<BEGIN_cmrollep-m24>

<P_61>

{ED:Ego_Dormio}

EGo dormio et cor meum vigilat . CMROLLEP-M24,61.4

+Tai +tat lyste lufe , herken , CMROLLEP-M24,61.5

and here of luf . CMROLLEP-M24,61.6

In +te sang of luf it es writen : ' I slepe , CMROLLEP-M24,61.7

and my hert wakes . ' CMROLLEP-M24,61.8

Mykel lufe he schewes , +tat never es irk to lufe , CMROLLEP-M24,61.9

bot ay standand , sittand , gangand , or wirkand , es ay his lufe
thynkand , CMROLLEP-M24,61.10

and oftsyth +tarof es dremande . CMROLLEP-M24,61.11

For+ti +tat I lufe , I wow +te , +tat I myght have +te als I walde ,
noght to me , bot to my Lorde . CMROLLEP-M24,61.12

I will become +tat messanger to bryng +te to hys bed , +tat hase made
+te and boght +te , Criste , +te keyng sonn of heven .
CMROLLEP-M24,61.13

For he wil with +te dwelle , if +tou will lufe hym : CMROLLEP-M24,61.14

he askes +te na mare bot +ti lufe . CMROLLEP-M24,61.15

And my dere syster in Criste , my wil +tou dose if +tou lufe hym .
CMROLLEP-M24,61.16

Criste covaytes noght els , bot at +tou do his wil , and enforce +te day
and nyght +tat +tou leve al fleschly lufe , and al lykyng +tat lettes
+te til lofe Jhesu Crist verraly . CMROLLEP-M24,61.17

For ay , whils +ti hert es heldand til lufe any bodely thyng , +tou may
not perfitely be coupuld with God . CMROLLEP-M24,61.18

In heven er neyn orders of aungels , +tat er contened in thre ierarchies
. CMROLLEP-M24,61.19

+Te lawest ierarchi contenes aungels , archaungels , and vertues ;
CMROLLEP-M24,61.20

+te mydel ierarchi contenes principates , potestates , and dominacions ;
CMROLLEP-M24,61.21

+te heest ierarchi , +tat neest es to God , contenes thronos , cherubyn
, and seraphyn . CMROLLEP-M24,61.22

+Te lawest es aungels , CMROLLEP-M24,61.23

+te heest <P_62> es seraphyn ; CMROLLEP-M24,62.24

and +tat order , +tat leste es bryght , es seven sythe sa bryght
CMROLLEP-M24,62.25

als +te sonn es bryghtar +tan a kandele , +te kandel bryghtar +tan +te
mone , +te mone bryghtar +tan a sterne . Also er +te orders in heven
ilk ane bryghter +tan other , fra aungels to seraphyn .
CMROLLEP-M24,62.26

+Tis I say to kyndel +ti hert for to covayte +te felichip of aungels .
CMROLLEP-M24,62.27

For al +tat er gude and haly , when +tai passe owt of +tis worlde , sal
be taken intil +ties orders : some intil +te lawest , +tat hase lufed
mykel ; some intil +te mydelmest , +tat hase lufed mare ; o+ter intil
+te heest , +tat maste lufed God and byrnandest es in hys lufe .
CMROLLEP-M24,62.28

Seraphyn es at say ' brynand ' ; til +te whilk order +tai er receyved
+tat leest covaytes in +tis worlde , and maste swetnes feles in God ,
and brynandest hertes hase in his lufe . CMROLLEP-M24,62.29

Til +te I write specialy , CMROLLEP-M24,62.30

for I hope mare godenes in +te +tan in another , and $+tat +tou wil gyf
+ti thoght to fulfil in dede +tat +tou seys es maste prophetabel for +ti
sawle , and +tat lyf gif +te til $in +te whilk +tow may halyest offer
+ti hert to Jhesu Criste and leste be in bisynes of +tis worlde .
CMROLLEP-M24,62.31

For if +tow stabil +ti lufe , and be byrnande whils +tou lyfes here ,
withowten dowte +ti settel es ordaynde ful hegh in heven and joyful
before Goddes face amang his haly aungels . CMROLLEP-M24,62.32

For in +te self degre +teir prowde devels fel downe fra , er meke men
and wymen , Criste dowves , sett , to have rest and joy withowten ende ,
for a litel schort penance and travel +tat +tai have sufferd for Goddes
lufe . CMROLLEP-M24,62.33

+Te thynk $now peraventure hard to gife +ti hert fra al erthly thynges ,
fra al ydel speche and vayne , and fra al fleschly lufe , and to be
alane , to wake and pray and thynk of +te joy of heven and of +te
passyon of Jhesu Criste , and to ymagyn +te payne of hell +tat es
ordande for synful man . CMROLLEP-M24,62.34

Bot wyterly , fra +tou be used +tarin , +te wil thynk <P_63> it lyghter
and swetter +tan +tou dyd any erthly thyng or solace .
CMROLLEP-M24,63.35

Als sone als +ti hert es towched with +te swetnes of heven , +te wil
lytel lyst +te myrth of +tis worlde ; CMROLLEP-M24,63.36

and when +tou feles joy in Criste lufe , +te wil lathe with +te joy and
+te comforth of +tis worlde and erthly gamen . CMROLLEP-M24,63.37

For al melody and al riches and delites , +tat al men in +tis world ken
ordayne or thynk , sownes bot noy and anger til a mans hert +tat verraly
es byrnand in +te lufe of God ; CMROLLEP-M24,63.38

for he hase myrth and joy and melody in aungels sang , als +tou may wele
wyt . CMROLLEP-M24,63.39

If +tou leve al thyng +tat +ti fleschly lufe list , for +te lufe of God
, and have na thoght on syb frendes , bot forsake al for Goddes lufe ,
and anely gyf +ti hert to coveyte Goddes lufe and pay hym , mare joy sal
+tou have and fynd in hym +tan I can on thynk . CMROLLEP-M24,63.40

How myght +tou +tan wyt it ? CMROLLEP-M24,63.41

I wate never , if any man be in swilk lufe ; CMROLLEP-M24,63.42

for ay +te hegher +te lyfe es , +te fewer folowers it hase here .
CMROLLEP-M24,63.43

For many thynges drawes man fra Goddes lufe , +tat +tow may here and se
; CMROLLEP-M24,63.44

and God comfortes his lufers mare +tan +tai wene +tat lufes hym noght .
CMROLLEP-M24,63.45

For+ti , +tof we seme in penance withowten , we sal have mykel joy
within , if we ordayne us wysely to Goddes servyce , and sett in hym al
owre thoghtes , and forsake al vanyte of +tis worlde .
CMROLLEP-M24,63.46

Gyf +tien entent til understand +tis wrytyng ; CMROLLEP-M24,63.47

and if +tou have sett al +ti desyre til lufe God , here +ties thre
degrees of lufe , sa +tat +tou may rise fra ane til another , to +tou be
in +te heest . CMROLLEP-M24,63.48

For I wil noght layne fra +te , +tat I hope may turne +te til halynes .
CMROLLEP-M24,63.49

+Te fyrst degre of lufe es , when a man haldes +te ten commandementes ,
and kepes hym fra +te seven dedely synnes , and es stabyl in +te trowth
of hali kyrke ; and when a man wil noght for any erthly thyng wreth God
, bot trewly standes in his servyce , and lasses +tarin til his lyves
ende . CMROLLEP-M24,63.50

+Tis degre of lufe behoves ilk man have , +tat wil be safe ;
CMROLLEP-M24,63.51

for na man may com til heven , bot if he lufe God and <P_64> his neghbor
, withowten pride , ire , envy , or bakbityng , and withowten al other
venemus synne , glotony , lichery , and covayties ; CMROLLEP-M24,64.52

for +ties vices slaes +te saule , CMROLLEP-M24,64.53

and makes it to depart fra God , withowten wham na creature may lyf .
CMROLLEP-M24,64.54

For als a man pusonde of a swete morcell takes venome +tat slase his
body , sa dose a synful wreche in likyng and luste of hys flesch :
CMROLLEP-M24,64.55

destrues his sawle , CMROLLEP-M24,64.56

and brynges it to dede withowten end . CMROLLEP-M24,64.57

Men thynk it swete to synne ; CMROLLEP-M24,64.58

bot +taire mede , +tat es ordand for +tam , es bitterer +tan +te gall ,
sowrar +tan +te atter , war +tan al +te waa +tat we may here se or fele
. CMROLLEP-M24,64.59

<poetry>

<em> Alle perisches and passes +tat we with eghe see <$$em>
CMROLLEP-M24,64.61

It wanes into wrechednes , +te welth of +tis worlde .
CMROLLEP-M24,64.62

Robes and ritches rotes in dike , CMROLLEP-M24,64.63

Prowde payntyng slakes into sorow , CMROLLEP-M24,64.64

Delites and drewryse stynk sal ful sone , CMROLLEP-M24,64.65

+Tair golde and +taire tresoure drawes +tam til dede .
CMROLLEP-M24,64.66

Al +te wikked of +tis worlde drawes til a dale , +Tat +tai may se +tare
sorowyng , whare waa es ever stabel . CMROLLEP-M24,64.67

Bot he may syng of solace , +tat lufes Jhesu Criste .
CMROLLEP-M24,64.68

+Te wretchesse fra wele falles into hell . CMROLLEP-M24,64.69

<$$poetry>

Bot when +tou have wele leved in +te ten comandementes of God , and
styfly put +te fra al dedely synnes , and payes God in +tat degre ,
umbethynk +te +tat +tou wil plese God mare , and do better with +ti
sawle , and become perfyte . CMROLLEP-M24,64.71

+Tan enters +tou into +te to+ter degre of lufe , +tat es , to forsake al
+te worlde , +ti fader and +ti moder , and al +ti kyn , and folow Criste
in poverte . CMROLLEP-M24,64.72

In +tis degre +tou sal stody how clene +tou be in hert , and how chaste
in body ; and gife +te til mekenes , suffryng , and buxumnes ; and loke
how fayre +tou may make +ti <P_65> saule in vertues and hate al vices ,
so +tat +ti lyf be gastly and noght fleschly . CMROLLEP-M24,65.73

Never_mare speke evyl of +ti neghbor , CMROLLEP-M24,65.74

ne gyf any evel worde for another ; CMROLLEP-M24,65.75

bot al +tat men says , evel or gude , suffer it mekeli in +ti hert ,
withowten styrryng of wreth ; and +tan sal +tou be in rest within and
withowte , CMROLLEP-M24,65.76

and so lyghtly sal +tou come to +te gastly lyfe , +tat +tou sal fynde
swettar +tan any erthly thyng . CMROLLEP-M24,65.77

Perfite life and gastly es , to despise +te worlde , and covete +te joy
of heven , and destroy thorow Goddes grace al wicked desyres of +te
flesch , and forgete +te solace and +te lykyng of +ti kynredyn , and
lufe noght bot in God : whethir +tai dy or lyfe , or be pore or riche ,
or seke , or in wa or in hele , CMROLLEP-M24,65.78

thank +tou ay God , CMROLLEP-M24,65.79

and blisse hym in al +ti werkis . CMROLLEP-M24,65.80

For his domes er so pryve , +tat na creature may comprehend +tam .
CMROLLEP-M24,65.81

And oftsithes some haves +tar likyng and +tair wil in +tis worlde , and
hell in +te to+ter ; CMROLLEP-M24,65.82

and some men er in pyne and persecucion and anguysch in +tis lyfe ,
CMROLLEP-M24,65.83

and hase heven to +tair mede . CMROLLEP-M24,65.84

For+ti , if +ti frendes be ay in +taire ese and hele and welsh of +tis
worlde , +tou and +tai bath may have +te mare drede +tat +tai lose noght
+te joy of heven withouten ende . CMROLLEP-M24,65.85

If +tai be in penance and sekenes , or if +tai lyf rightwisly , +tai may
trayste to come til +te blysse . CMROLLEP-M24,65.86

For+ti in +tis degre of lufe +tou sal be fulfilde with +te grace of +te
Haly Gaste , +tat +tou sal noght have na sorow ne grutchyng bot for
gastly thyng , als for +ti synnes and other mennes , and after +te lufe
of Jhesu Criste , and in thynkyng of his passyon . CMROLLEP-M24,65.87

And I wil +tat +tou have it mykel in mynde , CMROLLEP-M24,65.88

for it wyll kyndel +ti hert to sett at noght al +te gudes of +tis worlde
and +te joy +tarof , and to desyre byrnandly +te lyght of heven with
aungels and halowes . CMROLLEP-M24,65.89

And when +ti hert es haly ordande to +te service of God , and al worldly
thoghtes put oute , +tan wil +te liste stele by +te alane , to thynk on
<P_66> Criste , and to be in mykel praying . CMROLLEP-M24,66.90

For thorow gode thoghtes and hali prayers +ti hert sal be made byrnand
in +te lufe of Jhesu Criste , CMROLLEP-M24,66.91

and +tan sal +tow fele swetnes and gastely joy bath in praying and in
thynkyng . CMROLLEP-M24,66.92

And when +tou ert by +te alane , gyf +te mykel to say +te psalmes of +te
psauter and Pater noster and Ave Maria ; CMROLLEP-M24,66.93

and take na tent +tat +tou say many , bot +tat +tou say +tam wele , with
al +te devocion +tat +tow may , liftand up +ti thoght til heven .
CMROLLEP-M24,66.94

Better it es to say seven psalmes wyth desyre of Crystes lufe , havand
+ti hert on +ti praying , +tan {to_say} seven_hundreth_thowsand suffrand
+ti thoght passe in vanitees of bodyli thynges . CMROLLEP-M24,66.95

What gude , hopes +tou , may come +tarof , if +tou lat +ti tonge blaber
on +te boke and +ti hert ren abowte in sere stedes in +te worlde ?
CMROLLEP-M24,66.96

For+ti sett +ti thoght in Criste , and he sal rewle it til hym . And
halde +te fra +te venome of +te worldly bisynesse . CMROLLEP-M24,66.97

And I pray +te , als +tou covaytes to be Goddes lufer , +tat +tou lufe
+tis name Jhesu , and thynk it in +ti hert , sa +tat +tou forget it
never , whareso +tou be . CMROLLEP-M24,66.98

And sothely I say +te , +tat +tou sal fynd mykel joy and comforth +tarin
; CMROLLEP-M24,66.99

and for +te lufe +tat +tou lufes Jhesu , so tenderly and so specialy ,
+tou sal be fulfild of grace in erth , and be Criste dere servande in
heven . CMROLLEP-M24,66.100

For na thyng pays God swa mykel als verray lufe of +tis nam Jhesu .
CMROLLEP-M24,66.101

If +tou luf it ryght and lastandely , and never let , for na thyng +tat
men may do or say , +tou sal be receyved intil a heghar lyfe +tan +tou
can covete . CMROLLEP-M24,66.102

His godenes es sa mykel , +tar we inwardly aske hym ane , he wil gyf
fyfe , so wele payde es he when we wil sett al oure hert to lufe hym .
CMROLLEP-M24,66.103

In +tis degre of lufe +tou sal overcome +ti enmyse , +te worlde , +te
devel , and +ti flesche . CMROLLEP-M24,66.104

Bot never-+te-latter +tou sal ever have feghtyng whils +tou lyfes .
CMROLLEP-M24,66.105

Til +tou dye , +te behoves to be bysy to stande , +tat +tou fal noght
<P_67> intil delites , ne in evel thoghtes , ne in evel wordes , ne in
evel warke . CMROLLEP-M24,67.106

For+ti grete aght +ti +gernyng be +tat +tou lufe Criste verrayly .
CMROLLEP-M24,67.107

+Ti flesche sal +tou overcome with haldyng of +ti maydenhede , for
Goddes lufe anely ; or if +tou be na mayden , thorow chaste lyvyng and
resonabel in thoght and dede , and thorow discrete abstinence .
CMROLLEP-M24,67.108

+Te worlde +tou sal overcom thorow covaytyng of Cristes lufe and
thynkyng on +tis swete name Jhesus , and desyre til heven .
CMROLLEP-M24,67.109

For als sone als +tou feles savoure in Jhesu , +te wil thynk al +te
worlde noght bot vanyte and noy for men sawles . CMROLLEP-M24,67.110

+Tow will noght covayte +tan to be riche , to have many mantels and
fayre , many kyrtels and drewryse ; CMROLLEP-M24,67.111

bot al +tou wil sett at noght , and despise it als noght it ware , and
take na mare +tan +te nedes . CMROLLEP-M24,67.112

+Te wil thynk twa mantels or ane inogh ; CMROLLEP-M24,67.113

+tow +tat hase fyve or sex , gyf some til Criste , +tat gase naked in a
pore wede ; CMROLLEP-M24,67.114

and halde noght all , CMROLLEP-M24,67.115

for +tou wate noght if +tow lif til +tai be half gane .
CMROLLEP-M24,67.116

+Te devell es overcome when +tou standes stabely agaynes al his
fandyngys in sothefast charite and mekenes . CMROLLEP-M24,67.117

I wil +tat +tow never be ydel , bot ay owther speke of God , or wirke
som notabil warke , or thynk on hym principaly , +tat +ti thoght be ay
havand hym in mynde . CMROLLEP-M24,67.118

And thynk oft on his passyon : CMROLLEP-M24,67.119

{COM:poetry_omitted}

<P_69>

If +tou wil thynk +tis ilk day , +tou sal fynde swetnes +tat sal draw
+ti hert up , +tat sal gar +te fal in gretyng and in grete langyng til
Jhesu , CMROLLEP-M24,69.122

and +ti thoght sal al be on Jhesu , and so be receyved aboven all erthly
thyng , aboven +te firmament and +te sternes , so +tat +te egh of +ti
hert mai loke intil heven . CMROLLEP-M24,69.123

And +tan enters +tow into +te thirde degre of lufe , in +te whilk +tou
sal have grete delyte and comforth , if +tow may get grace to com
+tartill . CMROLLEP-M24,69.124

For I say noght +tat +tou , or another +tat redes +tis , sal do it all ;
CMROLLEP-M24,69.125

for it es at Goddes will to chese wham he will , to do +tat here es
sayde , or els another thyng on another maner , als he gifes men grace
til have +taire hele . CMROLLEP-M24,69.126

For sere men takes seer grace of oure Lorde Jhesu Criste ;
CMROLLEP-M24,69.127

and al sal be sett in +te joy of heven , +tat endes in charite .
CMROLLEP-M24,69.128

Wha sa es in +tis degre , wisdom he hase , and discrecion , to luf at
Goddes will . CMROLLEP-M24,69.129

+Tis degre es called contemplatife lyfe , +tat lufes to be anely ,
withowten ryngyng or dyn or syngyng or criyng . CMROLLEP-M24,69.130

At +te begynyng , when +tou comes +tartil , +ti gastly egh es taken up
intil +te blysse of heven , and +tar lyghtned with grace and kyndelde
with fyre of Cristes lufe , sa +tat +tou sal verraly fele +te bernyng of
lufe in +ti hert ever mare and mare , liftand +ti thoght to God , and
feland lufe , joy , and swetnes so mykel +tat na sekenes , anguys , ne
scheme , ne penance may greve +te , CMROLLEP-M24,69.131

bot al +ti lyf sal turne intyl joy ; CMROLLEP-M24,69.132

and +tan fore heghnesse of +ti hert +ti prayers turnes intil joyful
sange , and +ti thoghtes to melody . CMROLLEP-M24,69.133

+Tan es Jhesu al +ti <P_70> desyre , al +ti delyte , al +ti joy , al +ti
solace , al +ti comforth ; CMROLLEP-M24,70.134

al I wate +tat on hym ever be +ti sang , in hym all +ti rest .
CMROLLEP-M24,70.135

+Ten may +tow say : <poetry> ' I slepe , CMROLLEP-M24,70.136

and my hert wakes . CMROLLEP-M24,70.137

Wha sall tyll my lemman say : CMROLLEP-M24,70.138

For hys lufe me langes ay ? ' CMROLLEP-M24,70.139

<$$poetry>

All +tat lufes vanytees and specials of +tis warlde , and settes +taire
hert on any other thynges +tan of God , intyll +tis degre +tai may noght
come , ne intyll $+tat other degre of lufe before nevind .
CMROLLEP-M24,70.141

And +tarfore all worldely solace +te behoves forsake , +tat +ti hert be
heldande til na lufe of any creature , ne til na bysynes in erth , +tat
+tou may be in sylence , be ay stabilly and stalwortly with +ti hert in
Goddes lufe and hys drede . CMROLLEP-M24,70.142

Owre Lorde gyfes noght to men fairehede , ritchesse , and delytes for to
sette +taire hertes on and dispend +tam in synne , bot for +tai sulde
knew hym and lufe hym and thank hym of al hys gyftes .
CMROLLEP-M24,70.143

+Te mare es +taire scheme , if +tai wreth hym +tat hase gyfen +tam
gyftes in body and in saule . CMROLLEP-M24,70.144

For+ti , if we covayte to fle +te payne of purgatory , us behoves
restreyne us perfitely fra +te lust and +te likyng and al +te il delytes
and wikked drede of +tis worlde , and +tat worldely sorow be noght in us
, bot +tat we halde owre hope faste in Jhesu Criste , and stande manly
agaynes al temptacions . CMROLLEP-M24,70.145

Now I write a sang of lufe , +tat +tou sal delyte in when +tow ert
lufand Jhesu Criste : CMROLLEP-M24,70.146

{COM:remainder_of_text_poetry}

<P_73>

{ED:The_Commandment}

+TE comawndement of God es , +tat we lufe oure Lorde in al oure hert ,
in all oure saule , in al oure thoght . CMROLLEP-M24,73.150

In al oure hert : +tat es , in al oure understandyng , withowten erryng
. CMROLLEP-M24,73.151

In al owre sawle : +tat es , in al oure will , withowten gaynsaiyng .
CMROLLEP-M24,73.152

In al oure thoght : +tat es , +tat we thynk on hym , withowten forgetyng
. CMROLLEP-M24,73.153

In +tis maner es verray lufe and trew , CMROLLEP-M24,73.154

+tat es werk of mans will . CMROLLEP-M24,73.155

For lufe es a wilful stiryng of owre thoght intil God , sa +tat it
receyve na thyng +tat es agaynes +te lufe of Jhesu Crist , and +tarwith
+tat it be lastand in swetnes of devocion ; CMROLLEP-M24,73.156

and +tis es +te perfeccion of +tis lyfe , <P_74> til +te whilk al dedely
syn es contrary and enmy , bot noght venyall syn . CMROLLEP-M24,74.157

For venial syn dose noght away charite , CMROLLEP-M24,74.158

bot anly lettes +te usce and +te byrnyng +tarof . CMROLLEP-M24,74.159

For+ti all +tat wil lufe God perfitely , +taim behoves noght alanly fle
al dedly synnes , bot alsa , als mykel als +tai may , all venial syn ,
in thoght and worde and dede ; and namly , to be of lytel speche .
CMROLLEP-M24,74.160

And +tat sylens be in occupacion of gode thoghtes , it helpes gretely to
Goddes lufe ; CMROLLEP-M24,74.161

for jangelers and bakbyters , +tat appayres other mens lyfe with wikked
wordes , and all +tat roses +tar awne state before all other , or +tat
despises any state in +te whilke a man may be safe , +tai have na mare
syght of +te lufe of God in +taire sawle +ten +te egh of a bak has of
+te sonne . CMROLLEP-M24,74.162

For vayne speche and ill wordes er syngne of a vayne hert and ill , +tat
es withowten grace of God ; CMROLLEP-M24,74.163

and he +tat spekes ay +te gode , and haldes ilk a man better +tan
hymselfe , he schewes wele +tat he es stabel in godenes in hys hert ,
and ful of charite til God and til his neghbor . CMROLLEP-M24,74.164

And +tat +tou may wynne til +te swetnes of Goddes lufe , I sett here
thre degree of lufe , in +te whilk +tou be ay waxand .
CMROLLEP-M24,74.165

+Te fyrst degre es called insuperabel , +te secunde inseparabel , +te
thyrd singuler . CMROLLEP-M24,74.166

+Ti luf es insuperabel , when na thyng may overcome hit , +tat es ,
nowther wele ne waa , ese ne anguys , lust of flesch ne likyng of +tis
worlde ; CMROLLEP-M24,74.167

bot ay it lastes in gode thoght , if it wer temped gretely ,
CMROLLEP-M24,74.168

and it hates all syn , sa +tat na thyng may slokken +tat lufe .
CMROLLEP-M24,74.169

+Ti lufe es inseparabel , when al +ti thoghtes and +ti willes er gederd
togeder and festend haly in Jhesu Criste , swa +tat +tou may na tyme
forgete hym , CMROLLEP-M24,74.170

bot ay +tou thynkes on hym . CMROLLEP-M24,74.171

And for+ti it es called inseparabel , CMROLLEP-M24,74.172

for it may noght be departed fra +te thoght of Jhesu Criste .
CMROLLEP-M24,74.173

+Ti luf es singuler , when al +ti delyte es in Jhesu Cryste , and in
nane other thyng fyndes joy and comforth . CMROLLEP-M24,74.174

In +tis degre es lufe stalworth as dede , and hard as hell ;
CMROLLEP-M24,74.175

for als <P_75> dede slas al lyvand thyng in +tis worlde , sa perfite
lufe slas in a mans sawle all fleschly desyres and erthly covaytise ;
CMROLLEP-M24,75.176

and als hell spares noght til dede men , bot tormentes al +tat commes
+tartill , alswa a man +tat es in +tis degre of lufe , noght anly he
forsakes +te wretched solace of +tis lyf , CMROLLEP-M24,75.177

bot alswa he covaytes to sofer pynes for Goddes lufe .
CMROLLEP-M24,75.178

+Tarfore , if +te lyst lufe any thyng , lufe Jhesu Criste , +tat es +te
fayrest , richest , and wysest , whas lufe lastes in joy endles .
CMROLLEP-M24,75.179

For al erthly lufe es passand , CMROLLEP-M24,75.180

and wytes sone away . CMROLLEP-M24,75.181

If +tou be covetose after gode , luf hym , and +tou sal have al gode .
CMROLLEP-M24,75.182

Desyre hym trewly , and +te sal wante na thyng . CMROLLEP-M24,75.183

If delites like +te , lufe hym , CMROLLEP-M24,75.184

for he gyfes delites til hys lovers , +tat never may perisch .
CMROLLEP-M24,75.185

Bot al +te delytes of +tis world er faynt and fals and fayland in maste
nede ; CMROLLEP-M24,75.186

+tai bygyn in swettnes , CMROLLEP-M24,75.187

and +tair endyng es bitterer +tan +te gall . CMROLLEP-M24,75.188

If +tou kan noght lyf withowten felichip , lyft +ti thoght til heven ,
+tat +tou may fynd comforth with aungels and halows , +te whilke wil
helpe +te til God and noght lett +te , als +ti fleschly frendes dos .
CMROLLEP-M24,75.189

Restreyn +ti will a while fra al lust and lykyng of syn , and +tou sall
have efterwarde al +ti will ; CMROLLEP-M24,75.190

for it sal be clensed , and made sa fre +tat +te lyst do na thyng bot
+tat +tat es payng of God . CMROLLEP-M24,75.191

If +te lyste speke , forbere it at +te begynnyng , for Goddes lufe ;
CMROLLEP-M24,75.192

for when +ti hert feles delyte in Criste , +te wil not liste to speke ,
ne jangell , bot of Criste . CMROLLEP-M24,75.193

If +tow may not dreghe to syt by +ti_n@ @ane , use +te stalworthly in
hys lufe ; and he sal sa stabyly sett +te , +tat al +te solace of +tis
worlde sal noght remove +te , CMROLLEP-M24,75.194

for +te will noght list +tarof . CMROLLEP-M24,75.195

When +tow ert be +tiself , be ay , till slepe come , owther in prayer or
in gode meditacioun ; CMROLLEP-M24,75.196

and ordane +ti prayng and +ti wakyng and +ti fastyng +tat it be in
discrecion , noght over mykel na over litel . CMROLLEP-M24,75.197

Bot thynk ay +tat of <P_76> all thyng maste coveytes God +te lufe of
mans hert ; CMROLLEP-M24,76.198

and for+ti seke mare to lufe hym +tan to do any penance .
CMROLLEP-M24,76.199

For unskylful penance es litel worth , or noght ; CMROLLEP-M24,76.200

bot lufe es ay +te best , whether +tou do penance mykel or lytel .
CMROLLEP-M24,76.201

Be abowtwarde in +ti myght , +tat +tou war swa inwardly gyven til +te
lufe of Jhesu Criste , +tat for gastly joy of +ti sawle na thyng +tat
men may do or say make +te sary ; swa +tat +ti thoght within be fed anly
in +te swetnes of Cristes lufe , and noght in delyte of erthly ese , ne
in lovyng of men , when +tai begyn to speke gode of +te in ydel joy .
CMROLLEP-M24,76.202

Trayst in God , +tat he wil gif til +te +tat +tou prayse hym skilfully .
CMROLLEP-M24,76.203

Skylful prayer es , til cristen mans sawle , to seke and aske nyght and
day +te lufe of Jhesu Criste , +tat it may lufe hym verraly , feland
comforth and delyte in hym , owtkastyng worldes thoghtes and il bysynes
. CMROLLEP-M24,76.204

And sykir be +tou , if +tou covayte his lufe trewly and lastandly , swa
+tat na lufe of +ti flesche , ne angers of +te worlde , ne speche , ne
hatreden of men draw +te agayne and caste +te noght in bisynes of bodily
thyng ; +tou sal have his lufe , and fynd and fele +tat it es
delitabeler in an owre +tan al +te welthe +tat we here se may til
domesday . CMROLLEP-M24,76.205

And if +tou fayle and fall for temptacions , or for angers , or for over
mykel luf of +ti frendes , it es na wonder if he halde fra +te thyng
+tat +tow covaytes noght trewly . CMROLLEP-M24,76.206

He says +tat ' he lufes +tam +tat lufes hym , and +tai +tat arely wakes
til hym sal fynde him ' . CMROLLEP-M24,76.207

+Tow ert arely wakand oftsythe , CMROLLEP-M24,76.208

why +tan fyndes +tou hym noght ? CMROLLEP-M24,76.209

Certes , if +tou seke hym ryght , +tou sall fynde hym .
CMROLLEP-M24,76.210

Bot ay whiles +tou sekes erthly joy , if +tou wake never sa arely ,
Criste may +tou noght fynde . CMROLLEP-M24,76.211

For he es noght funden in +tair lande +tat lyves in fleschly lustes .
CMROLLEP-M24,76.212

Hys moder , when he was willed fra hyr , scho soght hym gretand arely
and late ymang his kynredyn and hirs ; CMROLLEP-M24,76.213

bot scho fend hym noght , for al hyr sekyng , til at +te laste scho come
<P_77> intil +te tempyl , CMROLLEP-M24,77.214

and +tare scho fend hym syttand ymange +te maysters , herand and
answerand . CMROLLEP-M24,77.215

Swa behoves +te do , if +tou wil fynd hym : CMROLLEP-M24,77.216

seke hym inwardly , in trouth and hope and charite of haly kyrk ,
castand owt al syn , hatand it in al +ti hert : CMROLLEP-M24,77.217

for +tat haldes hym fra +te , CMROLLEP-M24,77.218

and lettes +te , +tat +tou may noght fynd hym . CMROLLEP-M24,77.219

+Te herdes , +tat hym soght , fend hym lyand in a krybbe bytwyx twa
bestes , CMROLLEP-M24,77.220

+tat +tou knawes . CMROLLEP-M24,77.221

If +tou seke hym verraly , +te behoves ga in +te way of povert and noght
of riches . CMROLLEP-M24,77.222

+Te sterne led +te thre keynges intil Bedlem , +tar +tai fend Criste
swedeld in clowtes sympely , as a pore barne . CMROLLEP-M24,77.223

+Tarby understand , whils +tou ert in pryde and vanyte , +tou fyndes hym
noght . CMROLLEP-M24,77.224

How may +tou for scheme , +tat es bot servand , with many clathes and
riche folow +ti spowse and +ti Lorde , +tat yhede in a kyrtel ,
CMROLLEP-M24,77.225

and +tou trayles als mykel behynd +te as al +tat he had on ?
CMROLLEP-M24,77.226

For+ti , I rede +tat +tou parte with hym ar +tou and he mete , +tat he
reprove +te noght of outrage ; CMROLLEP-M24,77.227

for he wil +tat +tow have +tat +tou hase mister of , and na mare .
CMROLLEP-M24,77.228

He sayde til his discipyls +tat +tai sulde noght have als many clashes
as twa myght be sustend with ; CMROLLEP-M24,77.229

for to traveyle +tareabowte es owtrage bisynes , +tat he forbedes .
CMROLLEP-M24,77.230

+Te lufe of Jhesu Criste es ful dere tresure , ful delytabyl joy , and
ful syker to trayst man on . CMROLLEP-M24,77.231

For+ti he wil not gyf it to folys , +tat ken noght held it and kepe it
tenderly ; CMROLLEP-M24,77.232

bot til +taim he gese it , +te whilk nowther for wele ne for wa wil let
it passe fra +tam , CMROLLEP-M24,77.233

bot are +tai wil dye or +tai wolde wrath Jhesu Criste .
CMROLLEP-M24,77.234

And na wyse man dose precyous lycor in a stynkand vessell , bot in a
clene ; als Criste dose noght his lufe in a foule hert in syn and
bownden in wile lust of flesche , bot in a hert +tat es fayre and clene
in vertues . CMROLLEP-M24,77.235

Noght_for+ti , a fowle vessel may be made sa clene , +tat a ful dere
thyng savely may be done +tarin . CMROLLEP-M24,77.236

And Jhesu Criste <P_78> oftsythes purges many synfull mans sawle ,
CMROLLEP-M24,78.237

and makes it abyl , thurgh his grace , to receyve +te delitabel swetnes
of hys luf , and to be his wonnyng-sted in halynes ; CMROLLEP-M24,78.238

and ay +te clennar it waxes , +te mare joy and solace of heven Criste
settes +tarin . CMROLLEP-M24,78.239

For+ti , at +te fyrst tyme when a man es turned to God he may not fele
+tat swete lycor , til he have bene wele used in Goddes servys ,
CMROLLEP-M24,78.240

and his hert be purged thorow prayers and penance and gode thoghtes in
God . CMROLLEP-M24,78.241

For he +tat es slaw in Goddes servyce may noght be byrnand in lufe , bot
if he do al his myght and travell , nyght and day , to fulfill Goddes
wille . CMROLLEP-M24,78.242

And when +tat blyssed lufe es in a mans hert , it will not suffer hym be
ydel , CMROLLEP-M24,78.243

bot ay it stirres hym to do some gode +tat myght be lykand til God , as
in praying , or in wirkyng profitabel thynges , or in spekyng of Cristes
passyon ; and principally in thoght +tat +te mynde of Jhesu Criste passe
noght fra his thoght . CMROLLEP-M24,78.244

For if +tou lufe hym trewly , +tou wil glad +te in hym , and noght in
other thyng . CMROLLEP-M24,78.245

And +tou $wil thynk on hym , kastand away al other thoghtes .
CMROLLEP-M24,78.246

Bot if +tou be fals , and take o+ter +tan hym , and delyte +te in erthly
thyng agaynes his wille , wit +tou wele , he will forsake +te , as +tou
hase done hyme , and dampne +te for +ti synne . Wharfore , +tat +tou
may lufe hym trewly , understand +tat his lufe es proved in thre thynges
: in thynkyng , in spekyng , in wirkyng . CMROLLEP-M24,78.247

Chaunge +ti thoght fra +te worlde , and kast it haly on hym ; and he
sall norysche +te . CMROLLEP-M24,78.248

Chaunge +ti mowth fra unnayte and warldes speche , and speke of hym ;
and he sall comforth +te . CMROLLEP-M24,78.249

Chaunge +ti hend fra +te warkes of vanitese , and lyft +tam in his name
, and wyrke anly for hys lufe ; and he sall receyve +te .
CMROLLEP-M24,78.250

Do +tus , and +tan lufes +tou trewly , CMROLLEP-M24,78.251

and gase in +te way of perfitenes . CMROLLEP-M24,78.252

Delyte +te sa in hym , +tat +ti hert receyve nowther worldes joy ne
worldes sorow , CMROLLEP-M24,78.253

and <P_79> drede no anguys ne noy +tat may befalle bodyly on +te , or on
any of +ti frendes ; CMROLLEP-M24,79.254

bot betake all intil Goddes will , CMROLLEP-M24,79.255

and thank hym ay of all hys sandes , swa +tat +tou may have rest and
savowre in hys lufe . CMROLLEP-M24,79.256

For if +ti hert owther be ledde with worldes drede or worldes solace ,
+tou ert still fer fra +te swetnes of Cristes lufe .
CMROLLEP-M24,79.257

And loke wele , +tat +tou seme not ane withowten and be another wythin ,
als ypocrites dose , +te whilk er like til a sepulker +tat es paynted
richely withowten , and wythin rotes stynkand banes .
CMROLLEP-M24,79.258

If +tou have delyte in +te name of religion , loke +tat +tou have mare
delyte in +te dede +tat falles til religion . CMROLLEP-M24,79.259

Thyne abett says +tat +tou hase forsaken +te world , +tat +tou ert gyven
till Goddes servys , +tat +tou delyte +te noght in erthly thyng .
CMROLLEP-M24,79.260

Lok +tan , +tat it be in +ti hert , als it semes in men syght .
CMROLLEP-M24,79.261

For na thyng may make +te religious , bot vertues and clennes of sawle
in charite . CMROLLEP-M24,79.262

If +ti body be cled wythowten as +tine order wille , loke +tat +ti sawle
be noght naked within , +tat +tine order forbedes . CMROLLEP-M24,79.263

Bot naked be +ti sawle fra all vices , and warme happed in lufe and
mekenes . CMROLLEP-M24,79.264

Drede +te domes of God , sa +tat +tou wrath hym noght .
CMROLLEP-M24,79.265

Stabel +ti thoght in hys lufe , CMROLLEP-M24,79.266

and helld owt of +te al synnes . CMROLLEP-M24,79.267

Kast away slawnes . CMROLLEP-M24,79.268

Use +te manly in godenes . CMROLLEP-M24,79.269

Be deboner and meke til al men . CMROLLEP-M24,79.270

Lat na thyng bryng +te til ire or envy . CMROLLEP-M24,79.271

Dyght +ti sawle fayre , CMROLLEP-M24,79.272

and make +tarin a towre of lufe til Goddes sonn , CMROLLEP-M24,79.273

and gar +ti will be covaytous to receyve hym als gladly as +tou walde be
at +te commyng of a thyng +tat +tou lufed mast of al thyng .
CMROLLEP-M24,79.274

Wasche +ti thoght clene wyth lufe teres and brennand +gernyng , +tat he
fynd na thyng fowle in +te . CMROLLEP-M24,79.275

For his joy es +tat +tou be fayre and lufsom in his eghen .
CMROLLEP-M24,79.276

Fayrehede of +ti sawle , +tat he covaytes , es +tat +tou be chaste and
meke , mylde and sufferand , CMROLLEP-M24,79.277

never irk to do his wille , ay hatand all wykkednes .
CMROLLEP-M24,79.278

In al +tat +tou dose , thynk ay to come to +te syght of his fairehede ,
CMROLLEP-M24,79.279

and sett al +tine entent +tarin , +tat +tou may come <P_80> +tartil at
+tine endyng . CMROLLEP-M24,80.280

For +tat aght to be +te ende of al oure traveyle , +tat we evermare ,
whils we lyve here , desyre +tat syght in all oure hert , and +tat we
thynk ay lang +tartill . CMROLLEP-M24,80.281

Alssa festen in +ti hert +te mynd of his passyon and of his woundes :
CMROLLEP-M24,80.282

grete delyte and swetnes sal +tou fele , if +tou halde +ti thoght in
mynde of +te pyne +tat Crist sufferd for +te . CMROLLEP-M24,80.283

If +tou traveyle right in his lufe , and desyre hym brennandly , all
temptacyons and dredes of ill +tou sall overcom , and deful under +ti
fote , thorow his grace . CMROLLEP-M24,80.284

For al +tat he sees in gode will to luf hym , he helpes +tam agaynes all
+tar enmys , CMROLLEP-M24,80.285

and rayses +tar thoght aboven all erthly thyng , swa +tat +tai may have
savoure and solace in +te swetnes of heven . CMROLLEP-M24,80.286

Purches +te +te welle of gretyng , CMROLLEP-M24,80.287

and cees noght till +tou have hym . CMROLLEP-M24,80.288

For in +te hert where teres sprynges , +tar wil +te fyre of +te Haly
Gaste be kyndelde ; CMROLLEP-M24,80.289

and sythen +te fyre of lufe , +tat sal byrn in +ti hert , wil bryn til
noght al +te rust of syn , and purge +ti sawle of al fylth , als clene
as +te golde +tat es proved in +te fournes . CMROLLEP-M24,80.290

I wate na thyng , +tat swa inwardly sal take +ti hert to covayte Goddes
lufe , and to desyre +te joy of heven , and to despyse +te vanitees of
+tis worlde , as stedfast thynkyng of +te myscheves and grevous woundes
of +te dede of Jhesu Criste . CMROLLEP-M24,80.291

It wil rayse +ti thoght aboven erthly lykyng , and make +ti hert
brennand in Cristes lufe , and purches in +ti sawle delitabelte and
savoure of heven . CMROLLEP-M24,80.292

Bot peraunter +tou will say : ' I may noght despyse +te worlde ;
CMROLLEP-M24,80.293

I may not fynd it in my hert to pyne my body ; CMROLLEP-M24,80.294

and me behoves lufe my fleschly frendes , and take ese when it comes .
' CMROLLEP-M24,80.295

If +tou be temped with swilk thoghtes , I pray +te +tat +tou umbethynk
+te , fra +te begynnyng of +tis worlde , where +te worldes lovers er now
, and where +te lovers er of God . CMROLLEP-M24,80.296

Certes , +tai war <P_81> men and wymen as we er , CMROLLEP-M24,81.297

and ete and drank and logh ; CMROLLEP-M24,81.298

and +te wreches +tat lofed +tis worlde toke ese til +tair body ,
CMROLLEP-M24,81.299

and lyved as +tam lyst in likyng of +tair wikked will ,
CMROLLEP-M24,81.300

and led +tair dayes in lust and delyces ; CMROLLEP-M24,81.301

and in a poynt +tai fel intil hell . CMROLLEP-M24,81.302

Now may +tou see +tat +tai wer foles , and fowle glotons , +tat in a few
+geres wasted endles joy +tat was ordand for +tam , if +tai walde have
done penance for +tair synnes . CMROLLEP-M24,81.303

+Tou sese +tat al +te ryches of +tis world and delytes vanys away ,
CMROLLEP-M24,81.304

and commes til noght . CMROLLEP-M24,81.305

Sothely , swa dose al +te lofers +tarof ; CMROLLEP-M24,81.306

for na thyng may stande stabely on a fals gronde . CMROLLEP-M24,81.307

+Tair bodys er gyn til wormes in erth , and +tair sawles til +te devels
of hell . CMROLLEP-M24,81.308

Bot all +tat forsoke +te pompe and +te vanite of +tis lyfe , and stode
stalworthly agaynes all temptacions , and ended in +te lufe of God ,
+tai ar now in joy , CMROLLEP-M24,81.309

and hase +te erytage of heven , +tar to won withowten end , restand in
+te delyces of Goddes syght : CMROLLEP-M24,81.310

for here +tai soght na mare rest ne ese til +tair body +ten +tai had
nede of . CMROLLEP-M24,81.311

A thyng I rede +te , +tat +tou forgete noght +tis name Jhesu ,
CMROLLEP-M24,81.312

bot thynk it in +ti hert , nyght and day , as +ti speciall and +ti dere
tresowre . CMROLLEP-M24,81.313

Lufe it mare +tan +ti lyfe . CMROLLEP-M24,81.314

Rute it in +ti mynde . CMROLLEP-M24,81.315

Lufe Jhesu , CMROLLEP-M24,81.316

for he made +te , CMROLLEP-M24,81.317

and boght +te ful dere . CMROLLEP-M24,81.318

Gyf +ti hert till hym , CMROLLEP-M24,81.319

for it es his dette . CMROLLEP-M24,81.320

For+ti set +ti lufe on hys name Jhesu , +tat es ' hele . '
CMROLLEP-M24,81.321

+Ter may na ill thyng have dwellying in +te hert +tar Jhesu es halden in
mynde trewly . CMROLLEP-M24,81.322

For it chaces devels , CMROLLEP-M24,81.323

and destroyes temptacions , CMROLLEP-M24,81.324

and puttes away wykked dredes and vices , CMROLLEP-M24,81.325

and clenses +te thoght . CMROLLEP-M24,81.326

Whasa lofes it verraly es full of Goddes grace and vertues ; in gastly
comforth in +tis lyfe , CMROLLEP-M24,81.327

and when +tai dye , +tai er taken up intil +te orders of awngels , to se
hym in endles joy +tat +tai have lufed . CMROLLEP-M24,81.328

Amen . CMROLLEP-M24,81.329

{ED:The_Form_of_Living}

<P_85>

<heading>

Incipit forma vivendi scripta a beato Ricardo heremita ad Margaretam
anachoritam , suam dilectam discipulam . Capitulum i=m= .
CMROLLEP-M24,85.333

<$$heading>

IN ilk a synful man or woman , +tat es bunden in dedly syn , er +tre
wrechednes , +te wylk brynges +tam to +te dede of hell .
CMROLLEP-M24,85.335

+Te first es defaute of gastly strenght , +tat +tai er sa wayke wi+tin
+tair hert +tat +tai may nou+ter stand agaynes +te fandynges of +te
fende , ne +tai may lyft +tair wil to +gerne +te lofe of God and folow
+tartill . CMROLLEP-M24,85.336

+Te secund es use of fleschly desyres : CMROLLEP-M24,85.337

for +tai have na will ne myght to stand , +tai fall in lustes and
likynges of +tis worlde ; CMROLLEP-M24,85.338

and for +tai +tynk +tam swete , +tai dwell in +tam still , many tyll
+taire lyves ende ; CMROLLEP-M24,85.339

and sa +tai come to +te +trid wrechednes . CMROLLEP-M24,85.340

+Te +tred wrechednes es chaungyng of lastand gode for a passande delite
: CMROLLEP-M24,85.341

als $wha {TEXT:swa;_wha_from_R} say , +tai gif joy endles for a litell
joy of +tis lyfe . CMROLLEP-M24,85.342

If +tai will torn +tam , and ryse till penance , God will ordeyne +tair
wonyng wi+t awngels and wi+t haly men . CMROLLEP-M24,85.343

Bot for +tai chese +te vile syn of +tis world , and hase mare delite in
+te fyl+t of +taire flesch +tan in +te fairhede of heven , +tai lose
ba+t +te worlde and heven . CMROLLEP-M24,85.344

For he +tat hase noght jhesu criste , he tynes all +tat he has , and all
+tat he es , and all +tat he myght gete ; CMROLLEP-M24,85.345

he ne es wor+ty +te lyfe , ne to be fedde wi+t swynes mete .
CMROLLEP-M24,85.346

All creaturs sal be styrde in his vengaunce at +te day of dome .
CMROLLEP-M24,85.347

+Tiere wrechednes , +tat I have of talde , er noght anely in worldly men
or women , +tat uses gluttry or litcheri and o+ter apert synnes ,
CMROLLEP-M24,85.348

bot +tai er alswa in o+ter , +tat semes in penance and in gode lyf .
CMROLLEP-M24,85.349

For +te devyll , +tat es enmy till al mankynde , when he sees a man or a
woman ymang a_+tousand turne haly to God , and forsake all +te vanytees
and ryches +tat men +tat lufes +tis worlde covaytise , and seke +te joy
lastand , a_+tousand wiles he has on what maner he may desayve +tam .
CMROLLEP-M24,85.350

And <P_86> when he may noght bryng +tam intill swylk synnes , +te whylk
myght gar all men wonder on +tam , +tat knew +tam , he begyles many swa
prively +tat +tai kan noght oft sy+t fele +te trap +tat has taken +taime
. CMROLLEP-M24,86.351

Some he takes wi+t errour +tat he puttes +tam yn ; some wy+t singulere
witt , when he gars +taime wene +tat +te +tyng +tat +tai sai or do es
best , and for+ti +tai wyll na counsell have of o+ter +tat es better and
conander +ten +tai ; CMROLLEP-M24,86.352

and +tis es a foule stynkand pryde , CMROLLEP-M24,86.353

for he wolde sett his witt before all o+ter . CMROLLEP-M24,86.354

Some +te devell deceyves +turgh vayne glory , +tat es ydil joy : when
any has pryde and delyte in +tamself of +te penance +tat +tai suffer ,
of gode dedes +tat +tai do . of any vertu +tat +tai have ; es glad when
men loves +tam , sari when men lackes +tam , haves envy to +tam +tat es
spokyn mare gode of +tan of +tam ; CMROLLEP-M24,86.355

+tai halde +tairself so gloriouse , and swa fer passand +te lyf +tat
o+ter men ledes , +tat +tai +tynk +tat nane suld reprehend +tam in any
+tyng +tat +tai do or say ; an dispises synfull men and o+ter , +te
whilk will not do als +tai byd +tam . CMROLLEP-M24,86.356

How may +tow fynd a synfuller wretche +tan swilk ane ?
CMROLLEP-M24,86.357

And sa mykell es he +te wer , +tat he wate nooght +tat he es yll , and
es halden and honord of men als wyse and hali . CMROLLEP-M24,86.358

Some er deceyved wi+t over mykell lust and likyng in mete and drynk ,
when +tai passe mesure and com intill outrage and has delyte +tarein ,
and wenes +tat +tai synn noght ; CMROLLEP-M24,86.359

and for+ti +tai amend +tam noght , CMROLLEP-M24,86.360

and swa +tai destruye vertues of saule . CMROLLEP-M24,86.361

Some er begylde wi+t ovre mikell abstinens of mete and drynk and slepe ,
+tat es of +te temptacion of +te devell , for to gar +tam fall in myddes
+tair werk , swa +tat +tai bryng it till nane endyng , als +tai suld
have done if +tai had knawne skyll and halden discrecion ;
CMROLLEP-M24,86.362

and swa +tai tyne +taire merit for +taire frawerdnes .
CMROLLEP-M24,86.363

+Tis gylder layes oure enmy to take us wi+t , when we <P_87> begyn to
hate wycckednes and turne us till god . CMROLLEP-M24,87.364

+Ten many begynnes +te +tyng +tat +tai may nevermare bryng till ende ;
CMROLLEP-M24,87.365

+ten +tai wene +tat +tai may do what so +tair hert es sett on .
CMROLLEP-M24,87.366

Bot oft +tai fall or +tai come ymyd gate ; CMROLLEP-M24,87.367

and +tat +tyng , +tat +tai wend war for +tam , es lettyng till +tam .
CMROLLEP-M24,87.368

For we have a lange way till heven ; CMROLLEP-M24,87.369

and als many gode dedys $als we do , als many prayers als we make , and
als many gode +toghtes als we +tynk in trou+t and hope and charite , als
many paces ga we till hevenward . CMROLLEP-M24,87.370

+Tan if we make us sa wayke and so febyll , +tat we may nou+ter wyrk ne
pray als we suld do ne +tynk , er we nooght gretly at blame , +tat
fayles when we had maste nede to be stalwor+t ? CMROLLEP-M24,87.371

and wele I watte , it es noght Goddys will +tat we sa do .
CMROLLEP-M24,87.372

For +te prophete says : ' Lorde , I sall kepe my strengh to +te ' , +tat
he myght susten Goddys servys till his dede day , and noght in a litill
and in a schort tyme waste it , and +tan lygge wanand and granand be +te
wall . CMROLLEP-M24,87.373

And it es mykel mare peryll +tan {it_is} men wenes .
CMROLLEP-M24,87.374

For saynt Jerome says +tat he makys of ravyn offerand , +tat outragely
tourmentis his body in ovre lytel mete or slepe . CMROLLEP-M24,87.375

And saynt Bernarde sais : ' Fastyng and wakyngg lettis nooght gastly
goodes , bot helpes , if +tai be done wi+t descrecion ;
CMROLLEP-M24,87.376

wi+touten +tat , +tai er vices . ' CMROLLEP-M24,87.377

For+ti it es noght gode to pyne us so mykkell , and si+ten have un+tank
for oure dede . CMROLLEP-M24,87.378

+Tare hase bene many , and er , +tat wenes +tat it es nooght all +tat
+tai do , bot if +tai be in sa mikell abstinence and fastyng , +tat all
men speke of +tam +tat knawes +tam . CMROLLEP-M24,87.379

Bot oftsy+tes it befalles +tat ay +te mare joy and wonduryng +tai have
wi+touten of +te lovyng of men , ay +te les joy +tai have wi+tin of +te
luf of god . CMROLLEP-M24,87.380

At my dome , +tai sulde pay Jhesu Criste mikell mare , if +tai toke for
his love , in +tankyng and lovyng of hym , for to sustan +tar body in
his servyse and to halde +tam fra mikell speche of men , what so <P_88>
God send for +te tyme and +te stede , and gaf +tam si+ten enterely and
perfitely to +te luf and +te lovyng of +tat lorde Jhesu Criste , +tat
will stalwor+tly be lufed and lastandly be served ; so +tat +taire
halynes war mare sene in goddes egh +tan in mans . CMROLLEP-M24,88.381

For ay +te better +tou ert , and +te les speche +tou has of men , +te
mare es +ti joy before God . CMROLLEP-M24,88.382

Ha ! What it es mykell , to be wor+ti lovyng , and be noght loved !
CMROLLEP-M24,88.383

And what wrechednes it es , to have +te name and +te habet of halynes ,
and be noght so , bot cover pride , ire , or envy under +te cla+tes of
criste barnhede ! CMROLLEP-M24,88.384

A foule +tyng it es to hafe lykyng and delite in mens wordes , +tat can
na mare deme what we er in oure saule , +ten +tai wate what we +tynk .
CMROLLEP-M24,88.385

For oftsi+te +tai say +tat he or scho es in +te hegher degre +tat es in
+te lawer ; CMROLLEP-M24,88.386

and +tat +tai say es in +te lawer , es in +te hegher .
CMROLLEP-M24,88.387

For+ti I halde it bot wodnes to be gladder or sarier , whe+tir +tai say
gude or ill . CMROLLEP-M24,88.388

If we be aboutewarde to hyde us fra speche and lovyng of +tis worlde ,
God will schew us till hys lovyng and oure joy . CMROLLEP-M24,88.389

For +tat es his joy , when we er strenghfull to stande agaynes +te pryve
and +te aperte fandyng of +te devell , and sekes na +tyng bot +te
honoure and +te lovyng of hym , and +tat we myght enterely love hym .
CMROLLEP-M24,88.390

And +tat aght to be oure desyre , oure prayer , and oure entent , nyght
and day , +tat +te fyre of hys lufe kyndell oure hert and +te swetnes of
hys grace be oure comfor+t and oure solace in wele and wo .
CMROLLEP-M24,88.391

+Tow hase now herd a party how +te fende deceyves , wy+t hys sotell
craftes and whaynt , men and women . CMROLLEP-M24,88.392

And if +tou will do be gode cownsel and folow haly lare , als I hope
+tat +tou will , +tou sall destroy his trappes , and bryn in +te fyre of
luf all +te bandes +tat he walde bynd +te wi+t ; CMROLLEP-M24,88.393

and all his malys sall turne +te til joy , and hym till mare sorow .
CMROLLEP-M24,88.394

God suffers hym to tempe gode men for +taire profete , +tat +tai may be
+te hegher crownde when +tai +turgh his helpe hase overcomne sa <P_89>
cruell an enmy , +tat oftsy+tes bo+t in body and in saule confowndes
many man . CMROLLEP-M24,89.395

In +tre maners +te devell has power to be in a man .
CMROLLEP-M24,89.396

On a maner : hurtande +te godes +tat +tai have of kynde , als in dome
men and in o+ter , blemysand +tair +toght . CMROLLEP-M24,89.397

On ano+ter maner : revande +te godes whilk +tey have of grace ;
CMROLLEP-M24,89.398

and so he es in synfull man , +te whilk he hase deceyved +turgh delyte
of +te worlde and of +tair flesche , CMROLLEP-M24,89.399

and ledes +tam wi+t hym till hell . CMROLLEP-M24,89.400

On +te +tird maner : he tourmentes a mans body , als we rede +tat he has
done job . CMROLLEP-M24,89.401

Bot wytt +tou wele , if he begyle +te noght wi+tin , +te +tar noght
drede what he may do +te wi+touten , CMROLLEP-M24,89.402

for he may do na mare +tan God gyfs hym leve for to do .
CMROLLEP-M24,89.403

<heading>

Capitulum 2=m= . CMROLLEP-M24,89.405

<$$heading>

For +tat +tou has forsakyn +te solace and +te joy of +tis world , and
taken +te to solitary lyf , for gods luf to suffer tribulacion and
anguys here , and si+ten com to +tat blys +tat nevermare blynnes , I
trowe treuly +tat +te comfor+t of Jhesu Criste and +te swetnes of his
love , wi+t +te fire of +te Haly Gast , +tat purges all syn , sall be in
+te and wi+t +te , ledand +te , and lerand +te how +tou sall +tynk , how
+tou sall pray , what +tou sall wyrk ; so +tat in a few +gers +tou sall
have mare delyte to be by +ti nane , and speke till +ti luf and to +ti
spows Jhesu Crist , +tat hegh es in heven , +tan {you_shall_have} if
+tou war lady here of a_+towsand worldes . CMROLLEP-M24,89.407

Men wenes +tat we er in pyne and in penance grete , CMROLLEP-M24,89.408

bot we have mare joy and mare verray delyte in a day , +tan +tai have in
+te worlde all +tar lyve . CMROLLEP-M24,89.409

+Tai se oure body ; CMROLLEP-M24,89.410

bot +tai se noght oure hert , whare oure solace es .
CMROLLEP-M24,89.411

If +tai saw +tat , many of +tam wold forsake all +tat +tai have , for to
folow us . CMROLLEP-M24,89.412

For+ti be comford and stalwor+t , CMROLLEP-M24,89.413

and drede na noye ne angwysch ; CMROLLEP-M24,89.414

bot fest all +tyne entent in Jhesu , +tat +ti lyf be <P_90> gode and
wheme . CMROLLEP-M24,90.415

And loke +tat +tere be na +tyng in +te , +tat suld be myspayand till hym
, +tat +tou ne sone amend itt . CMROLLEP-M24,90.416

+Te state +tat +tou ert in , +tat es solitude , es maste abyll of all
o+tyr til revelacion of +te Haly Gaste . CMROLLEP-M24,90.417

For when saynt Jone was in +te yle of Pa+tmos , +tan God schewed hym his
pryvytees . CMROLLEP-M24,90.418

+Te godenes of God it es , +tat he comfortes +tam wondyrfully , +tat has
na comfor+t of +te worlde , if +tai gyf +tair hert enterly till hym ,
and covayts noght , ne sekes bot hym ; CMROLLEP-M24,90.419

+ten he gyves hymself till +taime in swetnes and delyte in byrnyng of
luf , and in joy and melody , CMROLLEP-M24,90.420

and dwelles ay wi+t +tam in +taire saule , sa +tat +te comfor+t of hym
departes never fra +tam . CMROLLEP-M24,90.421

And if +tai any tym begyn till erre , +turgh ignorance or freelte , sone
he wysses +tam +te right way ; CMROLLEP-M24,90.422

and all +tat +tai have nede of , he leres +tam . CMROLLEP-M24,90.423

Na man till swylk revelacion and grace on +te first day may kom , bot
+turgh lang travell and bysiness to loue Jhesu Criste , als +tou sall
here afterward . CMROLLEP-M24,90.424

Noght_for+ti +tan he suffers +tam to be temped on sere maners , bo+t
wakand and slepand . CMROLLEP-M24,90.425

For ay +te ma temptacions , and +te grevoser , +tai stande agayne and
overcomes , +te mare sall +tai joy in his luf when +tai er passed .
CMROLLEP-M24,90.426

wakand +tai er umwhile tempyd wy+t foule +toghtys , vile lustes , wicked
delites , wi+t pryde , ire , envy , despaire , presumpcion , and o+ter
many . CMROLLEP-M24,90.427

Bot +taire remedy sall be preyer , gretyng , fastyng , wakyng .
CMROLLEP-M24,90.428

+Tire +tynges , if +tai be done wi+t discrecion , +tai put away syn and
fil+t fra +te saule , CMROLLEP-M24,90.429

and makes it clene to receyve +te luf of Jhesu Criste , +tat may noght
be loved bot in clennes . CMROLLEP-M24,90.430

Also umwhile +te fende tempes men and women , +tat er solitary by +tam
ane , on a qwaynt maner and a sotell . CMROLLEP-M24,90.431

He transfigurs hym in +te lyknes of an awngel of lyght ,
CMROLLEP-M24,90.432

and apers till +tam , CMROLLEP-M24,90.433

and sayes +tat he es ane <P_91> of Goddes awngels comen to comfor+t +tam
; CMROLLEP-M24,91.434

and swa he deceyves foles . CMROLLEP-M24,91.435

Bot +tai +tat er wys , and wil not tyte trow till all spirites , bot
askes cownsel of conand men , he may not begyle +tam .
CMROLLEP-M24,91.436

Als I fynd writen of a reclues , +tat was a gude woman , til +te whilk
+te ill awngell oftsy+tes aperde in +te forme of a gode awngel , and
sayd +tat he was comen to bryng hir to heven . Wharfore scho was right
glad and joyful . CMROLLEP-M24,91.437

Bot never-+te-latter scho talde it til hir schryftfader ;
CMROLLEP-M24,91.438

and he , als wyse man and war , gaf hir +tis counsell .
CMROLLEP-M24,91.439

' When he comes ' , he sayde , ' byd hym +tat he schew +te oure lady
saynt Mary . CMROLLEP-M24,91.440

When he has done swa , say Ave Maria . ' CMROLLEP-M24,91.441

Scho dyd sa . CMROLLEP-M24,91.442

+Te fende sayde : ' +Tou has ne nede to se hyr ; CMROLLEP-M24,91.443

my presence suffyse to +te . ' CMROLLEP-M24,91.444

And scho sayde , on all maner scho suld se hyr . CMROLLEP-M24,91.445

He saw +tat hym behoved ou+ter do hir wyll , or scho walde despyse hym .
CMROLLEP-M24,91.446

Als tyte he broght for+t +te fayrest woman +tat myght be , als to hyr
syght , CMROLLEP-M24,91.447

and schewed til hyr . CMROLLEP-M24,91.448

And scho sett hir on hir knees , CMROLLEP-M24,91.449

and sayde ' Ave Maria ' . CMROLLEP-M24,91.450

And als tyte all vanyst away ; CMROLLEP-M24,91.451

and for scham never si+ten come he at hir . CMROLLEP-M24,91.452

+Tis I say , not for I hope +tat he sal have leve to tempe +te on +tis
maner , bot for I will +tat +tou be war , if any swylk temptacions
befall +te , slepand or wakand , +tat +tou trow not ovre tyte , til +tou
knaw +te so+t . CMROLLEP-M24,91.453

Mare privilyer he transfigurs hym in +te forme of an awngel of lyght ,
+tat comonli al men ar temped wi+t , when he hydes ill under +te liknes
of gode ; CMROLLEP-M24,91.454

and +tat es in twa maneres . CMROLLEP-M24,91.455

Ane es , when he egges us til ovre mykel ees and rest of body and
softnes til oure flesche , undir nede to susteyne oure kynde .
CMROLLEP-M24,91.456

For swilk +toghtes he puttes in us : CMROLLEP-M24,91.457

bot if we ete wele , and drynk wele , and slepe wele , and lygge soft ,
and sytt warme , we may not serve God , ne last in +te travell +tat we
have begonn . CMROLLEP-M24,91.458

Bot he +tynkes to bryng us till over mykel lust . CMROLLEP-M24,91.459

Ano+ter es , when under +te lyknes of gastly <P_92> gode he entices us
til scharp and ovre mikel penance , for to destroye oure self ; and says
+tus : ' +Tou wate wele , +tat he +tat suffers mast peneance for goddes
lufe , he sall have maste mede . CMROLLEP-M24,92.460

For+ti ete litell and febyl mete , CMROLLEP-M24,92.461

and drynk lesse ; CMROLLEP-M24,92.462

+te +tynnest drynk es gode ynogh till +te . CMROLLEP-M24,92.463

Recke noght of slepe ; CMROLLEP-M24,92.464

were +te hayre and +te habirion . CMROLLEP-M24,92.465

All +tyng +tat es affliccion for +ti flesche , do it , so +tat +tare be
nane +tat may passe +te in penance . CMROLLEP-M24,92.466

He +tat says +te +tus es aboute to sla +te wi+t ovre mykel abstinence ,
als he +tat sayde +te to+ter to sla +te wi+t ovre lytell .
CMROLLEP-M24,92.467

For+ti , if we will be right disposed , us behoves sett us in a gude
mene , and +tat we may destroy owre vices and halde oure flesche under ;
and never+telatter +tat it be stalwor+t in +te servyse of Jhesu Criste .
CMROLLEP-M24,92.468

Alsswa oure enmy will noght suffer us to be in rest when we slepe ;
CMROLLEP-M24,92.469

bot +tan he es aboute to begyle us in many maners . CMROLLEP-M24,92.470

Umwhile wi+t uggly ymages , for to make us radde and make us la+te wi+t
oure state . CMROLLEP-M24,92.471

Umwhile wi+t faire ymages , fayre syghtes and +tat semes confortabell ,
for to make us glad in vayne , and gar us wene +tat we er better +tan we
er . CMROLLEP-M24,92.472

Umwhile tels us +tat we er haly and gode , for to bryng us intill pryde
. CMROLLEP-M24,92.473

Bot he , +tat es ordiner of all +tyng , suffers noght +tat oure slepe be
wi+towten mede til us , if we dresse oure lyfe till his will .
CMROLLEP-M24,92.474

And wyt +tow wele , +tou syns noght slepand , if +tou be evermare
wakande wi+touten outrage of mete and drynk and wi+touten ill +toghtes .
CMROLLEP-M24,92.475

Bot many ane +te devel hase deceyved +turgh dremes , when he haves gart
+tam sett +tair hert on +tam . CMROLLEP-M24,92.476

For he hase schewed +tam some so+te , and se+tyn begyld +tam wi+t ane
+tat was fals . CMROLLEP-M24,92.477

For+ti says +te wyse man , +tat many besynes folowes dremes ; an +tai
fell , +tat hoped in +tam . <P_93> Wharfore , +tat +tou be not begylde
wi+t +tam , I will +tat +tou witt +tat +ter er sex maners of dremes .
CMROLLEP-M24,93.478

Twa er , +tat na man , haly ne o+ter , may eschape .
CMROLLEP-M24,93.479

+Tai er , if +tair wambe be ovre tome , or ovre full ;
CMROLLEP-M24,93.480

+tan many vanitees in seer maners befalles +tam slepande .
CMROLLEP-M24,93.481

+Te +trid es , of illusyons of oure enmy . CMROLLEP-M24,93.482

+Te fer+t es , of +toght before , and illusion folouand . And +te fyft
, +torow +te revelacion of +te Hali Gast , +tat es done on many a maner
. CMROLLEP-M24,93.483

+Te sext es , of +toghtes before +tat falles to Criste or hali kyrk ,
revelacion comand after . CMROLLEP-M24,93.484

In +tus many maners touches +te ymage of dremes men when +tai slepe .
CMROLLEP-M24,93.485

Bot sa mykell we sall latlyer gyf fay+t till any dreme , +tat we may not
sone wyt whilk es so+t , whilk es fals , whilk es of oure enmy , whilk
es of +te Hali Gaste . CMROLLEP-M24,93.486

For whare many dremes er , +tare er many vanitees . CMROLLEP-M24,93.487

And many +tai may make to erre ; for +tai hegh unwhaynt men ,
CMROLLEP-M24,93.488

and swa deceyves +tam . CMROLLEP-M24,93.489

<heading>

Capitulum 3=m= . CMROLLEP-M24,93.491

<$$heading>

$I knawe +tat +ti lyfe es gyven to +te servyce of God .
CMROLLEP-M24,93.493

+tan es it schame til +te , bot if +tou be als gode , or better , wi+tin
in +ti sawle , als +tou ert semand at +te syght of men .
CMROLLEP-M24,93.494

Turne for+ti +ti +toghtes perfitely till God , als it semes +tat +tou
hase done +ti body . CMROLLEP-M24,93.495

For I will not +tat +tou wene +tat all er hali +tat hase +te abet of
halynes , and er noght ocupyed wi+t +te worlde ; ne +tat all er ill +tat
melles +tam wi+t er+tly bysines . CMROLLEP-M24,93.496

Bot +tai er anly hali , what state or degre +tai be in , +te whilk
despises all er+tly +tyng , +tat es at say , lufs it noght , and byrnes
in +te luf of Jhesu Criste , and al +tair desires er sett til +te joy of
heven , and hates al synn , and ceses noght of gode werkys , and feles a
swetnes in +taire hert of +te lufe wi+touten ende . CMROLLEP-M24,93.497

And neuer+telatter +tai +tynk +tamself vylest of all ,
CMROLLEP-M24,93.498

and haldes +tam wretchedest , leste , and lawest . CMROLLEP-M24,93.499

+Tis es hali <P_94> mens lyf ; CMROLLEP-M24,94.500

folow it , CMROLLEP-M24,94.501

and be haly . CMROLLEP-M24,94.502

And if +tou will be in mede wi+t apostels , +tynk noght what +tou
forsoke , bot what +tou despyses . CMROLLEP-M24,94.503

For als mykell +tai forsake , +tat foloues Jhesu Criste in wilfull
povert , and in mekenes , and in charite , and in paciens , als +tai may
covayte +tat folows hym noght . CMROLLEP-M24,94.504

And +tynk wi+t how mykel and how gude will +tou presentes +ti vowes
before hym ; for_till +tat he hase hys egh . CMROLLEP-M24,94.505

And if +tou wi+t gret desyre offer +ti praiers , wi+t grete fervoure
covayte to se hym , CMROLLEP-M24,94.506

and seke na er+tly comfor+t bot +te savoure of heven ;
CMROLLEP-M24,94.507

and in contemplacion +terof have +ti delyte . CMROLLEP-M24,94.508

Wondurfulli Jhesu wirkes in hys lovers , +te whilk he reves fra +te lust
of flesch and of blode +torow tender lufe . CMROLLEP-M24,94.509

He makes +tam to will na er+tly +tyng , CMROLLEP-M24,94.510

and dose +tam ryse into +te solace of hym , and to forgete vanytees and
fleschely lufe of +te worlde , and to drede na sorow +tat may fall .
CMROLLEP-M24,94.511

To la+te wi+t over mykel bodili ees , to suffer for his luf , +tam +tynk
it joy ; CMROLLEP-M24,94.512

and to be solitary +tai haue grete comfor+t , +tat +tai be noght lettyd
of +tat devocyon . CMROLLEP-M24,94.513

Now may +tou se +tat many er war +tan +tai seme , CMROLLEP-M24,94.514

and many er better +tan +tai seme , and namely amang +tase +tat hase +te
habett of halynes . CMROLLEP-M24,94.515

For+ti afforce +te , in all +tat +tow may , +tat +tou be noght wer +tan
+tou semes . CMROLLEP-M24,94.516

And if +tou will do als I lere +te in +tis schort forme of lyvyng , I
hope , +torou +te grace of God , +tat if men halde +te gude , +tou sall
be wele better . CMROLLEP-M24,94.517

<heading>

Capitulum iiij=m= CMROLLEP-M24,94.519

<$$heading>

At +te begynning turne +te enterely to +ti Lorde Jhesu Criste .
CMROLLEP-M24,94.521

+Tat turnyng till Jhesu es noght els bot turnyng fra all +te covaytyse
and +te likyng and +te occupacions and bisynes of worldly +tynges and of
fleschly lust and vayne luf , swa +tat +ti +toght , +tat was ay donward
, modeland in +te er+t , whils +tou was in +te worlde , <P_95> now be ay
upwarde , als fire , sekand +te heghest place in heven , right til +ti
spows , +tare he sytes in hys blys . CMROLLEP-M24,95.522

Til hym +tou ert turned , when his grace illumyns +ti hert , and $it
forsakes all vices , and conformes it til vertues and gude +tewes , and
til all maner of debonerte and mekenes . CMROLLEP-M24,95.523

And +tat +tou may last and wax in gudenes +tat +tou hase begon ,
wi+towten slawnes and sarynes and irkyng of +ti lyf ; fowre +tyngs sall
+tou have in +ti +toght , til +tou be in perfyte lufe .
CMROLLEP-M24,95.524

For when +tou ert commen +tartill , +ti joy and desyre will ay be
byrnand in Criste . CMROLLEP-M24,95.525

Ane es : +te mesur of +ti lyf here , +tat sa schort es , +tat unne+tis
es it oght . CMROLLEP-M24,95.526

For we lyve bot in a poynt , +tat es +te leste +tyng +tat may be .
CMROLLEP-M24,95.527

And so+tely oure lyfe es les +tan a poynt , if we liken it to +te lyfe
+tat lastes ay . CMROLLEP-M24,95.528

Ano+ter es : uncertente of owre endyng . For we wate never when we sal
dye , ne whare we sal dye , ne how we sal dye , ne whider we sal ga when
we er dede ; and +tat God wil +tat +tis be uncertayn til us , for he
will +tat we be ay redy to dye . CMROLLEP-M24,95.529

+Te +tyrd es : +tat we sall answer before +te ryghtwys juge of all +te
tyme +tat we have bene here : how we have lyved , what oure occupacioun
hase bene , and why , and what gude we myght have done when we have bene
ydel . CMROLLEP-M24,95.530

For+ti sayde +te prophete : ' He hase calde +te tyme agayn me ' ,
CMROLLEP-M24,95.531

+tat ilk day he hase lent us here for to despende in gude use , and in
penance , and in Gods servys . CMROLLEP-M24,95.532

If we waste it in er+tly lufe and in vanitees , ful grevosly mon we be
demed and punyst , for +tat es ane of +te maste sorow +tat may be , bot
we afforce us manly in +te lufe of God , and do gude til all +tat we may
whil oure schort tyme lastes . CMROLLEP-M24,95.533

And ilk tyme +tat we +tynk not on God , we may cownt it als +te +tyng
+tat we have tynt . CMROLLEP-M24,95.534

+Te fer+t es : +tat we +tynk how mykell +te joy es +tat +tai have , +te
whilk lastes in Goddes lufe til +tair <P_96> endyng .
CMROLLEP-M24,96.535

For +tai sal be bre+ter and felaws wi+t awngels and haly men , lufand
and +tankand , lovand and seand +te kyng of joy in +te fayrhede and in
+te schynyng of his maieste ; +te whilk syght sall be mede and mete and
al delytes +tat any creature may +tynk , and mare +tan any may tell ,
till all hys lovers wi+touten ende . CMROLLEP-M24,96.536

It es mikel lightar to come to +tat blys +tan for to tell it .
CMROLLEP-M24,96.537

Alswa +tynk on what pyne and what sorow and tormentyng +tai sall have ,
+te whilk lufs noght God over all o+ter +tynges +tat man sees in +tis
world , bot files +tare bodi and +tair sawle in lust and letchery of
+tis lyfe , in pryde and covayties and o+ter synnes .
CMROLLEP-M24,96.538

+Tai sall byrne in +te fyre of hell , wi+t +te devell wham +tai served ,
als lang as God es in heven wi+t his servandes , +tat es evermare .
CMROLLEP-M24,96.539

<heading>

Capitulum v=m= . CMROLLEP-M24,96.541

<$$heading>

$I wyll +tat +tou be ay clymbande tyll Jhesuwarde , and ekand +ti luf
and +ti servys in hym ; noght als foles doos : CMROLLEP-M24,96.543

+tai begyn in +te heyest degre , CMROLLEP-M24,96.544

and coms downe till +te lawest . CMROLLEP-M24,96.545

I say noght , for I will +tat if +tou have begune unskylfull abstinence
, +tat +tou halde it ; CMROLLEP-M24,96.546

bot for many +tat was byrnand at +te begynning and abyll til +te luf of
Jhesu Criste , for owre mykel penans +tai have lettyd +tamself , and
made +tam sa febel +tat +tai may noght lufe God as +tai sulde . In +te
whilk luf +tat +tow wax ay mare and mare is my covaytyng and my
amonestyng . CMROLLEP-M24,96.547

I halde +te neuer of +te lesse meryt yf +tou be noght in swa mykel
abstinence ; CMROLLEP-M24,96.548

bot if +tou sett al +ti +toght how +tou may luf +ti spouse Jhesu Criste
mare +tan +tou has done , +tan dar I say +tat +ti mede es waxand and
noght wanande . Wharfore , +tat +tou be ryght disposed , ba+t for +ti
saule and +ti body , +tou sall understande fowre +tynges .
CMROLLEP-M24,96.549

+Te fyrst +tyng es : what +tyng fyles a man . +Te to+ter +tyng : what
makys hym clene . +Te +tyrd : what haldes hym in clennes . +Te fer+t :
what +tyng drawes hym for to ordayne his will all at Goddes will .
CMROLLEP-M24,96.550

For +te fyrst , wyt +tou +tat we synne in +tre +tynges +tat makes us
folowe , +tat es , wy+t hert , and mou+t , and dede .
CMROLLEP-M24,96.551

+Te synnes of +te hert er +tir : ill +toght , ill delyte , assent till
synne , desyre of ill , wikked will , ill suspension , undevocion if
+tou lat +ti hert any tyme be ydell , wi+touten occupacion of +te lufe
of +te lovyng of God ; ill drede , ill lufe , errour , fleschely
affeccioun till +ti frendes , or till o+ter +tat +tou lufes , joy in any
mens ill fare whe+tir +tai be enmy or nane ; despyte of pure or of
synfull men , to honor ryche men for +taire rytches , unconabyll joy of
any worldes vanite , sorow of +te worlde , un+tolmodnes , perplexite ,
+tat es , dowt what es to do and what noght , for ilk a man aght for to
be syker what he sall do and what he sall leve ; obstinacion in ill ,
noy to do gude , anger to serve God , sorow +tat he dyd na mare ill , or
+tat he dyd noght +tat luste or +tat will of his flesche , +te whilk he
myght have done , unstabylnes of +toght , pyne of penance , ypocrisy ,
lufe to plees to men , drede to dysplees +tam , schame of gude dede ,
joy of ill dede , synguler witt , covaytise of honoure or of dignite ,
or to be halden better +tan o+ter , or rycher , or fayrer , or to be
mare dred , vayne glory of any godes of kynde , or of happe , or of
grace , schame wi+t pore frendes , pryde of +ti riche kynne or of gentyl
CMROLLEP-M24,96.552

for all we er ilike fre befor Gods face , bot if owre dedes make any
better or wers +tan o+ter ; despyte of gude counsell and of gude
techynge . CMROLLEP-M24,96.553

+Te synnes of +te mow+te er +tir : to swere oftsy+t , forsweryng ,
sclaunder of Criste , or of any of his halows , <P_98> to neven his name
wi+touten reverence , agaynsaiyng and strife agayne so+tfastnes ,
grotchyng agayns God for any angwys , or noy , or tribulacioun +tat may
befall in er+t , to say Goddes servys undevowtly and wi+touten reverence
, bakbityng , flateryng , lesyng , missaiyng , wariyng , defamyng ,
flytyng , manasyng , sawyng of discorde , treson , fals wytnes , ill
cownsell , he+tyng , unboxumnes wi+t worde ; to turne gude dedes to ill
, for to gar +tam be halden ill +tat dose +tam we aght to lappe oure
neghboure dedes in +te beste , noght in +te warst ; excityng of any man
till ire , to reprehende in ano+ter +tat he dose hymself , vayne speche
, mykel speche , fowle speche ; to speke ydell wordes , or wordes +tat
er na nede ; rusyng , polysyng of wordes , defendyng of synne , criyng
of laghter , mowe makyng on any man ; to syng seculere sanges and lufe
+tam ; to prayse ill dedes ; to syng mare for lovyng of men +tan of God
. CMROLLEP-M24,98.554

+Te synnes of dede er +tir : glotony , letchery , drunkynhede , symony ,
wytchecraft , $brekyng of +te haly dayes , sacrileghe ; to receyve
Goddes body in dedely synn ; brekyng of vowes , apostasy , dissolucioun
in Goddes servys ; to gyf ensawmpyl of il dede ; to hurt any man in his
body or in his godes or in hys fame ; +teft , ravyn , usur , desayte ;
sellyng of ryghtwytnes ; to herken ill ; to gyf to herlotes ; to
wi+thalde necessaries fra +ti body , or to gyf it to owtrage ; to begyn
a +tyng +tat is abowen oure myght ; custom to syn ; fallyng oft to syn ;
fanyng of mare gude +tan we have , for to seme halyer , or conander , or
wiser +tan we er ; to halde +te office +tat we suffice noght till , or
+tat may noght be halden wi+touten syn ; to lede karols ; to bryng up
new gyse ; to be rebell agayne hys soverayns ; to defoule +tam +tat er
lesse ; to syn in syght , in heryng in smellyng , in towchyng , in
handelyng , in <P_99> schewyng , in gyftes , in wayes , sygnes ,
bydynges , writynges ; to receyve +te circumstance , +tat er , tyme ,
stede , maner , nowmber , person , dwellyng , conyng , elde +tir makes
+te syn mare or lesse ; to covayte to syn or he be temped ; to
constreyne hym till syn . CMROLLEP-M24,99.555

O+ter many syns +tar er of omission , +tat es , of levyng of gude undone
, when men leves +te gude +tat +tai suld do : noght +tynkand on God , ne
dredand ne lovand hym , ne +tankand hym of hys benefices ; to do noght
all +tat he doos for Goddes lufe ; to sorow noght for hys syn as he
sulde do ; to dispoos hym noght to receyve grace , and if he have taken
grace , to use it noght als hym aght , ne to kepe it noght ; tu turne
noght at +te inspiracion of God ; to conforme noght his will to Gods
will , to gyf noght entent till hes prayers , bot rabill on , and rek
never bot +tai be sayde ; to do necligently +tat he es bownden till
+torow a vowe , or comawnded , or es enjoynde in penance ; to draw on
lengh +tat es at do sone ; havand na joy of his neghbur prophet als of
his awne ; noght sorowand for his ill fare ; standand noght agayne
temptacions ; forgifand noght +tam +tat hase done hym harme ; kepand
noght trou+t to his neghbur , als he walde +tat he dyd till hym ; and
yheldand hym noght a gude dede for ano+ter if he may ; amendand noght
+tam +tat synnes before his ene ; peesand noght stryves ; lerand noght
+tam +tat er noght conand ; comfortand noght +tam +tat er in sorow , or
in sekenes , or in povert , or in penance , or in pryson .
CMROLLEP-M24,99.556

+Tir synnes , and many o+ter , makes men foule . CMROLLEP-M24,99.557

+Te +tynges +tat clenses us of +tat fil+t er +tre , agaynes +tase +tre
maners of synnes . CMROLLEP-M24,99.558

+Te fyrst es : sorow of hert , agayne +te syn of +toght .
CMROLLEP-M24,99.559

Ant it behoves be perfyte , +tat +tou will never syn mare , and +tat
+tou have sorow of all +ti synnes , and +tat all joy and solace , bot of
God and in God , be put out of +ti hert . CMROLLEP-M24,99.560

+Te to+ter es : <P_100> schryft of mou+t , agayn +te syn of mou+t .
CMROLLEP-M24,100.561

And +tat salle be hasty wi+touten delaying , naked wi+touten excusyng ,
hale wi+towten partyng , als for to tell a syn till a preste and ano+ter
till ano+ter CMROLLEP-M24,100.562

say all +tat +tow wate till ane , or els +ti schryft es noght wor+t .
CMROLLEP-M24,100.563

+Te +tird es : satisfaccion . CMROLLEP-M24,100.564

+Tat has +tre partyes , fastyng , prayer , and almosdede noght anly to
gif pore men mete and drynk , bot for to forgyf +tam +tat dose +te
wrange , and prai for +tam , and enforme +tam how +tai sall do , +tat er
in poynt to perisch . CMROLLEP-M24,100.565

For +te +tyrd +tyng , +tou sall wyt +tat clennes behoves be keped in
hert , and in mou+t , and in werk . CMROLLEP-M24,100.566

Clennes of hert +tre +tynges kepes . CMROLLEP-M24,100.567

Ane es waker +toght and stabel of God . CMROLLEP-M24,100.568

Ano+ter is bisynes to kepe +ti fyve wittes , sa +tat all +te wyked
styryngs of +tam be closed out of +te flesche . CMROLLEP-M24,100.569

Alswa clennes of mou+t kepes +tre +tynges . CMROLLEP-M24,100.570

Ane es , +tat +tow um+tynk +te before or +tou speke .
CMROLLEP-M24,100.571

Ano+ter es , +tat +tou be not of mikel speche , but of litel , and namly
ay til +ti hert be stabeld in +te luf of Jhesu Crist , swa +tat +te
+tynk +tat +tou lokes ay on hym , whe+ter +tou speke or noght .
CMROLLEP-M24,100.572

Bot swilk a grace may +tou noght have in +te fyrst day ,
CMROLLEP-M24,100.573

bot wi+t lang travell and grete bysines to lof hym wi+t custom , so +tat
+te egh of +ti hert be ay upwarde , sall +tou com +tartill .
CMROLLEP-M24,100.574

+Te +tyrd , +tat +tou for na +tyng , ne for na mekenes , lye on any man
. CMROLLEP-M24,100.575

For ilk a lee es syn , and il , and noght Goddes will .
CMROLLEP-M24,100.576

+Te +tar noght tell all +te so+t ay , bot if +tow will ;
CMROLLEP-M24,100.577

bot al lees hate . CMROLLEP-M24,100.578

Yf +tou say a +tyng of +tiself +tat semes +ti lovyng , and +tou say it
to +te lovyng of God and help of o+ter , +tou dos noght unwisely ,
CMROLLEP-M24,100.579

for +tou spekes so+tfastnes . CMROLLEP-M24,100.580

Bot if +tou will have oght pryve , tel it til nane bot swylk ane , +tat
+tou be syker +tat it sulde noght be schewed , bot anly til +te lovyng
of God , of wham es all gudenes , and +tat makes some better +tan o+ter
, and gifes +tam special grace , <P_101> noght anely for +tamself , bot
alswa for +tam +tat wil do wele after +taire ensawmpell .
CMROLLEP-M24,101.581

Clennes of werk +tre +tynges keps . CMROLLEP-M24,101.582

Ane es : a bysi +toght of dede . CMROLLEP-M24,101.583

For +te wyse man says : ' Umbe+tynk +te of +ti last endyng , and +tou
sall noght syn . ' CMROLLEP-M24,101.584

Ano+ter : fle fra ill felyschypp , +tat gyfs mare ensawmpel to luf +te
worlde +tan God , er+t +tan heven , fil+t of body +tan clennes of saule
. CMROLLEP-M24,101.585

+Te +tird es : temperance and discrecion in mete and drynk , +tat it be
now+ter til owtrage , ne bene+t skilwys sustinance for +ti body .
CMROLLEP-M24,101.586

For bo+t comes til an ende , owtrage and over mykel fastyng ;
CMROLLEP-M24,101.587

for now+ter es Gods will . CMROLLEP-M24,101.588

And +tat many wil noght wene , for noght +tat man may say .
CMROLLEP-M24,101.589

Yf +tou take sustenance of swilk gude als God sendys for +te tyme and
+te day , what it be I owttake na maner of mete +tat Cristen men uses ,
wi+t discrecion and mesur , +tou dose wele ; CMROLLEP-M24,101.590

for sa dyd Criste hymself and hys apostels . CMROLLEP-M24,101.591

Yf +tou leve many metes +tat men has , noght dispysand +te mete +tat God
has made til mannes helpe , bot for +te +tynk +tat +tou hase na nede
+tarof , +tou dose wele , if +tou se +tat +tow ert stalwor+t to serve
God , and +tat it brekes noght +ti stomake . CMROLLEP-M24,101.592

For if +tou have broken it wi+t ovre mikel abstynence , +te es reft
appetyte of mete , CMROLLEP-M24,101.593

and oft sal +tou be in qwa+tes , als +tou war redy to gyf +te gast ;
CMROLLEP-M24,101.594

and wit +tou wele , +tou synned in +tat dede . CMROLLEP-M24,101.595

And +tou may not witt sone whe+tir +ti abstinence be agayne +te or wi+t
+te . CMROLLEP-M24,101.596

For +te tyme +tou ert +gong , I rede +tat +tou ete and drynk better and
war als it comes , +tat +tou be noght begylt ; CMROLLEP-M24,101.597

and afterwarde , when +tou has proved many +tynges and overcommen many
temptacions , and knawes better +tiself and God +tan +tou dyd , +tan ,
if +tou se +tat it be at do , +tou mai take til mare abstinence .
CMROLLEP-M24,101.598

And whils +tou may , do pryve penance , +tat al men +tar noght wyt .
CMROLLEP-M24,101.599

Ryghtwysnes es noght al in fastyng , ne in etyng : CMROLLEP-M24,101.600

bot +tou ert ryghtwys , if all ilyke be to +te , despyte and lovyng ,
povert and <P_102> rytches , hunger and nede , als delytes and dayntes .
CMROLLEP-M24,102.601

If +tou take +tir wi+t a lowyng of God , I halde +te blyssed , hee
before Jhesu . CMROLLEP-M24,102.602

Men +tat comes til +te , +tai luf +te for +tai se +ti grete abstinens ,
and for +tai se +te enclosed . CMROLLEP-M24,102.603

Bot I may not love +te so lyghtly , for oght +tat I se +te do wi+towten
; bot if +ti wil be conformed enterely to Goddes will .
CMROLLEP-M24,102.604

And sett noght by +tar lovyng ne +tar lackyng , CMROLLEP-M24,102.605

and gyf +tou never tale , if +tai speke lesse gode of +te +tan +tai dyd
; bot +tat +tou be byrnander in Goddes luf +tan +tou was .
CMROLLEP-M24,102.606

For a +tyng warne I +te : CMROLLEP-M24,102.607

I hope +tat God has na perfyte servand in er+t wi+touten ennemyes of som
men ; CMROLLEP-M24,102.608

for anely wretchednes has na enmy . CMROLLEP-M24,102.609

For to draw us , +tat we conforme oure will till Goddes will , er thre
thynges . CMROLLEP-M24,102.610

Ane es : ensawmpel of haly men and haly wymen , +te whilk war ententife
nyght and day to serve God and drede hym and luf hym .
CMROLLEP-M24,102.611

And we folow +tam in erth , we moun be with +tam in heven .
CMROLLEP-M24,102.612

Another es : +te godenes of oure Lorde , +tat despises nane , bot gladly
receyves all +tat comes till hys mercy ; CMROLLEP-M24,102.613

and he es hamlyer to +tam +tan brother or syster , or any frende +tat
+tai maste luf or maste treystes on . CMROLLEP-M24,102.614

+Te thyrd es : +te wonderfull joy of +te kyngdom of heven , +tat es mare
+tan tong may tell , or hert mai thynk , or egh may se , or ere may here
. CMROLLEP-M24,102.615

It es swa mykel , +tat als in hel myght na thyng lyve for mykel pyne ,
CMROLLEP-M24,102.616

bot at +te myght of God suffers +tam noght to dye , CMROLLEP-M24,102.617

swa +te joy in +te syght of Jhesu in his godhede es swa mykel +tat +tai
mond dye for joy , if it ne war his godenes , +tat will +tat his lovers
be lyvand ay in blys , als his ryghtwysnes wil +tat al +tat lufed hym
noght be ay lyvand in fyre +tat es horribel till any man at thynk ,
CMROLLEP-M24,102.618

loke +ten what it es to fele . CMROLLEP-M24,102.619

Bot +tai +tat will not thynk it and drede it now , +tai sal suffer it
evermare . CMROLLEP-M24,102.620

Now hase +tow herd how +tou may dispose +ti lyfe , and rewle it to
Goddes will . CMROLLEP-M24,102.621

Bot I vate wele +tat +tou <P_103> desyres to here some special poynt of
+te luf of Jhesu Criste , and of contemplatyf lyfe , +te whilk +tou hase
taken +te till at mens syght . CMROLLEP-M24,103.622

Als I have grace and konnyng , I will lere +te . CMROLLEP-M24,103.623

<heading>

Capitulum vi=m= . CMROLLEP-M24,103.625

<$$heading>

Amore langueo . CMROLLEP-M24,103.627

+Tir twa wordes er wryten in +te boke of lufe , +tat es kalled +te sang
of lufe , or +te sang of sanges . CMROLLEP-M24,103.628

For he +tat mykel lufes , hym lyst oft syng of his luf , for joy +tat he
or scho hase when +tai thynk on +tat +tat +tai lufe , namely if +tair
lover be trew and lufand . CMROLLEP-M24,103.629

And +tis es +te Inglisch of thies twa wordes : ' I languysch for lufe .
' CMROLLEP-M24,103.630

Sere men in erth has sere gyftes and graces of God ;
CMROLLEP-M24,103.631

bot +te special gift of +tas +tat ledes solitary lyf es for to lufe
Jhesu Criste . CMROLLEP-M24,103.632

+Tow says me : ' All men lufes hym +tat haldes his comawndementes . '
CMROLLEP-M24,103.633

Soth it es . CMROLLEP-M24,103.634

Bot all men +tat kepes hys byddyngs , kepes noght also hys cownsayle ;
CMROLLEP-M24,103.635

and all +tat dos his cownsell er noght also fulfyld of +te swetnes of
his lufe , CMROLLEP-M24,103.636

ne feles noght +te fyre of byrnand luf of hert . CMROLLEP-M24,103.637

For+ti , +te diversite of lufe makes +te diversite of halynes and of
mede . CMROLLEP-M24,103.638

In heven , +te awngels +tat er byrnandest in lufe er nerrest God .
CMROLLEP-M24,103.639

Also men and women +tat maste has of Goddes lufe , whether +tai do
penance or nane , +tai sall be in +te heghest degre in heven ; +tai +tat
lufes hym lesse , in +te lawer order . CMROLLEP-M24,103.640

If +tou lufe hym mykel , mykel joy and swetnes and byrnyng +tou feles in
his lufe , CMROLLEP-M24,103.641

+tat es +ti comforth and strengh nyght and day . CMROLLEP-M24,103.642

If +ti lufe be not byrnand in hym , litel es +ti delyte .
CMROLLEP-M24,103.643

For hym may na man fele in joy and swetnes , bot if +tai be clene and
fylled with his lufe ; CMROLLEP-M24,103.644

and +tartill sal +tou com with grete travayle in praier and thynkyng ,
havand swilk meditacions +tat er al in +te lufe and in +te lovyng of God
. CMROLLEP-M24,103.645

And when +tou ert at +ti mete , love ay God in +ti thoght at ilk a
morsel , CMROLLEP-M24,103.646

and say +tus in +ti hert : CMROLLEP-M24,103.647

<P_104>

{COM:poetry_omitted}

And thynk it noght anely whils +tou etes , bot bath before and after ,
ay bot when +tou prayes or spekes . CMROLLEP-M24,104.650

Or if +tou have other thoghtes +tat +tou has mare swetnes in and
devocion +tan in +tase +tat I lere +te , +tou may thynk $+tam .
CMROLLEP-M24,104.651

For I hope +tat God will do swilk thoghtes in +ti hert als he es payde
of , and als +tou ert ordaynde for . CMROLLEP-M24,104.652

When +tou prayes , loke noght how mykel +tou says , bot how wele : +tat
+te lofe of +ti hert be ay upwarde , and thy thoght on +tat +tou sayes ,
als mykel als +tow may . CMROLLEP-M24,104.653

If +tou be in prayers and meditacions al +te day , I wate wele +tat +tou
mon wax gretely in +te lufe of Jhesu Cryste , and mikel fele of delyte ,
and within schort tyme . CMROLLEP-M24,104.654

<heading>

Capitulum viii=m= . CMROLLEP-M24,104.656

<$$heading>

Thre degrees of lufe I sal tell +te , CMROLLEP-M24,104.658

for I walde +tat +tou moght wyn to +te heest . CMROLLEP-M24,104.659

The fyrst degre es called insuperabel ; +te secund , inseparabel ;
CMROLLEP-M24,104.660

+te thyrd es syngulere . CMROLLEP-M24,104.661

+Ti luf es insuperabel , when na thyng +tat es contrary til Gods lufe
overcomes it , bot es stalworth agayns al fandyngs , and stabel ,
whether +tou be in ese or in angwys , or in hele or in sekenes ; swa
+tat +te thynk +tat +tow walde noght for all +te worlde , to have it
withowten ende , <P_105> wreth God any tyme ; CMROLLEP-M24,105.662

and +te war lever , if outher sulde be , to suffer al +te pyne and waa
+tat myght com til any creature , or +tou weld do +te thyng +tat suld
myspay hym . CMROLLEP-M24,105.663

On +tis maner sal +ti lufe be insuperabel , +tat na thyng may downe
bryng , bot spryngand on heght . CMROLLEP-M24,105.664

Blyssed es he or scho +tat es in +tis degre ; CMROLLEP-M24,105.665

bot +gitt er +tai blyssedar , +tat myght halde +tis degre and wyn intil
+te to+ter , +tat es inseparabel . CMROLLEP-M24,105.666

Inseparabel es +ti lufe , when al +ti hert and +ti thoght and +ti myght
es swa haly , swa enterely , and swa perfytely festend , sett , and
stabeld in Jhesu Cryste , +tat +ti thoght comes never of hym , never
departyd fra hym , outaken slepyng ; CMROLLEP-M24,105.667

and als sone als +tou wackens , +ti hert es on hym , sayand Ave Maria or
Gloria tibi Domine or Pater noster or Miserere mei Deus if +tou have
bene temped in +ti slepe , or thynkand on his lufe and his lovyng , als
+tou dyd wakand ; CMROLLEP-M24,105.668

when +tou may na tyme forgete hym , what sa +tou dose or says , +tan es
+ti lufe inseparabel . CMROLLEP-M24,105.669

Ful mykel grace have +tai +tat es in +tis degre of lufe ,
CMROLLEP-M24,105.670

and me thynk +tou , +tat hase noght els at do bot for to lufe God , may
com +tartill , if any may gete it . CMROLLEP-M24,105.671

+Te thyrd degre es heest , and maste ferly to wyn , CMROLLEP-M24,105.672

+tat es calde synguler , CMROLLEP-M24,105.673

for it hase na pere . CMROLLEP-M24,105.674

Singuler lufe es , when all comforth and solace es closed owt of +ti
hert , bot of Jhesu Cryste alane . CMROLLEP-M24,105.675

Other joy lyst it noght , CMROLLEP-M24,105.676

for +te swetnes of hym in +tis degre es swa comfortand and lastand in
his lufe , sa byrnand and gladand , +tat he or scho , +tat es in +tis
degre , mai als wele fele +te fyre of lufe byrnand in +taire saule , als
+tou may fele +ti fynger byrn , if +tou putt it in +te fyre .
CMROLLEP-M24,105.677

Bot +tat fire , if it be hate , es swa delitabell and wondyrful +tat I
ken noght tell it . CMROLLEP-M24,105.678

+Tan +ti sawle es Jhesu lufand , Jhesu thynkand , Jhesu desirand , anly
in +te covayties of hym anedande , til hym syngand , of hym byrnand , in
hym restand . CMROLLEP-M24,105.679

+Tan +te sange of lovyng and of lufe es commen , CMROLLEP-M24,105.680

<P_106>

+tan +ti thoght turnes intil sang and intil melody ,
CMROLLEP-M24,106.682

+tan +te behoves syng +te psalmes +tat +tou before sayde ,
CMROLLEP-M24,106.683

+tan +tou mon be lang abowte few psalmes , CMROLLEP-M24,106.684

+tan +te wil thynk +te deed swettar +tan hony , CMROLLEP-M24,106.685

for +tan +tou ert ful syker to se hym +tat +tou lufes ;
CMROLLEP-M24,106.686

+tan may +tou hardely say : ' I languysch for lufe ' ;
CMROLLEP-M24,106.687

+tan may +tou say : ' I slepe , CMROLLEP-M24,106.688

and my hert wakes . ' CMROLLEP-M24,106.689

In +te first degre , men may say : ' I languysch for lufe ' , or ' Me
ranges in lufe ' ; and in +te to+ter degre alswa , CMROLLEP-M24,106.690

for languysyng es when men fayles for sekenes . CMROLLEP-M24,106.691

And +tai +tat er in +tire twa degrees fayles fra al +te covayties of
+tis worlde , and fra lust and lykyng of synful lyfe ,
CMROLLEP-M24,106.692

and settes +tair entent and +tair hert to +te lufe of God .
CMROLLEP-M24,106.693

For+ti +tai may say : ' I languysch for lufe . ' And mykel mare , +tat
er in +te secund degre , +tan in +te fyrst . CMROLLEP-M24,106.694

Bot +te sawle +tat es in +te thyrd degre es als byrnand fyre , and as
+te nyghttyngale , +tat lufes sang and melody and fayles for mykel lufe
; swa +tat +te saule es anely comforted in lovying and lufyng of God ,
and til +te dede com es syngand gastly til Jhesu , and in Jhesu , and
Jhesu , noght <em> bodyly cryand <$$em> wyth mouth --
CMROLLEP-M24,106.695

of +tat maner of <em> syngyng speke <$$em> I noght ,
CMROLLEP-M24,106.696

for +tat sang hase bath <em> gude and ill ; CMROLLEP-M24,106.697

and <$$em> +tis maner of sang hase nane , bot if +tai be in +tis thyrd
degre of lufe , til +te whilk degre it es impossibel to com , bot in a
grete multitude of lufe . CMROLLEP-M24,106.698

For+ti , if +tou will wytt what@ @kyn joy +tat sang has , I say +te +tat
na man wate , bot he or scho +tat feles it , +tat has it , and +tat
loves God , syngand +tarwyth . CMROLLEP-M24,106.699

A thyng tel I +te : CMROLLEP-M24,106.700

it es of heven ; CMROLLEP-M24,106.701

and God gyfes it til wham he wil , bot noght withouten grete grace
comand before . CMROLLEP-M24,106.702

Wha hase it , hym thynk al +te sang and al +te mynstralcy of erth noght
bot sorow and wa +tartil . CMROLLEP-M24,106.703

In soverayne rest sal +tai be , +tat may gete it . CMROLLEP-M24,106.704

Gangrels and jangelers , and <P_107> kepers of comers and gangars arely
and late , nyght and day , or any +tat es takked with any syn wilfully
and wittandly , or +tat has delyte in any erthly thyng , +tai er als far
+tarfra , als es fra heven to erth . CMROLLEP-M24,107.705

In +te fyrst degre er many , CMROLLEP-M24,107.706

in +te to+ter degre er ful faa , CMROLLEP-M24,107.707

bot in +te thyrde degre unnethes er any ; CMROLLEP-M24,107.708

for ay +te mare +tat +te perfeccion es , +te faer folowers it has .
CMROLLEP-M24,107.709

In +te fyrst degre er men lickend to +te sternes ; in the to+ter , till
+te mone ; in +te thyrd , til +te sonne . CMROLLEP-M24,107.710

For+ti says saynt Paule : ' Other of +te sonne , other of +te mone ,
other of +te sternes ' : CMROLLEP-M24,107.711

swa it es of +te lufers of God . CMROLLEP-M24,107.712

In +tis third degre , if +tou may wyn +tartill , +tou sall witt of mare
joy +tan I have talde +te $+gitt . CMROLLEP-M24,107.713

And ymang other affeccions and sanges +tou <em> may in +ti <$$em>
langyng syng +tis in +ti hert til +ti Lord Jhesu , $when +tou covaytes
hys comyng and +ti gangyng : CMROLLEP-M24,107.714

{COM:poetry_omitted}

<P_108>

<heading>

Capitulum nonum CMROLLEP-M24,108.718

<$$heading>

$If +tou wil be wele with God , and have grace to rewle +ti lyf , and
com til +te joy of luf , +tis name Jhesu , fest it swa fast in +ti hert
, +tat it com never owt of +ti thoght . And when +tou spekes til hym ,
and says ' Jhesu ' , thurgh custom , it sal be in +ti ere joy , in +ti
mouth hony , and in +ti hert melody . CMROLLEP-M24,108.720

For +te sall thynk joy to here +tat name be nevened , swetnes to speke
it , myrth and sang to thynk it . CMROLLEP-M24,108.721

If +tou thynk Jhesu contynuly , and halde it stabely , it purges +ti syn
, CMROLLEP-M24,108.722

and kyndels +ti hert ; CMROLLEP-M24,108.723

it clarifies +ti sawle , CMROLLEP-M24,108.724

it removes anger , CMROLLEP-M24,108.725

and dose away slawnes ; CMROLLEP-M24,108.726

it woundes in lufe , CMROLLEP-M24,108.727

and fulfilles of charite ; CMROLLEP-M24,108.728

it chaces +te devel , CMROLLEP-M24,108.729

and puttes oute drede ; CMROLLEP-M24,108.730

it opens heven , CMROLLEP-M24,108.731

and makes a contemplatif man . CMROLLEP-M24,108.732

Have in mynde Jhesu ; CMROLLEP-M24,108.733

for al vices and fantomes it puttes owte fra +te lover .
CMROLLEP-M24,108.734

And haylce oft Mary , bath day and nyght . CMROLLEP-M24,108.735

Mikel lufe and joy sal +tou fele , if +tou wil do aftyr +tis lare .
CMROLLEP-M24,108.736

+Te thare noght covayte gretely many bokes ; CMROLLEP-M24,108.737

halde lufe in hert and in werke , and +tou hase al +tat we may say or
wryte . CMROLLEP-M24,108.738

For fulnes of +te law es charite ; CMROLLEP-M24,108.739

in +tat hynges all . CMROLLEP-M24,108.740

<heading>

Capitulum x=m= . CMROLLEP-M24,108.742

<$$heading>

Bot now may +tou ask me , and say : ' +Tou spekes sa mykel of lufe ,
CMROLLEP-M24,108.744

tel me , what es lufe ? And whar es lufe ? And how I sal lufe God
verrayly ? And how +tat I may knew +tat I lufe hym ? And in what state
I may maste lufe hym ? ' CMROLLEP-M24,108.745

+Tir er hard questyons to lere til a febyll man and a fleschly , als I
am . CMROLLEP-M24,108.746

Bot never-+te-latter +tarfore I sal noght lefte +tat I ne sall schew my
wytt , and als me thynk +tat it may be ; CMROLLEP-M24,108.747

for I hope in +te helpe of Jhesu , +tat es wel of lufe and pees and
swetnes . CMROLLEP-M24,108.748

+Te fyrst askyng es : What is lufe ? CMROLLEP-M24,108.749

And I answer : Luf es a byrnand +gernyng in God , with a wonderfull
<P_109> delyte and sykernes . CMROLLEP-M24,109.750

God es lyght and byrnyng . CMROLLEP-M24,109.751

Lyght clarifies oure skyll ; CMROLLEP-M24,109.752

byrnyng kyndels oure covayties , +tat we desyre noght bot hym .
CMROLLEP-M24,109.753

Lufe es a lyf , copuland togedyr +te lufand and +te lufed .
CMROLLEP-M24,109.754

For mekenes makes us swete to God ; CMROLLEP-M24,109.755

purete joynes us tyll God ; CMROLLEP-M24,109.756

lufe makes us ane with God . CMROLLEP-M24,109.757

Luf es fayrhede of al vertues . CMROLLEP-M24,109.758

Luf es thyng , thurgh +te whilk God lufes us , and we God , and ilk ane
of us other . CMROLLEP-M24,109.759

Lufe es desyre of +te hert , ay thynkand til +tat +tat it lufes ;
CMROLLEP-M24,109.760

and when it hase +tat it lufes , +tan it joyes , CMROLLEP-M24,109.761

and na thyng may make it sary . CMROLLEP-M24,109.762

Lufe es a $stiryng of +te saule , for to luf God for hymself , and all
other thyng for God ; +te whilk lufe , when it es ordaynde in God , it
dose away all inordinate lufe in any thyng +tat es noght gude .
CMROLLEP-M24,109.763

Bot al dedely syn es inordynate lufe in a thyng +tat es noght ;
CMROLLEP-M24,109.764

+tan lufe puttes out al dedely syn . CMROLLEP-M24,109.765

Luf es a vertu , +tat es rightest affeccion of man saule .
CMROLLEP-M24,109.766

Trowth may be withowten lufe , CMROLLEP-M24,109.767

bot it may noght helpe withouten it . CMROLLEP-M24,109.768

Lufe es perfeccion of letters , vertu of prophecy , frute of trowth ,
help of sacramentes , stablyng of witt and conyng , rytches of pure men
, lyfe of dyand men . CMROLLEP-M24,109.769

Se how gude lufe es . CMROLLEP-M24,109.770

If we suffer to be slayne , if we gyf al +tat we have til beggar staf ,
if we ken als mykel als al men ken in erth , til al +tis , withouten
lufe , es noght bot sorow ordande and torment . CMROLLEP-M24,109.771

If +tou will aske how gode es he or scho , ask how mykel lufes he or
scho ; CMROLLEP-M24,109.772

and +tat ken na man tel , CMROLLEP-M24,109.773

for I held it bot foly to deme a mans hert , +tat nane knawes bot God .
CMROLLEP-M24,109.774

Lufe es a ryghtwis turnyng fra al ertly thynges , CMROLLEP-M24,109.775

and es joynd til God withouten departyng , and kyndelde with +te fire of
+te Haly Gaste , fer fra fylyng , fer fra corrupcion , oblyst till na
vice of +tis lyfe , hegh aboven all fleschely lustes , ay redy and gredy
til contemplacion of God , in all thynges noght <P_110> overcomen , +te
sowme of al gude affeccyons , hele of gude maners , ende of
comawndementes of God , dede of synnes , lyf of vertues , vertu whils
feghtyng lastes , crowne of overcomers , mirynes til haly thoghtes .
CMROLLEP-M24,110.776

Withouten +tat , na man may pay God ; CMROLLEP-M24,110.777

with +tat , na man synnes . CMROLLEP-M24,110.778

For if we luf God in al oure hert , +tar es na thyng in us thurgh +te
whilk we serve to syn . CMROLLEP-M24,110.779

Verray luf clenses +te saule , CMROLLEP-M24,110.780

and delyvers it fra +te pyne of hell , and of +te foule servys of syn ,
and of +te ugly felyschip of +te devels ; CMROLLEP-M24,110.781

and of +te fendes sonn makes God sonn , and parcenel of +te heritage of
heven . CMROLLEP-M24,110.782

We sall afforce at cleth us in lufe , als +te yren or +te cole dose in
+te fyre , als +te ayer dose in +te sonn , als +te woll dose in +te hewe
. CMROLLEP-M24,110.783

+Te cole swa clethes it in +te fyre , +tat al es fyre ;
CMROLLEP-M24,110.784

<em> +te ayre swa clethes it in +te son , +tat al es ligth ; <$$em>
CMROLLEP-M24,110.785

and +te woll swa substancialy takes +te hewe , +tat it es lik it .
CMROLLEP-M24,110.786

In +tis maner sall a trewe lufar of Jhesu Criste do :
CMROLLEP-M24,110.787

his hert sal swa byrne in lufe , +tat it sal be turned intil fyre of
lufe , and be , als it war , al fire , CMROLLEP-M24,110.788

and he sal sa schyne in vertues , +tat in na parte of hym he be myrke in
vices . CMROLLEP-M24,110.789

+Te tother askyng es : Whare es lufe ? CMROLLEP-M24,110.790

And I answer : Lufe es in +te hert and in +te will of mane ; noght in
hys hand , ne in his mouth , +tat es at say , noght in hys wark , bot in
his sawle . CMROLLEP-M24,110.791

For many spekes gode , CMROLLEP-M24,110.792

and dose gode , CMROLLEP-M24,110.793

and many lufes noght God ; als ypocrites , +te whilk suffers grete
penance , and semes haly at mens syght , CMROLLEP-M24,110.794

bot for +tai seke lovyng and honoure of men and favoure , +tai have lost
+tar mede , CMROLLEP-M24,110.795

and in +te syght of God er +te devel sons and ravysand wlves .
CMROLLEP-M24,110.796

Bot if a man gyf almose-dede , and take hym til povert , and do penance
, it es signe +tat he lufes God ; CMROLLEP-M24,110.797

bot +tarfore lufes he hym noght , CMROLLEP-M24,110.798

bot when he forsakes +te worlde anly for Goddes lufe , and settes al his
thoght on God , and lufes al men als hymself , and al +te gude dedes
+tat he may <P_111> do , he dose +tam in entent for to pay Jhesu Criste
and to cum til +te rest of heven . +Tan he lufes God ,
CMROLLEP-M24,111.799

and +tat luf es in his saule , CMROLLEP-M24,111.800

and sa his dedes schewes withouten . CMROLLEP-M24,111.801

If +tou speke +te gude , and do +te gude , men supposes +tat +tou lufes
God . CMROLLEP-M24,111.802

Forthi loke wele +tat +ti thoght be in God , or elles +tou dampnes
+tiselfe , CMROLLEP-M24,111.803

and deceyves +te men . CMROLLEP-M24,111.804

Na thyng +tat I do withowten proves +tat I lufe God ;
CMROLLEP-M24,111.805

for a wicked man myght do als mykel penance in body , als mykel wake and
faste , als I do . CMROLLEP-M24,111.806

How may I +tan wene +tat I lufe , or halde me better for +tat , +tat ilk
a man may do ? CMROLLEP-M24,111.807

Certes mi hert , whethir it lufe my God or noght , wate na man bot God ,
for noght +tat +tai may se me do . Wharfore luf es in will verraily ,
noght in warke , bot als a signe of lufe . CMROLLEP-M24,111.808

For he +tat says he lufes God , and wil noght do in dede +tat in hym es
to schew lufe , say hym +tat he lyghes . CMROLLEP-M24,111.809

Luf wil noght be ydel : CMROLLEP-M24,111.810

it es wirkand som gude evermare . CMROLLEP-M24,111.811

If it sesse of wirkyng , wit +tou +tat it keles and wytes away .
CMROLLEP-M24,111.812

+Te thirde askyng es : How sal I verrayli lufe God ?
CMROLLEP-M24,111.813

I answer : Verray lufe es , to lufe hym in al +ti myght stalwortly , in
al +ti hert wysely , in al +ti sawle devowtely and swetely .
CMROLLEP-M24,111.814

Stalwortly may na man lufe hym , bot he be stalworth .
CMROLLEP-M24,111.815

He es stalworth , +tat es meke ; CMROLLEP-M24,111.816

for al gastly strengh comes of mekenes , on whame restes +te Haly Gaste
in a meke sawle . CMROLLEP-M24,111.817

Mekenes governes us , CMROLLEP-M24,111.818

and kepes us in al oure temptacions , swa +tat +tai overcome us noght .
CMROLLEP-M24,111.819

Bot +te devel deceyves many +tat er meke , thorow tribulacions and
reproves and bakebitynges . CMROLLEP-M24,111.820

Bot if +tou be wrath for any anguys of +tis worlde , or for any worde
+tat men says of +te , or for oght +tat men says til +te , +tou ert
noght meke , CMROLLEP-M24,111.821

ne +tou may swa lufe God stalwortly ; CMROLLEP-M24,111.822

for luf es stalworth als +te dede , +tat slaes al lyvand thyng in erth ,
and hard als hell , +tat spares noght till +tam +tat er dede .
CMROLLEP-M24,111.823

And he +tat lufes God perfitely , he greves hym noght , what <P_112>
schame or angwys +tat he suffers ; CMROLLEP-M24,112.824

bot he hase delyte CMROLLEP-M24,112.825

and covaytes +tat he war worthy for to suffer torment and payne for
Crystes lufe . CMROLLEP-M24,112.826

And he hase joy +tat men reproves hym and spekes ill of hym :
CMROLLEP-M24,112.827

als a dede man , what sa men dos or sayes , he answers noght . Ryght
swa , wha sa lufes God perfitely , +tai er not stirred for any worde
+tat man may say . CMROLLEP-M24,112.828

For he or scho kan noght lufe , +tat may noght suffer payne and anger
for +tair frendes lufe ; CMROLLEP-M24,112.829

for wha sa lufes , +tai have na pyne . CMROLLEP-M24,112.830

Prowde men or women lufes noght stalworthly ; CMROLLEP-M24,112.831

for +tai er swa wayke , +tat +tai fall at ilk a styryng of +te wynde ,
+tat es temptacion . CMROLLEP-M24,112.832

+Tai seke heghar stede +tan Cryste ; CMROLLEP-M24,112.833

for +tai wil have +tair wil done , whethir it be with right or with
wrang , CMROLLEP-M24,112.834

and Cryst will na thyng be done bot wele , and withouten harme of othir
men . CMROLLEP-M24,112.835

Bot wha sa es verrayly meke , +tai wil noght have +tair wil in +tis
worlde , bot +tat +tai may have it in +te to+ter plenarly .
CMROLLEP-M24,112.836

In na thyng may men sonar overcom +te devel +tan in mekenes , +tat he
mykel hates ; CMROLLEP-M24,112.837

for he may wake and faste and suffer pyne mare +tan any other creature
may . CMROLLEP-M24,112.838

Bot mekenes and lufe may he noght have . CMROLLEP-M24,112.839

Alswa +te behoves luf God wysely ; CMROLLEP-M24,112.840

and +tat may +tou noght do , bot if +tou be wyse . CMROLLEP-M24,112.841

+Tou ert wyse , when +tou ert pore , withowten covaytyse of +tis world ,
and dispyses +tiselfe for +te lufe of Jhesu Cryste , and dispendes al
+ti witte and al +ti myght in hys servys . CMROLLEP-M24,112.842

For sum +tat semes wysest er maste foles , CMROLLEP-M24,112.843

for al +tar wysdom +tai spyll in covayties and bisynes abowte +te world
. CMROLLEP-M24,112.844

If +tou saw a man have preciouse stanes , +tat he myght by a kyngdom
wyth , if he gaf +tam for an appyl , als a barne wil do , ryghtwysly
moght +tou say +tat he war noght wyse , bot a grete fole .
CMROLLEP-M24,112.845

Alsswa , if we wyl , we have preciouse stanes , povert and penance and
gastly travayle , with +te whilk we may by +te kyngdome of heven ;
CMROLLEP-M24,112.846

for if +tou lufe povert , and dispyse riches and <P_113> delytes of +tis
worlde , and halde +tiself vyle and pure , and thynk +tat +tou hase
noght of +tiself bot syn , for +tis povert +tou sall have rytches
withouten ende . CMROLLEP-M24,113.847

And if +tou have sorowe for +ti synnes , and for +tou ert swa lang in
exile owte of +ti contre , and forsakes +te solace of +tis lyfe , +tou
sal have for +tis sorow +te joy of heven . CMROLLEP-M24,113.848

And if +tou be in travayle , and punysche +ti body skil-wisly and wisely
in wakkyns , fastyngs , and in prayers and meditacions , and suffer hete
and calde , hunger and thyrst , myses and anguys for +te lufe of Jhesu
Cryste , for +tis travel +tou sal com till reste +tat lastes ay , and
syt in a setel of joy with aungels . CMROLLEP-M24,113.849

But som er , +tat lufes noght wysely , like til barnes , +tat lufes mare
an appel +tan a castel . CMROLLEP-M24,113.850

Swa dose many : CMROLLEP-M24,113.851

+tai gyf +te joy of heven for a litel delyte of +tar flesche , +tat es
noght worth a plowme . CMROLLEP-M24,113.852

Now may +tow se +tat wha sa will lufe wysely , hym behoves lufe lastand
thyng lastandly , and passand thyng passandly ; swa +tat his hert be
sette and festend in na thyng bot in God . CMROLLEP-M24,113.853

And if +tou will luf Jhesu verraly , +tow sal noght anly lufe hym
stalwortly and wysely , bot also devowtly and swetely .
CMROLLEP-M24,113.854

Swete lufe es , when +ti body es chaste and +ti thoght clene .
CMROLLEP-M24,113.855

Devowte luf es , when +tou offers +ti prayers and +ti thogtes til God
with gastly joy and byrnand hert in +te hete of +te Haly Gaste , swa
+tat +te thynk +tat +ti saule es , als it war , drunken for delyte and
solace of +te swetnes of Jhesu ; CMROLLEP-M24,113.856

and +ti hert conceyves sa mykel of Goddes helpe , +tat +te thynk +tat
+tow may never be fra hym departyd . CMROLLEP-M24,113.857

And +tan +tou comes intil swilk rest and pees in sawle , and quiete
withowten thoghtes of vanitese $or of vices , als +tou war in sylence
and slepe and sette in Noe schyppe , +tat na thyng may lette +te of
devocion and byrnyng of swete lufe . CMROLLEP-M24,113.858

Fra +tou have getyn +tis lyfe , all +ti luf , til dede come , es joy and
comforth ; CMROLLEP-M24,113.859

and <em> tou es <$$em> verrayli Cristes <P_114> lufer ;
CMROLLEP-M24,114.860

and he restes in +te , whas stede es maked in pees .
CMROLLEP-M24,114.861

+Te ferth askyng was : How +tou moght knaw +tat +tou war in lufe and
charite ? CMROLLEP-M24,114.862

I answer , +tat na man wate in erth +tat +tai er in charite , bot if it
be thorow any privelege or special grace +tat God hase gifen til any man
or woman , +tat al other may noght take ensawmpel by .
CMROLLEP-M24,114.863

Haly men and women trowes +tat +tai have trowth and hope and charite ,
CMROLLEP-M24,114.864

and in +tat dose als wele als +tai may , CMROLLEP-M24,114.865

and hopes certaynly +tat +tai sal be safe . CMROLLEP-M24,114.866

+Tai wate it not als tyte ; CMROLLEP-M24,114.867

for if +tai wiste , +tair merit war +te lesse . CMROLLEP-M24,114.868

And Salomon says +tat it er right-wys men and wyse men ,
CMROLLEP-M24,114.869

and +tair warkes er in Goddes hand . CMROLLEP-M24,114.870

And noght_for+ti man wate noght whethir he be worthi hateredyn or lufe ;
CMROLLEP-M24,114.871

bot al es reserved uncertayne til another worlde . CMROLLEP-M24,114.872

Never-+te-latter , if any had grace +tat he moght wyn til +te thirde
degre of lufe , +tat es called syngulere , he sulde knaw +tat he war in
lufe ; CMROLLEP-M24,114.873

bot in +tat maner his knawyng es , +tat he moght never bere hym +te
hegher , ne be in +te lesse bisynes to lufe God . CMROLLEP-M24,114.874

Bot sa mykel +te mare +tat he es siker of lufe , wil he be bisy to lufe
hym , and drede hym , +tat hase made hym swilk , and done +tat godenes
til hym . CMROLLEP-M24,114.875

And he +tat es swa hee , he wil noght halde hymself worthier +tan +te
synfullest man +tat gaas on erth . CMROLLEP-M24,114.876

Alsswa , seven experimentes er , +tat a man be in charite .
CMROLLEP-M24,114.877

+Te fyrst es , when al covatise of ertly thyng es slokkend in hym .
CMROLLEP-M24,114.878

For where sa covaityse es , +tare es na lufe of Cryste ;
CMROLLEP-M24,114.879

+tan if he have na covaytyse , signe es +tat he hase lufe .
CMROLLEP-M24,114.880

+Te secunde es , byrnand +gernyng of heven . CMROLLEP-M24,114.881

For when men hase feled oght of +tat savoure , +te mare +tai have +te
mare +tai covayte ; CMROLLEP-M24,114.882

and he +tat noght hase feled , noght he desires . CMROLLEP-M24,114.883

For+ti , when any es swa mykel gyfen til +te luf +tarof +tat he kan fynd
na joy in +tis lyfe , taken he hase +tat he es in charite .
CMROLLEP-M24,114.884

+Te thyrd es , if his tung be chawngyd , +tat was <P_115> $wone to speke
of +te erth $and now spekes of God , and of +te lyf +tat lastes ay .
CMROLLEP-M24,115.885

+Te feerth es , exercise of gastly profet , als if any man or woman gyf
+tam enterely to Goddes servyes , and entermetes +tam of nane erthly
bisynes . CMROLLEP-M24,115.886

+Te fift es , when +te thyng +tat es hard in itselfe semes lyght for to
do ; +te whilk luf makes . CMROLLEP-M24,115.887

For als Austyne says , ' Lufreden es +tat bryngs +te thyng +tat es farre
nerehande , and impossibel til possibel apertly . '
CMROLLEP-M24,115.888

+Te sext es , hardynes of thoght , to suffer all anguyses and noyes +tat
comes . CMROLLEP-M24,115.889

Withowten +tis , al +te o+ter suffices noght . CMROLLEP-M24,115.890

For it sal noght make a ryghtwys man sary , what sa falles hym ;
CMROLLEP-M24,115.891

for he +tat es ryghtwys , he hates noght bot syn , CMROLLEP-M24,115.892

he lufes noght bot God , CMROLLEP-M24,115.893

he dredes noght bot to wreth God . CMROLLEP-M24,115.894

+Te sevent es , delitabilite in sawle when he es in tribulacion , and
makes lovyng to God in ilk anger +tat he suffers ; CMROLLEP-M24,115.895

and +tis schewes wele +tat he lufes God , when na sorow may bryng hym
downe . CMROLLEP-M24,115.896

For many lufes God whils +tai er in ese , CMROLLEP-M24,115.897

and in adversitee +tai grotche , CMROLLEP-M24,115.898

and falles in swa mykel sarynes , +tat unneth may any man comforth +tam
; CMROLLEP-M24,115.899

and swa sclawnder +tai God , flytand and feghtand agayne his domes .
CMROLLEP-M24,115.900

And +tat es a caytif lovyng , +tat any welth of +te worlde makes ;
CMROLLEP-M24,115.901

bot +tat lovyng es of mykel pryce , +tat na violence of sorow may do
away . CMROLLEP-M24,115.902

+Te fifte askyng was : In what state men may maste lufe God ?
CMROLLEP-M24,115.903

I answer : In swilk state sa it be , +tat men er in maste rest of body
and sawle , and leest occupied with any nedes or bisyness of +tis worlde
. CMROLLEP-M24,115.904

For +te thoght of +te lufe of Jhesu Criste , and of +te joy +tat lastes
ay , sekes rest wythowten , +tat it be noght lettyd with comers and
gangers and occupacion of worldely thynges ; CMROLLEP-M24,115.905

and it sekes within grete sylence fra +te noyes of covayties and of
vanitees and of ertly thoghtes . CMROLLEP-M24,115.906

And namely , al +tat lufes contemplatyfe lyf , +tai seke rest in body
and in saule . CMROLLEP-M24,115.907

For a grete doctor says +tat <P_116> +tai er Goddes trone , +tat dwelles
still in a stede , and er noght abowte rennand , bot in swetnes of
Cristes lufe er stabyld . CMROLLEP-M24,116.908

And I have lufed for to sytt , for na penance , ne for na fantasy +tat I
wild men spak of me , ne for na swylk thyng ; bot anly for I knew +tat I
loved God mare , and langar lasted within +te comforth of lufe , +tan
gangand or standand or kneleand . CMROLLEP-M24,116.909

For sittand am I in maste rest , and my hert maste upwarde .
CMROLLEP-M24,116.910

Bot +tarfore peraventure es it noght +te best til another at sitte , als
I did , and wil do til my dede , bot if he war disposed als I was in his
sawle . CMROLLEP-M24,116.911

<heading>

Capitulum xi=m= . CMROLLEP-M24,116.913

<$$heading>

Seven gyftes of +te Hali Gaste er in men and wymen +tat er ordaynd til
+te joy of heven , and ledes +taire life in +tis worlde rightwisly .
CMROLLEP-M24,116.915

+Ties +tai er : wysdome , understandyng , cownsayle , strengh , connyng
, pyte , and +te drede of God . CMROLLEP-M24,116.916

Begynne we at cownsel , CMROLLEP-M24,116.917

for +tarof es maste nede at +te begynnyng of owre werkes , +tat us
myslike noght afterwarde . CMROLLEP-M24,116.918

With +tier seven gyftes +te Haly Gaste towches sere men serely .
CMROLLEP-M24,116.919

Cownsel es , doyng away of worldes rytches and of delytes and of al
thynges +tat man may be $tagild with in thoght or dede ; and +tarwith be
drawne inwardely til contemplacion of God . CMROLLEP-M24,116.920

Understandyng es , to knew what es for to do and what for to leve ; and
+tat , +tat sal be gifen , to gif it til +tam +tat hase nede , noght til
other +tat hase na myster . CMROLLEP-M24,116.921

Wysdom es , forgetyng of ertly thynges , and thynkyng of heven with
discrecion in al mens dedes . CMROLLEP-M24,116.922

In +tis gyft schynes contemplacion , +tat es , als saynt Austyn says , '
A gastely dede of fleschly affeccions , thorow +te joy of a raysed
thoght . ' CMROLLEP-M24,116.923

Strengh es , lastyng to fulfill gude purpose , +tat it be noght left for
wele ne for wa . CMROLLEP-M24,116.924

<P_117>

Pyte es , +tat a man be mylde , CMROLLEP-M24,117.926

and agayne-say noght haly writte when it smytes his synnes , whethir he
understand it or noght ; CMROLLEP-M24,117.927

bot in al his myght purge he +te vilete of syn in hym and in other .
CMROLLEP-M24,117.928

Connyng es , +tat makes a man in gude hope , noght rusand hym of his
rightwisnes , but sorowand of his syn ; and +tat man geder erthly godes
anely to +te honoure of God , and prow til other men mare +tan til his
self . CMROLLEP-M24,117.929

+Te drede of God es , +tat we turne noght agayne til oure syn thorou any
il eggyng ; CMROLLEP-M24,117.930

and +tan es drede perfyte in us and haly , when we drede to wreth God in
+te leste syn +tat we may knaw , and flees it as venym .
CMROLLEP-M24,117.931

<heading>

Capitulum xii=m= . CMROLLEP-M24,117.933

<$$heading>

Twa lyves +tar er +tat Cristen men lyfes . CMROLLEP-M24,117.935

Ane es called actyve lyfe ; CMROLLEP-M24,117.936

for it es in mare bodili warke . CMROLLEP-M24,117.937

Another , contemplatyve lyfe ; CMROLLEP-M24,117.938

for it es in mare swetnes gastely . CMROLLEP-M24,117.939

Actife lyfe es mykel owteward , and in mare travel , and in mare peryle
for +te temptacions +tat er in +te worlde . CMROLLEP-M24,117.940

Contemplatyfe lyfe es mykel inwarde ; CMROLLEP-M24,117.941

and for+ti it es lastandar and sykerar , restfuller , delitabiler ,
luflyer , and mare medeful . CMROLLEP-M24,117.942

For it hase joy in Goddes lufe , and savowre in +te lyf +tat lastes ay ,
in +tis present tyme if it be right ledde . CMROLLEP-M24,117.943

And +tat felyng of joy in +te lufe of Jhesu passes al other merites in
erth ; CMROLLEP-M24,117.944

for it es swa harde to com to , for +te freelte of oure flesch and +te
many temptacions +tat we er umsett with , +tat lettes us nyght and day .
CMROLLEP-M24,117.945

All other thynges er lyght at come to in regarde +tarof ,
CMROLLEP-M24,117.946

for +tat may na man deserve , bot anely it es gifen of Goddes godenes
til +tam +tat verrayli gifes +tam to contemplacion and til quiete for
Cristes luf . CMROLLEP-M24,117.947

Til men or wymen +tat takes +tam til actife lyfe , twa thynges falles .
CMROLLEP-M24,117.948

Ane , for to ordayne +tair meyne in drede and in +te lufe of God , and
fynd +tam +taire <P_118> necessaries , and +tamself kepe enterely +te
comandementes of God , doand til +tar neghbur als +tai wil +tat +tai do
til +tam . CMROLLEP-M24,118.949

Another es , +tat +tai do at +tar power +te seven werkes of mercy : +te
whilk es , to fede +te hungry , to gyf +te thirsti a drynk , to cleth
+te naked , to herbar hym +tat has na howsyng , to viset +te seke , to
comforth +tam +tat er in prysoun , and to grave dede men .
CMROLLEP-M24,118.950

Al +tat mai and hase cost : +tai may noght be qwyt with ane or twa of
+tir , CMROLLEP-M24,118.951

bot +tam behoves do +tam al , if +tai wil have +te benyson on domes day
, +tat Jhesu sal til al gyf +tat dose +tam ; CMROLLEP-M24,118.952

or els may +tai drede +te malysoun +tat al mon have +tat wil noght do
+tam , when +tai had godes to do +tam wyth . CMROLLEP-M24,118.953

Contemplatife lyf hase twa partyes , a lower and a heer .
CMROLLEP-M24,118.954

+Te lower party es meditacion of haly wrytyng , +tat es Goddes wordes ,
and in other gude thoghtes and swete , +tat men hase of +te grace of God
abowt +te lufe of Jhesu Criste , and also in lovyng of God in psalmes
and ympnes , or in prayers . CMROLLEP-M24,118.955

+Te hegher party of contemplacion es behaldyng and +gernyng of +te
thynges of heven , and joy in +te Haly Gaste , +tat men hase oft .
CMROLLEP-M24,118.956

And if it be swa +tat +tai be noght prayand with +te mowth , bot anely
thynkand of God and of +te fairehede of aungels and haly sawles . +Tan
may I say +tat contemplacion es a wonderful joy of Goddes luf , +te
whilk joy es lovyng of God , +tat may noght be talde ;
CMROLLEP-M24,118.957

and +tat wonderful lovyng es in +te saule , CMROLLEP-M24,118.958

and for abundance of joy and swettenes it ascendes intil +te mouth , swa
+tat +te hert and +te tonge acordes in ane , and body and sawle joyes in
God lyvand . CMROLLEP-M24,118.959

A man or woman +tat es ordaynd til contemplatife lyfe first God enspires
+tam to forsake +tis worlde and al +te vanite and +te covayties and +te
vile luste +tarof . CMROLLEP-M24,118.960

Sythen he ledes +tam by +tar ane , CMROLLEP-M24,118.961

and spekes til +gar hert , CMROLLEP-M24,118.962

and als +te prophete says , ' He gifes +tam at sowke <P_119> +te swetnes
of +te begynnyng of lufe . ' CMROLLEP-M24,119.963

And +tan he settes +tam in wil to gyf +tam haly to prayers and
meditacions and teres . CMROLLEP-M24,119.964

Sithen , when +tai have sufferd many temptacions , and foule noyes of
thoghtes +tat er ydel , and of vanitees , +te whilk wil comber +tam ,
+tat can noght destroy +tam , er passand away , he gars +tam geder til
+tam +tair hert , and fest anely in hym ; CMROLLEP-M24,119.965

and opens til +te egh of +tair sawls +te +gates of heven , swa +tat +te
ilk egh lokes intil heven . CMROLLEP-M24,119.966

And +tan +te fire of lufe verrali ligges in +tair hert
CMROLLEP-M24,119.967

and byrnes +tarin , CMROLLEP-M24,119.968

and makes clene of al erthly filth . CMROLLEP-M24,119.969

And sithen forward +tai er contemplatife men , and ravyst in lufe .
CMROLLEP-M24,119.970

For contemplacion es a syght , CMROLLEP-M24,119.971

and +tai se intil heven with +tar gastly egh . CMROLLEP-M24,119.972

Bot +tou sal witt , +tat na man hase perfite syght of heven whils +tai
er lifand bodili here ; CMROLLEP-M24,119.973

bot als sone als +tai dye , +tai er broght before God ,
CMROLLEP-M24,119.974

and sese hym face til face and egh til egh , CMROLLEP-M24,119.975

and wones with hym withouten ende . CMROLLEP-M24,119.976

For hym +tai soght , CMROLLEP-M24,119.977

and hym +tai covayted , CMROLLEP-M24,119.978

and hym +tai lufed in al +tar myght . CMROLLEP-M24,119.979

Loo , Margarete , I have schortly sayde +te +te forme of lyvyng , and
how +tou may come til perfeccion , and to lufe hym +tat +tou hase taken
+te til . CMROLLEP-M24,119.980

If it do +te gude , and profit til +te , thank God ,
CMROLLEP-M24,119.981

and pray for me . CMROLLEP-M24,119.982

+Te grace of Jhesu Criste be wi+t +te CMROLLEP-M24,119.983

and kepe +te . CMROLLEP-M24,119.984

Amen . CMROLLEP-M24,119.985

Explicit forma vivendi . CMROLLEP-M24,119.986
