<BEGIN_cmsiege-m4>

<P_70>

Al men +tat wyll her of +te sege of Jerusalem , her +ge may her of gret
meraculs +tat almytty God wro+gt to schow his goodnys and of gret
vengans +tat he toke for syn . CMSIEGE-M4,70.3

Furst +ge schall wndurstond +ter felle iij +tinggys to +te juis , +tat
is to say pylgremag . CMSIEGE-M4,70.4

Hit began in Jacobe , +tat went vnto Eygypt wytt his lenage ;
CMSIEGE-M4,70.5

and +ter +tay wer in gret saruavg , speycyally aftur +te dethe of Jacobe
, tyll God send Meyses to delyuyr +tem . CMSIEGE-M4,70.6

And he lad them +toovrow +te Rede Seye : CMSIEGE-M4,70.7

by +te gret my+gt of God +te wattur stode styll vpe in bothe sydys
CMSIEGE-M4,70.8

and let +tem pas into +te dessert of Cannon . CMSIEGE-M4,70.9

And as kynge Pharrov com them to have slayn , when he was in +te see
wytt all his ost , +te wattur ouerhyllyd +tem CMSIEGE-M4,70.10

and drownnyd them al , CMSIEGE-M4,70.11

for +tey wer rebel a+gennyst +te commandment of God . CMSIEGE-M4,70.12

But +te juis , +tat wer callyd +te peppull of Hisyrayll , wer fede wytt
manna , +tat cam from heyvyn , mad wytt angellys , CMSIEGE-M4,70.13

and her clovthis wer wyttout weme fortty +gere . CMSIEGE-M4,70.14

And for all +tis gret meracullys they dyde mammatre CMSIEGE-M4,70.15

and offendyt allmy+gtty God . CMSIEGE-M4,70.16

+Ten fell +tey into gret saruage and traldome in Babelon ,
CMSIEGE-M4,70.17

and +tat contenovyd fyfty +ger +ger God graciously +tem delyvyrte ;
CMSIEGE-M4,70.18

and soo is +geyt +te terme of fyfty +gere wytt vs +te +ger of gracse .
CMSIEGE-M4,70.19

But +ter was in +tem gret dyssper , CMSIEGE-M4,70.20

and +terfor God warnyd +teme of gret wengans commyng to +tem , as +te
good clarke <P_71> Josepphus reyhersyt in +tis wys : CMSIEGE-M4,71.21

' The day schall come +tat the sytte of Jerusalem schal be destryid and
+te juis confondyde for +ter sin . CMSIEGE-M4,71.22

Messias schall send hem scham , war and confusion . CMSIEGE-M4,71.23

Ther schall com ij prynsis froo Rome , +te fadyr and +te son ,
CMSIEGE-M4,71.24

and thay schall dysstry +te cytte of Jerusalem and all +te juis +tat
+tey fynd +terin . CMSIEGE-M4,71.25

And +te fadyr schall geet suche worschype +tat he schall be Emparowr .
CMSIEGE-M4,71.26

But for all +tis warnyng of profycy +tey wyll not amend +tem of +ter
syne . ' Etc. CMSIEGE-M4,71.27

Aftur +te dethe of Cryst +ter came monny wengans to +tem .
CMSIEGE-M4,71.28

But vij +ger aftur Crystys deth +te juis slowe sent Jamys +te yongyr ;
CMSIEGE-M4,71.29

+tey sayd sent Jamys preychyd in Jerusalem to amend +tem of +ter syne .
CMSIEGE-M4,71.30

And +tey made hyme +te beschope of +te tovn . CMSIEGE-M4,71.31

He werryd no lynnyn nodyr wollon , CMSIEGE-M4,71.32

no+tyr eete fleche nor fyche no+tyr berd , CMSIEGE-M4,71.33

nodyr was wesseh nor ba+tid , CMSIEGE-M4,71.34

but he was clo+tid in heyr . CMSIEGE-M4,71.35

And he knelyd to God in prayers , +tat his bone wex hard as horne .
CMSIEGE-M4,71.36

Soo he prayid for +te juis , CMSIEGE-M4,71.37

but +tei quyt hyme ewyll his mede . CMSIEGE-M4,71.38

On a day of her pasca gret multytud of peppull wer geydyrt ,
CMSIEGE-M4,71.39

and +tey bad Jamys not teyche +te doctryne of Cryst and he wold have
love of +tem . CMSIEGE-M4,71.40

But he boldlyche praychyd tyll +tey puld hyme dovn of +te pulpyte +tat
he stod in . CMSIEGE-M4,71.41

And as he knelyde in his prayers , voon wytt a fullynge-stafe smot +te
brayn ovte of his hede . CMSIEGE-M4,71.42

And +tey +tat lowyt Jamys berryid hym wytt onovre . CMSIEGE-M4,71.43

And on hyme God schewyde gret meracullys and on +te juis grete wengans ,
CMSIEGE-M4,71.44

but +tei wold not amend them . CMSIEGE-M4,71.45

And Jamys was callyd +te brodyr of Cryst for he was so lyk hyme .
CMSIEGE-M4,71.46

And he was warnyng and tokyn to +te juis +tat +tei schuld amend +ter
lyve . CMSIEGE-M4,71.47

<P_72>

The secund tokyn was : As +tei wer at +ter fest in pascha , +te stattys
and +te commyns , +ten fyl a stryfe , +tat +tay fyl and slove euyryche
odyr wytt +ter cnywys , +te nombur of xxx_M , by +te uenyjavns of God .
CMSIEGE-M4,72.49

The iij tokyn was an heyfer bor to sacryfyce +tat sodenly fel don amonge
+te pepull and calwyd a lambe . CMSIEGE-M4,72.50

The iiij tokyne : CMSIEGE-M4,72.51

On pasche ny+gt at iiij of +te bele a ly+gte was in +te tempull as hit
hade byn dayly+gte , CMSIEGE-M4,72.52

and +terof +tey hade gret fere . CMSIEGE-M4,72.53

The v tokyn : CMSIEGE-M4,72.54

+Ter came a blast and a doon +tat hit brast vp +te gattys ,
CMSIEGE-M4,72.55

and schemyt +te wallys schuld ouerturn . CMSIEGE-M4,72.56

The vj tokon : CMSIEGE-M4,72.57

On a vennysday at eve +tey hard a crye in +te tempull , saying : ' Goo
we hens , CMSIEGE-M4,72.58

goo we hens ! ' CMSIEGE-M4,72.59

All +te pepull ron away for feyr . CMSIEGE-M4,72.60

The vij tokyn : CMSIEGE-M4,72.61

+Ter was a ster in +te skye wytt a scharpe peynt as a speyr alle a +ger
ouer +teme . CMSIEGE-M4,72.62

The viij tokon : CMSIEGE-M4,72.63

+Tei see in +te skye mene and hors armyd +tat some tyme fow+gt and some
tyme reste , +tat sore afeyrryde +tem . CMSIEGE-M4,72.64

And +tey sayd hit was tokyn of war or hovngur . CMSIEGE-M4,72.65

+Tey sayd soth CMSIEGE-M4,72.66

and wyst not , CMSIEGE-M4,72.67

but +tey wold not amend . CMSIEGE-M4,72.68

The ix tokon was charys and waynys in +te clovdys aperyng and anon frov
+ter sy+gt . CMSIEGE-M4,72.69

The x tokon was : iiij +gere or +te sege began +ter was bore a man of
Jude , +te sone of Jhesu Ananye . CMSIEGE-M4,72.70

He stod vpe on wy+gtsonday at +te fest CMSIEGE-M4,72.71

and callyd on +te word , west , est , north and sowthe .
CMSIEGE-M4,72.72

And +ter come iiij wyndys on +te tempulle of Jerusaleme and on +te cyty
and on the pepul for her syn , as hyme semyd in his wision .
CMSIEGE-M4,72.73

He sayd : ' We schall have wengans for sin . ' CMSIEGE-M4,72.74

For +tis wordys +tei byte hyme sor CMSIEGE-M4,72.75

and bro+gt hym befor Pylat . CMSIEGE-M4,72.76

And he sayd as he sayd before , CMSIEGE-M4,72.77

and euyr he cryid : ' Alas , Jerusalem , alas , we schall be confoundyt
for synn ! ' CMSIEGE-M4,72.78

And <P_73> when he wold not seys his saying , thay let hyme goo ,
CMSIEGE-M4,73.79

but +tey wold not amend +tem of her synne CMSIEGE-M4,73.80

but foullov her ovn wyll . CMSIEGE-M4,73.81

And +te vsavge was alayd when Jhesu sayd ' Consummatum est , '
CMSIEGE-M4,73.82

that betokeny+gth : ' The newe testement is begon , CMSIEGE-M4,73.83

for +te old is indyte CMSIEGE-M4,73.84

and fulfyllyth for loue of man . ' CMSIEGE-M4,73.85

And they had +te doctryne and all +te dedis of Cryst wryttyn in +ter
bokus of +ter on wryttyng , CMSIEGE-M4,73.86

but +tey wold not do +teraftur , as hit was prewyd when sent Teyllyn
fond +te holly cros . CMSIEGE-M4,73.87

Schwe owercome them by +ter on bokus , CMSIEGE-M4,73.88

and +geyte wold +tey not ask mercy for +te dethe of Cryst and of +te
saynttus of Cryste ; CMSIEGE-M4,73.89

and +terfor +ge schall her how +tey sped . CMSIEGE-M4,73.90

But furst spek we of Waspasyon , +te nobul kyng , +tat was sor syke in
leppur , and a cankur in his nose and lyppus , +tat he sawe no helpe but
dethe . CMSIEGE-M4,73.91

And when he was bore , he had waspus in his nos , CMSIEGE-M4,73.92

and +terfor men callyd hyme Waspassyon . CMSIEGE-M4,73.93

This +tingis God send to hyme for +tis cavssys , +tat hath set all his
werkys at serttayn . CMSIEGE-M4,73.94

And as God is lord aboue all +tingis , so is +te Emparowr kyng aboue all
erthly lordys and kyngis . CMSIEGE-M4,73.95

And notwyttstondyng Waspasion wos not Emparovr at +te begynnyng of +tis
werke , CMSIEGE-M4,73.96

but he was son aftur , so +tat +te moste worthi Lord almy+gty wold be
awreykyde by his most nobyle seruant . CMSIEGE-M4,73.97

But he was so stynkyng in his leppur +tat no man my+gt soffyr +te
stynche no+tyr abyde in his chambur , CMSIEGE-M4,73.98

but by a wyse +tei put his met vnto hyme , CMSIEGE-M4,73.99

for he my+gt nat aryse tyl God CMSIEGE-M4,73.100

hyme conforttyd . CMSIEGE-M4,73.101

But at +te deth of Cryst was Tyberyis Emparowr of Rome CMSIEGE-M4,73.102

and raynnyd xxxiij +ger . CMSIEGE-M4,73.103

And in his viij +ger Cryst soffyrt his passyon . CMSIEGE-M4,73.104

The juis wryt a letter to +te Emparovr , saying he dyde wrong to sle
ry+gt blod , Jhesu Cryst , and to set vp mammatys <P_74> and to do fals
sacryfyce in +te temppull and to spend +ter offeryng in his on vse
wyttout leve of +te gouernowrs of +te tempule ; CMSIEGE-M4,74.105

and wytt +tat he made a condyte commynge into his hows a+genst her vsage
. CMSIEGE-M4,74.106

And for his mysdedys he was iugyte to exile . CMSIEGE-M4,74.107

When he hart +tis , he ordent a ryche present wyth letteris gaylly
indyet CMSIEGE-M4,74.108

and send hit to +te Emparowr as followyth afturward . CMSIEGE-M4,74.109

But next was Gayus Emparovr and next hyme Clarydiis and +ten Nero , +tat
slow Pettur and Povle , and next hyme Waspasyon . CMSIEGE-M4,74.110

But furst Waspasyon was kynge of Gallyse and of Gascony .
CMSIEGE-M4,74.111

And he had a son +tat hy+gt Tyttus , +tat on a tyme was in +te cytty
Burdex . CMSIEGE-M4,74.112

And +ter Tytus saw a schype comme seylyng +tat come frome Jerusalem .
CMSIEGE-M4,74.113

Tytus send for +te mastur of +te schyfe , and his name was Nataane , a
man of Jude , +tat went to Rome to bere trevage and letteris froo Pyllat
to +te Emparour Tyberius , CMSIEGE-M4,74.114

and soo he told to Tyttus . CMSIEGE-M4,74.115

' But I have , ' he sayd , ' hade gret lete wyth temppas ,
CMSIEGE-M4,74.116

and I am wynd-dryfe to +tis plas . ' CMSIEGE-M4,74.117

Tyttus sayd : ' Tyburryus is dede , CMSIEGE-M4,74.118

and iij Emparovris have byn sethe . ' CMSIEGE-M4,74.119

But Tytus seythe : ' In Iude bythe good lechis ; CMSIEGE-M4,74.120

and yfe +tou can telle me to a leche +tat can heylle my fadyr , I schal
wyll reyward +te and send +te to +te Emparovre vppon myne non cost . '
CMSIEGE-M4,74.121

' Syr ' , sayd Nathone , ' I am no leche , CMSIEGE-M4,74.122

but in Jude was wrongfully do to dethe a trowe profete Jhesu of
Nazarethe , +tat elly+gt men , boddy and sovle . ' CMSIEGE-M4,74.123

And he tellyd to Tytus of Crystus wertus preychyng and his holly werkys
and grete meracullys , and +tat he schowyd hymeselfe verry God and man ,
and how he send his dessypullys to preche and gawe heme power to heylle
all syknys - and +tem +tat feythfully belewy+g on Jhesu Cryst , they
heylly+g hem in boddy and sowll <P_75> and howe he send +te Holy Gost to
his desypuls aftur his assencion and taw+gt to +tem lxx langagis to
teche all +te world . CMSIEGE-M4,75.124

' And yf +tey fadyr my+gt speke wyth one of his desyppuls and wyl beleve
in Jhesu Cryst , I dar say he schale be hole . ' CMSIEGE-M4,75.125

This harde Wellosiane , +tat was stowarde wyth Waspasyon ,
CMSIEGE-M4,75.126

and fayn he wold hit wher fulfyllyd . CMSIEGE-M4,75.127

But furst +tey send Nataan to Nero , +te crwell Emparovr +tat sclow
hymselfe , CMSIEGE-M4,75.128

and +terof was Rome ful fayn . CMSIEGE-M4,75.129

And as +ge schall her afturward , they chovs Waspasion Emparovr ,
CMSIEGE-M4,75.130

for he was moste of honnovr . CMSIEGE-M4,75.131

And +tey +to+gt +tat Tytus schuld keppe +te charge in his fadyris stede
. CMSIEGE-M4,75.132

But +tis was to +ger aftur +tat Nataan woos goo home .
CMSIEGE-M4,75.133

But nowe twrne we to Nataan , howe he dyde his meyssage .
CMSIEGE-M4,75.134

He hath take his trewage to +te Emparovr and letterys frow Pyllat .
CMSIEGE-M4,75.135

In +tis wyes he told +te profycy that +te juis hade , how Cryst schuld
be bor of a mayd of juis kynd to save man , +tat was forlore .
CMSIEGE-M4,75.136

And he callyd to +te Emparovr in his letteris alle +te myrracullys and
the teychyng of Cryst +tat Pylat hade wryte in his bokus .
CMSIEGE-M4,75.137

And he ascwsyd hyme in his letteris +tat +te juis wer only +te cavs of
his dethe , and not he , but as he nedys most +geyfe jegement by +te
crye of +te pepull . CMSIEGE-M4,75.138

But he was not exscwssyd so byfor God and man , CMSIEGE-M4,75.139

for he knew +te troth , as his on bokus wyttnyssyt , CMSIEGE-M4,75.140

but he wold not do +teraftur and amend hyme of his syne no+tyr abay to
Godys lawe . CMSIEGE-M4,75.141

As for to know how Pylat toke his name : In Spen ther was a kyng +tat
was callyd Tyrus . CMSIEGE-M4,75.142

He gat a chyld on a mylwardys do+gttur +tat hy+gt Pyla ,
CMSIEGE-M4,75.143

and her fadyr hy+gt Atus , CMSIEGE-M4,75.144

and +te chyld was callyd Pylatus . CMSIEGE-M4,75.145

The kyng gat a chyld on his wyfe +te sam +gere , CMSIEGE-M4,75.146

and +tis to chyldorn wer togeydur . CMSIEGE-M4,75.147

And for +te trowe chyld was strongur +ten Pylat , Pylat slow hyme .
CMSIEGE-M4,75.148

And +te kynge most send a chyld in trevag to Rome , CMSIEGE-M4,75.149

and he send his son Pylat CMSIEGE-M4,75.150

and put hym not to dethe . CMSIEGE-M4,75.151

And at Rome was +te kyngis son of Fravns ; CMSIEGE-M4,75.152

and for he was callyd mor genttyll <P_76> +ten Pylat , Pylat soon slow
hyme . CMSIEGE-M4,76.153

And +ten +te romans sende hym wyth commyssion into +te heylle of
Peynttus , CMSIEGE-M4,76.154

and +ter he was so cursyd +tat all men ferryd hym . CMSIEGE-M4,76.155

But kyng Herrod for his crwelty send for hyme CMSIEGE-M4,76.156

and mad hym juge of Jude in Jerusaleme . CMSIEGE-M4,76.157

And for parttynge of her goodis +tey to wer aungurre , CMSIEGE-M4,76.158

but +te onment was made in +te senddyng of Cryst : CMSIEGE-M4,76.159

at +te tyme of his passion Pylat send hyme to Herrode ,
CMSIEGE-M4,76.160

and Herrod send hyme a+geyne , CMSIEGE-M4,76.161

and +ter Pilat and Herrod wer acordyt and mad at one .
CMSIEGE-M4,76.162

And at +te sayd tyme of Crystus passion +te juis sede : ' His blod on vs
and owre chylldorn . ' CMSIEGE-M4,76.163

And so into +te tokyne of veniance God send to +tem +te blody flyxe and
most on good fryday . CMSIEGE-M4,76.164

But leve ve +tis CMSIEGE-M4,76.165

and torne we a+geyne to Nathaan . CMSIEGE-M4,76.166

When Nathaane had don his herrond to Nero , he had letteris of wyttnys
of al +te matteris CMSIEGE-M4,76.167

and his gon home . CMSIEGE-M4,76.168

Uelysyane , the steward wyth Waspasian , went to Waspasian
CMSIEGE-M4,76.169

and tolde to his lorde all +te wordyse of Nathaon , how Pylat and +te
juis dyde Cryst to dethe , +tat came to save mankynd , takyng fleche and
blod of +te wyrgyn Maree , conseywyd of +te Holly Gost , werry God and
mane . CMSIEGE-M4,76.170

+Te manheyde dyid for mannys sowle savacion , CMSIEGE-M4,76.171

and +te godhede arysyd a+geyne when he hade fete the sollys owt of
heylle , +tat he dere bo+gt wyth his byttur passyon . CMSIEGE-M4,76.172

And aftur +tat he oftyntymys aperryd to his desyplys , CMSIEGE-M4,76.173

and in +ter presense he asendyt to +te Fadyr in heyuyn CMSIEGE-M4,76.174

and send to heme +te Holly Gost CMSIEGE-M4,76.175

and +gavfe +teme all langgage to teyche all +te world CMSIEGE-M4,76.176

and +gaf theme power to heylle in bothe bodye and sovle +tat faythfully
belewyt in hyme and <P_77> keppyt his lawys . CMSIEGE-M4,77.177

' And +geyfe +ge may have on of his dysipplys , I hoppe +ge schall be
hooll . ' CMSIEGE-M4,77.178

Waspasion was glade of +tis talle CMSIEGE-M4,77.179

and bade Wellosian goo in hast to gete hyme a dessipull of Cryst .
CMSIEGE-M4,77.180

And so Welosian went to Jerusaleme CMSIEGE-M4,77.181

and tok his tyme and ryme by +te temppull of Dawytt in the hows of
Jacobe , a jwe ; CMSIEGE-M4,77.182

but he was a preuey crystyn mane . CMSIEGE-M4,77.183

Wellosiane told to hyme +te cavse of his commynge CMSIEGE-M4,77.184

and desiryde to her of Cryst and to spek wyth some of his dessipplys and
+tat he my+gt have some reylikus of Cryst . CMSIEGE-M4,77.185

Jacobe was glade CMSIEGE-M4,77.186

and tolde hime of his myrraculs and howe falslye he was put to dethe .
CMSIEGE-M4,77.187

And he sayde : ' My do+gttur was von of +te Marys +tat went wytt boxis
hym to anynt . CMSIEGE-M4,77.188

And yf +ti mastur and lorde beleve on hyme , I dar say he schall be
hoole . CMSIEGE-M4,77.189

And I wyle send for a lady +tat lowyt Cryst , CMSIEGE-M4,77.190

and I hoppe +tat schew and I schall geyfe +te good concelle . '
CMSIEGE-M4,77.191

And then was Wellysian glade . CMSIEGE-M4,77.192

On morrow Welosiane and Jacobe went to Pilat . CMSIEGE-M4,77.193

But Vellosian wold not aly+gt of his hors tyl he com to Pylat , for his
lord Uaspasion , kyng of Galyce , CMSIEGE-M4,77.194

for he was lord of Jerusaleme , CMSIEGE-M4,77.195

and he wold have an nanswer in hast , CMSIEGE-M4,77.196

' for , ' he sayd , ' +te trevage hat+t be longe behynd . '
CMSIEGE-M4,77.197

Pilat askyd yf Nero wer dede , CMSIEGE-M4,77.198

and he sayd : ' Nay , but my lord Waspasion is his levetennand . '
CMSIEGE-M4,77.199

He made his herrand to Pylat to take +te markys on his face to knowe
hyme anodyr tyme . CMSIEGE-M4,77.200

Pylat was wrothe wyth him CMSIEGE-M4,77.201

and porposyd him to sleye . CMSIEGE-M4,77.202

But +ter was a kny+gt +tat was namyd Barrobas , +tat was delyuyrt frove
preson at +te dethe of Cryst , CMSIEGE-M4,77.203

and he sayd : ' Hit <P_78> wer scham to do +tis kny+t harme +tat is
aloon ; CMSIEGE-M4,78.204

and he semyth a good kny+gt , CMSIEGE-M4,78.205

for he dothe well his message . CMSIEGE-M4,78.206

But dred not of Waspasion , CMSIEGE-M4,78.207

for we wyll make +te owr kynge . CMSIEGE-M4,78.208

And yf Waspasioon set vppon +te , he schall hit sor aby .
CMSIEGE-M4,78.209

And so send him worde by +tis good man . ' CMSIEGE-M4,78.210

Uelosian rode to his in full glad +tat he knew Pylat .
CMSIEGE-M4,78.211

And Jacob bro+gt a ladye +tat hy+gt dame Werony , CMSIEGE-M4,78.212

and schewe grant to goo wyth hyme to conford and helpe his lorde .
CMSIEGE-M4,78.213

Dame Werony sayde : ' I deyllyd in Gallaly CMSIEGE-M4,78.214

and was syke in +te blody flyxe . CMSIEGE-M4,78.215

And I come to +tis tovne to have helpe of Jhesu of Nazarethe ,
CMSIEGE-M4,78.216

and was he lade to +te juis to his dethe . CMSIEGE-M4,78.217

And I tok a cloth : CMSIEGE-M4,78.218

my wyl was to ber hit to a paynttur to hawe +te fugur of his face ;
CMSIEGE-M4,78.219

but as he bar +te cros toward his passion , I cryd on hyme for sokor .
CMSIEGE-M4,78.220

And his blessid modyr Mary , schew sawe a cleyn cloth in my hond ,
CMSIEGE-M4,78.221

and +terwytt schew wyppyd +te face of her son Jhesu , CMSIEGE-M4,78.222

for he swet for beyryng of +te cros , CMSIEGE-M4,78.223

and all +te markys of his face wer sene in +te clothe +tat I wold let
have paynttyd . CMSIEGE-M4,78.224

Owr Lady sent Mary toke to me +te clothe a+geyne , CMSIEGE-M4,78.225

and I mekely hit kyssyd and allsoo +te heme of +te clothe +tat he werryd
. CMSIEGE-M4,78.226

And I toke his blessynge , CMSIEGE-M4,78.227

and anon I was hole . CMSIEGE-M4,78.228

But for I love Cryst Jhesu , Pylat hatty+te me , CMSIEGE-M4,78.229

and +terfor I am glade to goo froo his power . ' CMSIEGE-M4,78.230

Sche made her reydy CMSIEGE-M4,78.231

and went wyth Welosiane . CMSIEGE-M4,78.232

But furst at +te prayer of Welosian Jacob send for some of +te juis +tat
put Cryst to dethe . CMSIEGE-M4,78.233

And +tey wyth gret game and jeying told all +te storry of his passion .
CMSIEGE-M4,78.234

And Welosian bar hit preueyly in his mynd tyll +te tyme come +tat hit
my+gt be awengyt . CMSIEGE-M4,78.235

He +tonkyd Jacob CMSIEGE-M4,78.236

and prommyssid hime to be his good frende . CMSIEGE-M4,78.237

Velosian hath goodly take his leve of Jacob ; CMSIEGE-M4,78.238

and toke his lady wytt hyme into Gascony into his oon place , ther fore
to <P_79> rest , CMSIEGE-M4,79.239

and went to his lord CMSIEGE-M4,79.240

and told hyme howe he hade sped and how he hard +te juis tell all +te
passion of Cryst . CMSIEGE-M4,79.241

Waspasion sayd : ' And I may be hole , I wyll be awengyt on +tat crwelle
dethe and dede . ' CMSIEGE-M4,79.242

The lond ferryde of +te dethe of Uaspasion CMSIEGE-M4,79.243

and crownyd his sone Tyttus CMSIEGE-M4,79.244

and made hime kynge . CMSIEGE-M4,79.245

And +tat was one +te morrow +tat Welosian was come home .
CMSIEGE-M4,79.246

And has dame Wyrony stod in her in , sche sawe pope Cleyment come in +te
way , +tat was come fro Jerusaleme wyth Pettur and Povle , +tat Nero
slow . CMSIEGE-M4,79.247

And +tis lady spake to Cleyment CMSIEGE-M4,79.248

and told hyme why schow was come , CMSIEGE-M4,79.249

and +te pope was ful glade . CMSIEGE-M4,79.250

And at +te prayer of Welosian +tey went bothe to +te kynge .
CMSIEGE-M4,79.251

Uaspasion welcommyd +teme gladly CMSIEGE-M4,79.252

and prayd +teme of conford . CMSIEGE-M4,79.253

Sent Cleyment sayd , yf he wold have helpe , he most beleve one Jhesu
Cryst , +tat all helpe is inne , the sone of God and of +te wyrgyne
Marry and werry God and mane , +tat com to by man frow thraldom ,
CMSIEGE-M4,79.254

for wythout his passion mane my+gt not be sawyd . CMSIEGE-M4,79.255

And sent Cleyment declaryd to hyme +te fethe and +te lawys of God
omnipotent . CMSIEGE-M4,79.256

Uaspasion sayde : ' +Gif I be hole , I wyll be a crystyne man
CMSIEGE-M4,79.257

and I welle awenge +te dethe of Cryste ; CMSIEGE-M4,79.258

for I wyll sleye all +te juis +tat I fynd , CMSIEGE-M4,79.259

and I wylle sele xxx for a d CMSIEGE-M4,79.260

for +tey sold +ter Lord for xxx d . ' CMSIEGE-M4,79.261

Then sayd Cleyment : ' Kyngis worschyppe hyme at his byrthe , furst
Errowd , +tat slow gret multytud of chyldorn for his sake ;
CMSIEGE-M4,79.262

and as bokus tellythe , +te sayd Erawde suffyrd all syknis in his boddy
and nowe +te paynnys of heylle . CMSIEGE-M4,79.263

And I hoppe +tat kyngis schall awenge his deth . CMSIEGE-M4,79.264

Beleve his power is to hele +te . CMSIEGE-M4,79.265

He reysyd +te kny+gte +tat lay deyd in his grave iiij dayis .
CMSIEGE-M4,79.266

And aftur +tat he asenddyt to hewyne , he sent +te Holly Gost to his
decippuls , as he befor prommessid to +teme , CMSIEGE-M4,79.267

and <P_80> ta+gtht +tem lxx launggagis to preche all +te worde
CMSIEGE-M4,80.268

and +gavfe +teme power to hele in body and sovle all +tat wold on hyme
beleue and fay+gthfully serue hyme . ' CMSIEGE-M4,80.269

The kynge Uaspasion beleuyd +tis well wyth all +te syrcumstanse of +te
fayth as he was taw+gt , CMSIEGE-M4,80.270

and sent Cleyment hyme asayllyd . CMSIEGE-M4,80.271

Dame Werrony toke Cleyment +te wernakull +tat Cryst wyppyd on his face ,
as befor is sayd . CMSIEGE-M4,80.272

And sent Cleyment was reyuessid wyth onowr CMSIEGE-M4,80.273

and bar +te warnacul to +te kynge . CMSIEGE-M4,80.274

And he reuerently hit kyssid CMSIEGE-M4,80.275

and worschyppte +te Fadyr and +te Son and +te Holly Gost and +te
warnacull in +te worschype of Crystus face , +tat hit towchyd
CMSIEGE-M4,80.276

and +terof wos +te merk , CMSIEGE-M4,80.277

and anon he was hole CMSIEGE-M4,80.278

and praysyd almy+gtty God . CMSIEGE-M4,80.279

And he sayd : ' I wyll awenge +te dethe of Cryst wyth his grace ,
CMSIEGE-M4,80.280

for I wot well he is +te son of God . CMSIEGE-M4,80.281

And when I have done +tat dede , we wyll be crystynd all and geyf gret
mede to +te lady dame Verony . ' CMSIEGE-M4,80.282

And schw prayd hyme geyf to Cleyment what he wold , CMSIEGE-M4,80.283

for schw wyll abyd wyth hyme . CMSIEGE-M4,80.284

And he +gavfe +tem londys and renttus and gret reywardys .
CMSIEGE-M4,80.285

Sent Cleyment consayld hyme to take crystendome in hast ,
CMSIEGE-M4,80.286

but +te kynge sayd he wold furst wreke +te dethe of Cryst .
CMSIEGE-M4,80.287

And he send for his son Tytus and for his lorddys . CMSIEGE-M4,80.288

Also he send to Nero +te Emparovr for lycens , CMSIEGE-M4,80.289

and he sayd he most wreke a spyte ido in Jerusaleme . CMSIEGE-M4,80.290

And Nero hyme grant , CMSIEGE-M4,80.291

but he knew nat the cavse , CMSIEGE-M4,80.292

for he was cursyd CMSIEGE-M4,80.293

and louyt not Cryst . CMSIEGE-M4,80.294

The kynge mad hyme reydy , CMSIEGE-M4,80.295

and furthe they went . CMSIEGE-M4,80.296

But at +te prayer of sent Cleyment and of dame Werony +te kynge <P_81>
commandyt pece to ale crystyn men CMSIEGE-M4,81.297

and yafe +tem good warrante +tat no man schwld theme greve .
CMSIEGE-M4,81.298

Waspasion and his son Tyttus went to schepe wyth a_C_M men .
CMSIEGE-M4,81.299

Sent Cleyment hyme blessyd CMSIEGE-M4,81.300

and toke his leve at +te see CMSIEGE-M4,81.301

and went home , and dame Werony wyth hym , in Goddyse pese .
CMSIEGE-M4,81.302

And +te kynge had good weddur and wynd at wyll and wylle sped and all
his men . CMSIEGE-M4,81.303

In vj wekus Waspasion sayllyd to Acrvs CMSIEGE-M4,81.304

and toke +te tovne wyth force CMSIEGE-M4,81.305

and set in men to keppe hit CMSIEGE-M4,81.306

and wente into +te lond CMSIEGE-M4,81.307

and slowe and brent CMSIEGE-M4,81.308

and toke vittayle plentte . CMSIEGE-M4,81.309

And on a fryday thay come fro Arryse to Japheth CMSIEGE-M4,81.310

and segyt +te tovne . CMSIEGE-M4,81.311

And God send to +te pepulle of +te conttray wondyr +tingis , of rayne ,
hayle , snowe and wyndyse and hongur and gret sykenyse ,
CMSIEGE-M4,81.312

but to Waspasion and to his pepull God send welthe inowe in all +ter
jornaye . CMSIEGE-M4,81.313

But +te tovne wold not +geld +tem longe tyme . CMSIEGE-M4,81.314

Waspasion swar he wold not go thens tyl hit wer +gelde .
CMSIEGE-M4,81.315

And +ten they rone euyryche apone odyr wyth +ter weppun tyll all wer
slayne in +te tovne save ij kny+gttus +tat lovyd togeydur , +tat wold
sley none odyr of +teme . CMSIEGE-M4,81.316

+Te tone hy+gt syr Japhel , CMSIEGE-M4,81.317

and he was kyne to Syser , of +te blod of Waspasion . CMSIEGE-M4,81.318

And +terfor +te kynge mad hyme of his conssell and his gyd to Jerusaleme
, CMSIEGE-M4,81.319

and +tat he dyd full well . CMSIEGE-M4,81.320

They left keppars in Japhete CMSIEGE-M4,81.321

and went +ter way . CMSIEGE-M4,81.322

+Te crystyn men in Jerusaleme had warnyng of +te Holly Gost
CMSIEGE-M4,81.323

and went ouer flom Jurdane to a place +tat men cale Pellan ,
CMSIEGE-M4,81.324

and +ter +tey deyllyd . CMSIEGE-M4,81.325

But some wold see what schuld fale and abyde in Jerusaleme .
CMSIEGE-M4,81.326

When Pyllat wyst +tat Japheth was nome , he feyryd sor CMSIEGE-M4,81.327

and send for gret helpe . CMSIEGE-M4,81.328

Then to hyme came Archeles , +te kynge of Gallale , +te sone of Erroawd
, +tat slowe +te chyldorne of Hissarell . CMSIEGE-M4,81.329

He came wyth a gret host , CMSIEGE-M4,81.330

and also +te conttray came to Jerusaleme <P_82> for socur for fer of
Waspasion , CMSIEGE-M4,82.331

for he slow and brent in all +te conttrey . CMSIEGE-M4,82.332

Pylat sent spyis to wyt what way +tat Waspasion come .
CMSIEGE-M4,82.333

And he and Ercheles rode out at +te gat CMSIEGE-M4,82.334

and asayde her horssis . CMSIEGE-M4,82.335

But he hade no grace to flee , CMSIEGE-M4,82.336

for Gode hade +geyfe hyme respyt forty +ger , CMSIEGE-M4,82.337

but he wold not amend . CMSIEGE-M4,82.338

When +te spyis come a+geyne to Pylat , they told what way +te host come
CMSIEGE-M4,82.339

and sayd +tey wer wondyr strong . CMSIEGE-M4,82.340

And +ten Pylat feryd sore . CMSIEGE-M4,82.341

+Ten sayd Archeles to Pylat : ' Ferryd I no+tinge , CMSIEGE-M4,82.342

for +ter is no wattur ner +te cyty +ten flem Jurdane .
CMSIEGE-M4,82.343

And when +tey fynd no freche watur , +tey most nedys fle ,
CMSIEGE-M4,82.344

and we wyl follo and sley +teme all . ' CMSIEGE-M4,82.345

And whil +tis tale was a tellyng , +te tovne was besegyte .
CMSIEGE-M4,82.346

And +tis was +te iiij_and_xxx +ger aftur +te dethe of Cryst .
CMSIEGE-M4,82.347

On +te day of paske Waspasion bade Japhel , for he knew +te conttre , he
rood about +te cyty and see what was to be done . CMSIEGE-M4,82.348

And so he dyde CMSIEGE-M4,82.349

and set +te host in gouernance wyth monny feyttys of war
CMSIEGE-M4,82.350

and byte done +te subbarbuse to +te toune wale . CMSIEGE-M4,82.351

And for +tey had noo freche wattur , +tey toke skynnys of bestus
CMSIEGE-M4,82.352

and mad fyll hundyrtys of bagis and bogyse CMSIEGE-M4,82.353

and fet wattur one horsbakis CMSIEGE-M4,82.354

and fyld so myche in +te wale of Josephath +tat euyry man had inow+g .
CMSIEGE-M4,82.355

And +tey dayly fete more . CMSIEGE-M4,82.356

And when +the pepull of Jerusaleme sawe wattur in +tat wale , they
merweld sor CMSIEGE-M4,82.357

and told Pylat . CMSIEGE-M4,82.358

Pylat and Archelese and Josephus , +te good clarke , went to se hit
CMSIEGE-M4,82.359

and soor merveld on +tat case . CMSIEGE-M4,82.360

And +ten mastur Josephus , he sayde : ' This his +te hond of Myssyas ,
CMSIEGE-M4,82.361

for God is wrothe wyth vs for +te dethe of +te profete Jhesu of
Nazare+tet . ' CMSIEGE-M4,82.362

But Archeles sayd : ' Pylat , drede +te not , CMSIEGE-M4,82.363

but keppe +te cyty , and +tou schalt have +ti wyle . '
CMSIEGE-M4,82.364

Uaspasion and Japhele and Welosian stod CMSIEGE-M4,82.365

and save Pylat on +te wallys , CMSIEGE-M4,82.366

and Wellosian consellyd his lord to him to speke <P_83> and se what he
wold say . CMSIEGE-M4,83.367

Waspasion sayde : ' Pylat , se me , +tat ame +ti lord and wyle awenge
+ti fals dedis . ' CMSIEGE-M4,83.368

But at +tat tyme he wase not his lord CMSIEGE-M4,83.369

but sayd so to make hyme ferd . CMSIEGE-M4,83.370

And Pylat +gavfe hyme no word for sorro . CMSIEGE-M4,83.371

Then sayd Waspasione to Archelese : ' +Tou art forsworne ,
CMSIEGE-M4,83.372

and so was +ti fadyr . CMSIEGE-M4,83.373

+Tou wer bettur hold wyth me +ten wyth +te tovne . CMSIEGE-M4,83.374

Thi fadyr dyid in vofule paynis , and so schalt +tou or longe tyme pas .
' CMSIEGE-M4,83.375

But +tey +gavf hime no answer CMSIEGE-M4,83.376

but so departtyd . CMSIEGE-M4,83.377

Pylat sayd : ' I feyr +tis kynge , CMSIEGE-M4,83.378

for he is of Syseris blode and kynd CMSIEGE-M4,83.379

and he wole do as he sayth . ' CMSIEGE-M4,83.380

Archeles sayd : ' We be stronge ino+gth . CMSIEGE-M4,83.381

I reyde +te wage hyme battayll . ' CMSIEGE-M4,83.382

And Pylat dyde aftur his consell CMSIEGE-M4,83.383

and wagyt him battayle . CMSIEGE-M4,83.384

And Waspasion toke hit wyth glad cher CMSIEGE-M4,83.385

and sayd : ' Pylat , +tou schalt have schame of +ti battayl wytt the
my+gt of God . ' CMSIEGE-M4,83.386

And +tey manly schet CMSIEGE-M4,83.387

and cast ingyne , arrowe and quarrell into +te tovne CMSIEGE-M4,83.388

and slove gret multytude of pepule . CMSIEGE-M4,83.389

And +te tovne my+gtly +teme defendyd . CMSIEGE-M4,83.390

And a quarrel haplye sclove a povr mane +tat went wyth chyldorne in +te
stret . CMSIEGE-M4,83.391

But +te juis hild hym a profete , CMSIEGE-M4,83.392

and +terfor +tey feyrryd full sore . CMSIEGE-M4,83.393

But in +te j +ger of +tis sege dyid Nero +te Emparowr .
CMSIEGE-M4,83.394

He left Tytus to kepe +te sege , CMSIEGE-M4,83.395

and he went to Rome CMSIEGE-M4,83.396

and was crovnnyd Emparovr in +te saryssynnis wyse . CMSIEGE-M4,83.397

And he hastyd hyme to Jerusaleme . CMSIEGE-M4,83.398

The good man Jacobe sayde to Pylat : ' +Tis jwe +tat we cale a profet
sayd xx +ger passid +tat +tis tovne schvld be destryid ;
CMSIEGE-M4,83.399

and nowe he is slayne , CMSIEGE-M4,83.400

I leve hit +te mor . CMSIEGE-M4,83.401

I rede +ge +geyld vpe +te tovne . ' CMSIEGE-M4,83.402

Pylat wytt hyme was wrothe CMSIEGE-M4,83.403

and sayd : ' +Tis was +ti concent wyth Welosian , CMSIEGE-M4,83.404

and +tat +tou schalt aby full sore . ' CMSIEGE-M4,83.405

He lete fettur Jacobe wytt yrone CMSIEGE-M4,83.406

and cast hyme into a fovle dovngone to dy wyttovte mete and drynke for
lake of foode . CMSIEGE-M4,83.407

<P_84>

The do+gttur of Jacobe , Mare , prayd to God for hyme CMSIEGE-M4,84.409

and sayd : ' Lord , I beleve on +te CMSIEGE-M4,84.410

and come to seche +te wyth eyntment at +ti tombe , wyllynge +te to
honovr and pleys . CMSIEGE-M4,84.411

So helpe my fadyr , +ti seruante . ' CMSIEGE-M4,84.412

And allmy+gtty God send an angele CMSIEGE-M4,84.413

and fet Jacobe oute of presone CMSIEGE-M4,84.414

and set hyme wythout +te tovne wallese . CMSIEGE-M4,84.415

He knelyd dovne CMSIEGE-M4,84.416

and +tankyd God , CMSIEGE-M4,84.417

and +ten he went to +te host . CMSIEGE-M4,84.418

Welosiane hyme welcommyd CMSIEGE-M4,84.419

and bro+gt hyme to +te Emparovr Waspasion CMSIEGE-M4,84.420

and sayd : ' Tis is ovr frend +tat herberd me in Jerusaleme when I went
to get yove helpe and conford . ' CMSIEGE-M4,84.421

+Te Emparovre hyme welcommyd CMSIEGE-M4,84.422

and wos glad . CMSIEGE-M4,84.423

And Jacob hyme told how Pylat hade hym presond and how he was delyuyrt
by an angel . CMSIEGE-M4,84.424

And also he told hyme all +te juis consel . CMSIEGE-M4,84.425

The Emparovr wos glad CMSIEGE-M4,84.426

and mad hyme gret cher . CMSIEGE-M4,84.427

And of hyme he askyd consele to make a dyche abovt +te tovne , +tat no
man schwld go away vnspyid . CMSIEGE-M4,84.428

And so hit was don and mad in hast , CMSIEGE-M4,84.429

and +tat +te juis sovr reypent . CMSIEGE-M4,84.430

Pylat toke his conssayle of Archeles , of Barrobas , and of Josephus .
CMSIEGE-M4,84.431

And +tey in +te ny+gt layd plankus ouer +te dyche CMSIEGE-M4,84.432

and come ovte wyth xxxv_M of horsmen and l_M of fotemen ,
CMSIEGE-M4,84.433

and sore +ti met in battayl . CMSIEGE-M4,84.434

And gret multytud of pepul wer dede in both partys . CMSIEGE-M4,84.435

But Pylat lost xl_M , CMSIEGE-M4,84.436

and he schappyd into +te tovne . CMSIEGE-M4,84.437

And Josephus wose hurt soor ; CMSIEGE-M4,84.438

but he was a preway crystyne man CMSIEGE-M4,84.439

and most knew of +te juis lave ; CMSIEGE-M4,84.440

and he wos full sorry CMSIEGE-M4,84.441

for his kyne was ettynne . CMSIEGE-M4,84.442

But Jacob let make charnels CMSIEGE-M4,84.443

and berryd +te peppul . CMSIEGE-M4,84.444

And +te Emparovr wos glad and gretly conforttyd wyth +te wyse consell of
Jacob . CMSIEGE-M4,84.445

+Ten began gret sowrro and hovngur in +te cyty . CMSIEGE-M4,84.446

They eete horse , cattys , rattys and myse and +te fen in +te waye and
+teron dogis and +terone cyldorne , CMSIEGE-M4,84.447

and +te stronggyr eete +te <P_85> wekir . CMSIEGE-M4,85.448

And +tey drow lote who schwld eete o+tyr . CMSIEGE-M4,85.449

But +te gret men wer confortyd in +ter hongyr by +te wertw of presious
stonnys +tat +tey had one heme . CMSIEGE-M4,85.450

+Ter was a lady of +te conttray +tat hy+gt Marey , CMSIEGE-M4,85.451

and schoe deyllyd wyth a lady +tat hy+gt Clarys in +te cyty .
CMSIEGE-M4,85.452

Both wer good crystyn wemen . CMSIEGE-M4,85.453

The do+gttur of Mary was dede for hongur , CMSIEGE-M4,85.454

and so wer allmoste both ladyse , CMSIEGE-M4,85.455

for to +teme was lewyd no +tinge to ette . CMSIEGE-M4,85.456

And +ten sayd Claryse : ' Ete we +tis chyld . ' CMSIEGE-M4,85.457

But Mary sayd : ' Nay , ra+tyr wyl I dye . ' CMSIEGE-M4,85.458

+Ter come a angele CMSIEGE-M4,85.459

and bade +teme eete +te chyld . CMSIEGE-M4,85.460

' for hit is +te profysy +tat wemen schuld eete +ter chyldorne . '
CMSIEGE-M4,85.461

And so +tey rost +te chyld . CMSIEGE-M4,85.462

Pylat felyd +te savyr of +tis rost CMSIEGE-M4,85.463

and send +terefor , CMSIEGE-M4,85.464

and +ten wer +te wemen ful wo . CMSIEGE-M4,85.465

But when Pylat save what hit was , he commandyt +tat no man schwld eete
his chyld nor woman , but +tat +tey schwld eete +ter treysore .
CMSIEGE-M4,85.466

And so +tey eete gold and sylvyr wyth corne and heye , CMSIEGE-M4,85.467

but hit dyd +teme no good . CMSIEGE-M4,85.468

But afturward +tey wer fayne to fete hit ovte of +ter boddys .
CMSIEGE-M4,85.469

But aftur +te husbond eete +te wyfe , CMSIEGE-M4,85.470

and +te wyfe eete +te husbond , CMSIEGE-M4,85.471

and euyrry man slow odyr for +ter treysser in +ter boddyse , that +te
strettys lay ful of dede men . CMSIEGE-M4,85.472

And when thay hade no treysore in +tem , no man wold +teme byrre
CMSIEGE-M4,85.473

but cast +teme vppon heypuse CMSIEGE-M4,85.474

and let +tem lye . CMSIEGE-M4,85.475

And so +te pepule wer lost wyth stenche . CMSIEGE-M4,85.476

But when +te tovne was get , Tyttus let bren +tem for stenche .
CMSIEGE-M4,85.477

And when he saw +tat dolful sy+gte , he fel dovne on his kneis
CMSIEGE-M4,85.478

and sayd : ' Lord God , +tow knowyst wele +tis is not for my fadyr nor
for me , but for +ter on synnis . ' CMSIEGE-M4,85.479

But byfor +tis tyme +te counsseyle of +te cyty bad Pylat yeld +te sette
and tovne . CMSIEGE-M4,85.480

And Pylat sayd : ' Nay , abyde +ge a whylle yf anny of +tis lordys may
dye or yf we may +tem pleyse wytt +geyftus of owr treysovr . '
CMSIEGE-M4,85.481

<P_86>

The Emparovr send Jacob to wyte yf +tey wold geyfe vpe +te tovne .
CMSIEGE-M4,86.483

Jacob came to +te walle CMSIEGE-M4,86.484

and callyd a jwe , CMSIEGE-M4,86.485

and he fet to hyme Josephus . CMSIEGE-M4,86.486

And when he sawe Jacobe , he askyd hyme how he came owt of preson .
CMSIEGE-M4,86.487

And Jacob hyme told howe , by +te myracul of God . CMSIEGE-M4,86.488

And Josephus thankyd God . CMSIEGE-M4,86.489

And when Jacobe see he wase a crystyne mane , he wase glad
CMSIEGE-M4,86.490

and told to hyme +te forsayde meracullus of Waspasion and of sent
Cleyment and dame Werony and Welosyane and of hymeselfe , as +te storry
before telly+gt . CMSIEGE-M4,86.491

And +ten Josephus hyme prayd to pray to +te Emparovr for +te crystyne
pepul , CMSIEGE-M4,86.492

and Jacob hyme grant . CMSIEGE-M4,86.493

But Jacob askyd Josephus yf +tey wold held +te tovne .
CMSIEGE-M4,86.494

And he sayd : ' Naye , CMSIEGE-M4,86.495

but Pylat wolde asay yf he my+gt askape wyth pleysovr of +geyftus .
CMSIEGE-M4,86.496

And yf +te Emprovr wer a crystyn mane , we wold +geld vs to hyme ,
CMSIEGE-M4,86.497

but we have leuyr deye +ten +geld vs to a sarussyne . '
CMSIEGE-M4,86.498

+Tey toke her leve CMSIEGE-M4,86.499

and departtyd . CMSIEGE-M4,86.500

And Jacob told to +te Emparovr what answer he hade . CMSIEGE-M4,86.501

Then sayd Josephus to Pylat : ' I have herd ty+tingis +tat +te Emparovr
wyl vs al destrye . CMSIEGE-M4,86.502

I rede +ge cale yowr pepull and se what is to done . '
CMSIEGE-M4,86.503

Pylat lete a crye , CMSIEGE-M4,86.504

and +te pepul aperyd before hyme . CMSIEGE-M4,86.505

He askyd of +teme what was her counsel best to done . CMSIEGE-M4,86.506

Some sayd : ' We leve her to longe . CMSIEGE-M4,86.507

Mysseas is rovthe wyth vs , CMSIEGE-M4,86.508

for he is +te sone of God , CMSIEGE-M4,86.509

and we as fovllis stryve a+genst ovr lord God , CMSIEGE-M4,86.510

and we be worthy to suffyr wo . CMSIEGE-M4,86.511

We fynd in profycy +tat +te romans schvld vs destry , CMSIEGE-M4,86.512

and now we aske mercy to late . CMSIEGE-M4,86.513

But go we ovte CMSIEGE-M4,86.514

and schort we ovr lywys , CMSIEGE-M4,86.515

for bettur is schort payne +ten longe . ' CMSIEGE-M4,86.516

And some sayd : ' Hit his fayrer dethe to sley eche o+tyr +ten to +geld
vs to more payne . ' CMSIEGE-M4,86.517

And so xj_M slov euyreche odyr CMSIEGE-M4,86.518

and fel dede for stynche of dede men . CMSIEGE-M4,86.519

<P_87>

And +tey +ten begane to cry Jhesu mercy : CMSIEGE-M4,87.521

' We have sor afendyt . CMSIEGE-M4,87.522

We fynd sothe +tat +tou spake govynge to +ti passion : CMSIEGE-M4,87.523

Weppe +ge not for me , but for yovr chyldorne and for yovrselfe ,
CMSIEGE-M4,87.524

and so we may nowe , and curse +te brestus +tat +gave vs sovke and +te
body +tat vs bar . CMSIEGE-M4,87.525

And +terfor , Pylat , +geld vp +te tovne , CMSIEGE-M4,87.526

for ve no lengur may leue . ' CMSIEGE-M4,87.527

Then Pylat , Archeles , Josephus , Barrobas and +te commynte went to +te
wallys CMSIEGE-M4,87.528

and sayd to +te Emparovr : ' Tis is +te last daye of vij +ger .
CMSIEGE-M4,87.529

We may no lengur +te tovne kepe . CMSIEGE-M4,87.530

Tel vs whe+tyr we schale lyve or dye , CMSIEGE-M4,87.531

for we moste vs +geld . ' CMSIEGE-M4,87.532

When +te Emparovr +tis herd , he fel doune on his kneis
CMSIEGE-M4,87.533

and +tankyd almy+gtty God . CMSIEGE-M4,87.534

And +ten he stod vpe CMSIEGE-M4,87.535

and sayd : ' +Tou slowe Cryst in his manhede wythoute gylte .
CMSIEGE-M4,87.536

On hyme +ge had no mercy , CMSIEGE-M4,87.537

nor none +ge geyt of me . ' CMSIEGE-M4,87.538

When Archeles +tis herd , he slowe hymeselfe wyth his ovn sorde
CMSIEGE-M4,87.539

and fele adovne ouer +te walle . CMSIEGE-M4,87.540

The Emparovre sayd : ' He is traytur CMSIEGE-M4,87.541

and was trayttur , CMSIEGE-M4,87.542

and so he dyid . ' CMSIEGE-M4,87.543

But he bade byrre hyme wor+teyly , CMSIEGE-M4,87.544

for he was a kynge . CMSIEGE-M4,87.545

Pylat toke +te keyis CMSIEGE-M4,87.546

and oppynd +te +gattys , CMSIEGE-M4,87.547

and Tytus wyth his host went in . CMSIEGE-M4,87.548

But in +te prese Josephus wyth fel men askappyd into +te cyty of
Jenopozame . CMSIEGE-M4,87.549

+Te Emparovr let +teme sowe in CMSIEGE-M4,87.550

and +te cyty bysete , +tat +tey my+gt not skape . CMSIEGE-M4,87.551

But Joseffus wold not +geld hyme to +te Emparovr , CMSIEGE-M4,87.552

for he was not crystynd . CMSIEGE-M4,87.553

But +te Emparovr so sovr hyme besett +tat he toke wytt hyme xj fellowys
and flede into a cave . CMSIEGE-M4,87.554

And for hongur +tey drove lottys who schovld eete odyr of +tem ,
CMSIEGE-M4,87.555

and +te lotht fel to Josephus +tat he schuld dye . CMSIEGE-M4,87.556

But God wold not so , CMSIEGE-M4,87.557

for his wyte holpe fel men . CMSIEGE-M4,87.558

When Josephus se he schuld be dede , he lepe on his fellow
CMSIEGE-M4,87.559

and toke frov hyme his sword CMSIEGE-M4,87.560

and hyme slove . CMSIEGE-M4,87.561

And so he <P_88> asschapyd CMSIEGE-M4,88.562

and went to +te Emparoure . CMSIEGE-M4,88.563

+Te Emparovr askyd what he wose , CMSIEGE-M4,88.564

and he sayd : ' Josephus , +tat wrot +te storry of Crystus dethe and of
juis laves and of her prophecy +tat now is favle . ' CMSIEGE-M4,88.565

The Emparovre sayd : ' +Tou arte a spye . CMSIEGE-M4,88.566

+Tou schalte be dede ; CMSIEGE-M4,88.567

for yfe +tou wer so wyse a man , +tou my+gt have warnyd +te juis of her
harme . ' CMSIEGE-M4,88.568

Then sayd Josephus : ' I take wyttnis by +te bokus +tat I wrote and
allso of +te juis +tat I to +tem hit told many +geryse passyd . '
CMSIEGE-M4,88.569

The bokys were fete of +te juis lawe , CMSIEGE-M4,88.570

and hit was fond as Josephus had sayd . CMSIEGE-M4,88.571

And also hit was wyttnyssyd of mony men . CMSIEGE-M4,88.572

And Josephus told to +te Emparovre +tat he wase a crystyne mane ,
CMSIEGE-M4,88.573

and Jacob for hyme vndurtoke . CMSIEGE-M4,88.574

And so +te Emparovr hyme toke to grace . CMSIEGE-M4,88.575

+Ten sayde Josephus : ' +Ge may see by +tis bokus +tat I told +te juis
xl dayis befor +tat +ge schuld be Emparour and also of +te sykenys of
yowr sone Tytus , CMSIEGE-M4,88.576

and wytt my covnsel I schal helpe to make hyme hole . '
CMSIEGE-M4,88.577

For Tytus was sore syke in a cardyacull take wyth +te jay of his fadyris
honovr . CMSIEGE-M4,88.578

And +te Emparovr sayde to Josephus : ' Yf +tou can my son helpe , I wyl
+te reywarde ry+gt wele , CMSIEGE-M4,88.579

for I love hyme most of al +tis world . ' CMSIEGE-M4,88.580

So on day Josephus sayd to Tytus : ' I trust ry+gt wele yow to helpe of
your syknys . CMSIEGE-M4,88.581

But grant me +tat +ge be not wrothe wyth no man +tat I brynge wytt me
into yowr presens . ' CMSIEGE-M4,88.582

And Tytus hyme granttyd . CMSIEGE-M4,88.583

A man +tat Tytus movste hattyd . Josephus let set hyme at +te mete in
+te presens of Tytus CMSIEGE-M4,88.584

and hyme worthyly serwyd . CMSIEGE-M4,88.585

The blod in his body hete for gret grame and angur , CMSIEGE-M4,88.586

and so his cardyacule frow hyme went , CMSIEGE-M4,88.587

and he was hole . CMSIEGE-M4,88.588

And when he save hit was for his heyleth , he +tankyd God .
CMSIEGE-M4,88.589

And +ten Tytus forsovked all +te wrath +tat he hade to +tat .
CMSIEGE-M4,88.590

And Tytus toke Josephus nexte to hyme wyth <P_89> gret love .
CMSIEGE-M4,89.591

And +te Emparowr was ful glad and hym wele reywardyde .
CMSIEGE-M4,89.592

But torne we to the sege of Jerusaleme . CMSIEGE-M4,89.593

When Pylat se Tytuse at +te +gawttys of Jerusaleme , he proferd to
+geyfe hyme his bayllywyke yf he my+gt geyt hyme his lyve and leve to
dweyll styll in +te cyty . CMSIEGE-M4,89.594

And to +te Emparovr he wold +geyfe a_C sparhavkus ramage and a_C of
jentyl fawcons and xxx mutys of hovndys and a_C clothis of sylk and of
gold and x leons , x lebarttus , x boris , x mullys lad wytt treyssore ,
syluyr and gold , and wyth precyos stonnis . CMSIEGE-M4,89.595

And Tytus +tus told his fadyr +te Emparour . CMSIEGE-M4,89.596

But he commandyt to kepe hyme into good hold , CMSIEGE-M4,89.597

for he schvld have no grace . CMSIEGE-M4,89.598

Tytus , as +te Emparour hyme bade , went into +te tovne , and Jacob wyth
hyme to tell wyche wer crystyn men , theme to save . CMSIEGE-M4,89.599

And +te Emparovr keppyd wyttovte , +tat none schuld fle .
CMSIEGE-M4,89.600

+Tey fyllyde +te dychys CMSIEGE-M4,89.601

and opond +te +gattys , CMSIEGE-M4,89.602

and Tytus went in wytt iij_C men wel armyd . CMSIEGE-M4,89.603

He toke Pylat , CMSIEGE-M4,89.604

and xxx kny+gttus hyme keppyd . CMSIEGE-M4,89.605

And +te juis +tat wer take alyve , +tei bond heme in heyppus , +tat none
of +teme askappyd . CMSIEGE-M4,89.606

And as he let bette dovne +te wallys , in a thyke place of +te walle he
fond Joseph of Barmathe , fayr of coullur , +tat seyuyn +ger was in +tat
place wythovt mette or drynke , CMSIEGE-M4,89.607

for he thav+gte +te lawe of Cryste , +tat hyme wel fede wyth his godnys
. CMSIEGE-M4,89.608

Tytus send hyme to +te Emparovr , CMSIEGE-M4,89.609

and he hyme knewe note , CMSIEGE-M4,89.610

for he was most worthy mane aftur +te Emparowr . CMSIEGE-M4,89.611

Then Tytus , Japhelle , Josephus , Josefe and Jacobe bro+gt all +te
crystyne men befor +te Emparovr , CMSIEGE-M4,89.612

and he lete clothe theme in whytte , +tat +te host my+gte +teme knowe
and worchype . CMSIEGE-M4,89.613

The pepull +tat wer sawyd told to +te Emparovr how +te juis hade eyttyn
her treyssour . CMSIEGE-M4,89.614

And +terwyth +te Emparovr was <P_90> glade , CMSIEGE-M4,90.615

for hit schuld , he sayd , torne +teme to payne ; CMSIEGE-M4,90.616

and let make a crye CMSIEGE-M4,90.617

and sold xxx jwis for a penny CMSIEGE-M4,90.618

for +tey sold +ter Lorde for xxx d . CMSIEGE-M4,90.619

And +tey full sovr tormenttyd wer to fette +te treyssour oute of her
bellys ; CMSIEGE-M4,90.620

but +te Emparour bade do to +teme +te most payne +tat +tey my+gte ,
CMSIEGE-M4,90.621

and so +tey hade . CMSIEGE-M4,90.622

Then Tytus bade bette dovne +te wallys and +terwyth fyle +te dychis ;
CMSIEGE-M4,90.623

for he lete no +tinge stond but +te tempul of Salamone and +te castyl
wytt +te tour of Dawyte to fulfyll +the profycy . CMSIEGE-M4,90.624

And +tey berryde +te juis into downgheppus wythovte +te towne .
CMSIEGE-M4,90.625

And +ter wer sold a_C_M and mo , and dede wyth weppyn and hongur
CCCC_M_and_xvij . CMSIEGE-M4,90.626

And her wenganse schall euyr laste , CMSIEGE-M4,90.627

for +tey be , and euyr schalle , in bondauge and gret traldome .
CMSIEGE-M4,90.628

Tytus brou+gt Pylat to +te Emparour CMSIEGE-M4,90.629

and sayd : ' Her is +te traytur +tat put Cryste to dethe . '
CMSIEGE-M4,90.630

The Emparovr sayde : ' In tymys me semyth I may well loue +tis mane .
CMSIEGE-M4,90.631

I can note be wrathe wyth hyme . CMSIEGE-M4,90.632

Loke +ge +ter be no gyle . ' CMSIEGE-M4,90.633

An olde mane +tat stod bysyde , he sayd he had one hyme +te cote +tat
owr Lady made and toke to Cryste , CMSIEGE-M4,90.634

' and by +te wertwe of +tat clothe and of +te presyovs stonnys on hyme
he may go saufe amonge his foomen . ' CMSIEGE-M4,90.635

Thay toke frome hyme +tis cote , CMSIEGE-M4,90.636

and +ten was +te Emprovr ful wrothe CMSIEGE-M4,90.637

and sayd : ' +Tou art wor+ty mor schame +ten all +te jwis . '
CMSIEGE-M4,90.638

He lete put hyme in a barrel of stele CMSIEGE-M4,90.639

and porpossyd to caste hyme in +te see , CMSIEGE-M4,90.640

but he abod to do hyme mor pyne . CMSIEGE-M4,90.641

And when he come to Rome , he lett take hyme owt and put hyme into a
darke presson and feed hyme wyth barlay brede and wattur .
CMSIEGE-M4,90.642

But in feste dayis he hade mete inowe . CMSIEGE-M4,90.643

And so he laye ij +ger on +te bare grovnd . CMSIEGE-M4,90.644

And he neuyr reypent hyme of hys syne , CMSIEGE-M4,90.645

but wyth a knyfe +tat he borrowyd of his kepper to pare wyth a peyr he
hymeself@ @weth slowe . CMSIEGE-M4,90.646

<P_91>

When +te Emparovr +tis herd , he sayd : ' He dede most wekyd dede ,
CMSIEGE-M4,91.648

and +terfore he hathe most schamfull dethe ; CMSIEGE-M4,91.649

for he my+gt do no werse dede +ten deme ovr Lord to deth . '
CMSIEGE-M4,91.650

Thay put hyme into +te barreylle CMSIEGE-M4,91.651

and lade hyme into a dyslate place by a wattur syde . CMSIEGE-M4,91.652

But for stynche and for feyr of feyndys +tat wer abovte hyme many men
wer dede . CMSIEGE-M4,91.653

Then +tey toke hyme vp CMSIEGE-M4,91.654

and cast hyme inte a wattur . CMSIEGE-M4,91.655

And +ter he dyde myche sowrrov CMSIEGE-M4,91.656

for he my+gt not synke . CMSIEGE-M4,91.657

So he wase tossyde wyth fenddys , wyth stenche and cry and darknys and
wyth brennynge feyr , +tat no man durst come ny +tat place .
CMSIEGE-M4,91.658

But on a nonetyde +ter come a schepe CMSIEGE-M4,91.659

and se +tat cruvele sy+gte CMSIEGE-M4,91.660

and hard +te cry CMSIEGE-M4,91.661

and see +te barreyll tossyd wyth fendys , CMSIEGE-M4,91.662

and vnnethe they toke londe CMSIEGE-M4,91.663

but wer ner loste . CMSIEGE-M4,91.664

And +to +tey wente into +te cytye on Vyene CMSIEGE-M4,91.665

and told +te clarkys of +te cyty in what a feyr +tat +tey wer .
CMSIEGE-M4,91.666

And +ten +te clarkys and laye pepull wyth gret pennans-dowynge prayde to
Gode to be delyuyrt of hyme . CMSIEGE-M4,91.667

And Gode send to +teme a wayse CMSIEGE-M4,91.668

and bad +teme go to +te wattur syde , CMSIEGE-M4,91.669

and so +tey dyde . CMSIEGE-M4,91.670

And +ter +tey sawe a roche of stone opone on +te see syde ,
CMSIEGE-M4,91.671

and wyth a gret blast of wynd , ly+gttynnyng and +tondorynge he was cast
into +te roche of stone , CMSIEGE-M4,91.672

and +te roche clovsyde a+geyne . CMSIEGE-M4,91.673

+Te peppule +tankyde God . CMSIEGE-M4,91.674

And so +tey wer of hyme delyuyrt . CMSIEGE-M4,91.675

But +ter as he lay forst +te hole cane no mane stope , CMSIEGE-M4,91.676

for men sayth hit gothe to helle . Etc. CMSIEGE-M4,91.677

But turne we a+geyne to Jerusallem . CMSIEGE-M4,91.678

Whyll +te Emparovr lay at sege , he sent oute his men for wettayle .
CMSIEGE-M4,91.679

And as he +teme bade , thay toke all +te castyllys and tovnnys in Jude
into +ter one hondyse CMSIEGE-M4,91.680

and slow al +te peppull +tat wold not torne to Goddys lawys ;
CMSIEGE-M4,91.681

and al +tat wyll torne to Goddys lawe wer <P_92> sworne to be trowe .
CMSIEGE-M4,92.682

And +te Emparour on +teme set lawe and keppynge . CMSIEGE-M4,92.683

And +te Emparovr rewarddyte genttylmen +tat wyth hyme wer in war wyth
londyse and renttus , CMSIEGE-M4,92.684

and +te commentye he rewardyte wyth odyr goodyse plenty ;
CMSIEGE-M4,92.685

for he made cleyne alle +te lond of +ter gooddys CMSIEGE-M4,92.686

and yafe hit to his men . CMSIEGE-M4,92.687

And he heme thankyde CMSIEGE-M4,92.688

and toke his schepe , CMSIEGE-M4,92.689

and so to Rome he sayllyde . CMSIEGE-M4,92.690

But when he came to lond , wyth hyme mete in presessione sent Cleyment
and all his clargye and +te lady dame Weronye wyth grete multytud of
pepulle , hyme welcommynge and +tankynge allmy+gtty Gode .
CMSIEGE-M4,92.691

Cleyment and +te lady mad gret jaye +tat Jacobe , Joseph of Barmathe ,
Josephus and odyr crystyne men wer savfe CMSIEGE-M4,92.692

and +teme welcommyd wyth gret gladnyse . CMSIEGE-M4,92.693

The Emparovr wase crystynd in hast , CMSIEGE-M4,92.694

and so wer all his pepule . CMSIEGE-M4,92.695

The Emparour let schave all his men in tokyne of clennyse .
CMSIEGE-M4,92.696

And when +tey wer screwyne and crystonyd , he clothyde +teme wyth whyte
in tokenyng of cleynnyse and of Goddyse lawe . CMSIEGE-M4,92.697

The Emparour byldyd v churchus CMSIEGE-M4,92.698

and wor+tily +tem induid . CMSIEGE-M4,92.699

And to +teme he yafe monny ryalle ornamenttus . CMSIEGE-M4,92.700

And he send into all his londdyse to keppe +te lawe of God and peys ,
CMSIEGE-M4,92.701

and so hit wase do in all his dayis . CMSIEGE-M4,92.702

And his sone Tyttus and +tey lewyde a holly lyfe . CMSIEGE-M4,92.703

The Emparour let close +te warnacul in syluyr and in golde
CMSIEGE-M4,92.704

and put hit into a crystal stone , +tat men may hit see but not hondyle
. CMSIEGE-M4,92.705

And dame Weroyny hit yaf to +te churche of seynte Pettur in Rome .
CMSIEGE-M4,92.706

<P_93>

+Ten sente Cleyment sacryd +te Emparour CMSIEGE-M4,93.708

and sete on hyme +te crovne . CMSIEGE-M4,93.709

And the Emparour set on seynt Cleyment a mytur wyth a crovne and a
presius dyadyme for chefe of all clarkys and fadyr of all holly churche
. CMSIEGE-M4,93.710

And so be +te power +tat God yafe to Pettur and to his sussessowryse the
Emparour hyme confermyde poppe , as +ger wose chose by +te crystyne
clergey . Etc. CMSIEGE-M4,93.711

At +te tombe of Waspasion the Emparovr , God schowyd myracullys to blynd
and to lame . CMSIEGE-M4,93.712

And Tytus leuyde aftur hyme a good lyue CMSIEGE-M4,93.713

and euyry daye gafe gret almys for +te loue of God . CMSIEGE-M4,93.714

And he hade a good ende of this worlde . CMSIEGE-M4,93.715

The jwis wente to Jerusaleme to byld hit a+geyne , CMSIEGE-M4,93.716

but hit was not +te wyll of God , CMSIEGE-M4,93.717

for +tey schall neuyr have habytacione but in bonddauge .
CMSIEGE-M4,93.718

And as +tey toke +ter markys to bylde +te place +tat wose dystryid ,
they sawe a crose alle blody one +te erthe all blody , +tat wase tokon
her wenganse was not done . CMSIEGE-M4,93.719

And for feer +tey went +ter way . CMSIEGE-M4,93.720

Anodyr tyme +tei come a+geyne , CMSIEGE-M4,93.721

and as +tey toke merkys , +tei sawe +te crose and her clothis full of
blode . CMSIEGE-M4,93.722

And +tey went +ter way for fer . CMSIEGE-M4,93.723

They come a+geyne +te +trede tyme , CMSIEGE-M4,93.724

and as +tey stovpyd to take +ter mercus , they hade no power to speke .
CMSIEGE-M4,93.725

But a feyr come frome +te grovnd CMSIEGE-M4,93.726

and brend theme all to povdyr . CMSIEGE-M4,93.727

This wytnyssythe Josephus , +tat good clarke , +tat sawe and wrot +ter
actus . Etc. CMSIEGE-M4,93.728

Her enddyth +te sege of Jerusaleme . CMSIEGE-M4,93.729
