<BEGIN_cmthorn-mx4>

<S_SAMPLE_1>

<P_6>

<heading>

WODNES TO MAKE HARE LIK GOLD HERYNG DEFENES WORMES SCHEPELOUSE QWIK
THYNG IN +te ERE CMTHORN-MX4,6.5

<$$heading>

Tak his handis CMTHORN-MX4,6.7

& bynde +tam bi-hynde hym faste . CMTHORN-MX4,6.8

+Tan take flour of affadill CMTHORN-MX4,6.9

& do it in his righte hande & his bandes sall bryste . CMTHORN-MX4,6.10

Or gif it hym at drynke & he sall passe $owte of +te euyll faire & wele
. CMTHORN-MX4,6.11

Tak epworte CMTHORN-MX4,6.12

& grynde it smalle CMTHORN-MX4,6.13

& schafe his hede CMTHORN-MX4,6.14

& laye it appon +te schedde of his hede all +te nyghte .
CMTHORN-MX4,6.15

Tak aueroyne , marygolde & sawge CMTHORN-MX4,6.16

& stamp it CMTHORN-MX4,6.17

& temper it vp with wyne CMTHORN-MX4,6.18

& drynke it fyve dayes . CMTHORN-MX4,6.19

Take +te jeuse of walworte , hony & salt & swyn grese CMTHORN-MX4,6.20

and boyle +tam ouer +te fire til it be thikke CMTHORN-MX4,6.21

& do a littill encense +ter-in CMTHORN-MX4,6.22

and anoynte his heued +ter-with ofte & he sal mende . CMTHORN-MX4,6.23

Tak +te grene bowes of an asche CMTHORN-MX4,6.24

& bryne +tam CMTHORN-MX4,6.25

& kepe +te jeuse +tat commes owte at +te endis , a negschel_full , and
+te jeuse of senegrene , twa egschelfull , of hony an eg-schelfull , of
oyle of olyue a neg-schelfull , of +te woyse of +te pore leeke heued
with +te faces +ter-of , a neg-schelfull , CMTHORN-MX4,6.26

& menge +tam to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,6.27

& helle +ter-of in +te hale here CMTHORN-MX4,6.28

& lay +te on +te to+ter syde at slepe & +te sall mende with schort tymm
, & +tu vse it . CMTHORN-MX4,6.29

Tak +te jeuse of rewe & +te jeuse of moure egges CMTHORN-MX4,6.30

& do in +ti nere . CMTHORN-MX4,6.31

Tak henne grese & +te jeuse of $grene wormode with oyl CMTHORN-MX4,6.32

& do in +ti nere . CMTHORN-MX4,6.33

Tak +te galle of a wedir with +te vryn or +te mylke of a woman mengid
to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,6.34

& do it in thi nere . CMTHORN-MX4,6.35

Secundum Magistrum William de Excestre : CMTHORN-MX4,6.36

Tak lorell leues , sedes of cermoyntayne , comyn , annys and <P_7> caruy
, of ilkan ylike porcyon , CMTHORN-MX4,7.37

and welle +tam wele in faire water CMTHORN-MX4,7.38

& , when +tay are wele wellide , take and do +tat water in a clene
vesselle CMTHORN-MX4,7.39

& do of +tat water in +te ere & he sal here wele with-in scorte tymm .
CMTHORN-MX4,7.40

Take +te +gerdis of hawthorne CMTHORN-MX4,7.41

& kepe +te jeuse +tat comes fro +te +gerdis endis CMTHORN-MX4,7.42

& menge oyle +ter-with CMTHORN-MX4,7.43

& putt it in +te hale ere CMTHORN-MX4,7.44

& lay +te one +te to+ter ere . CMTHORN-MX4,7.45

Sepe probatum est per diuersos . CMTHORN-MX4,7.46

Take +te fattnes of a blake ele & +te jeuse of synegrene , elike porcyon
, CMTHORN-MX4,7.47

& putt it ofte in +te hale ere CMTHORN-MX4,7.48

& lay +te on +te to+ter . CMTHORN-MX4,7.49

Tak +te jeuse of mentastrum & vynacre CMTHORN-MX4,7.50

& mak it lewke CMTHORN-MX4,7.51

& do it in +ti nere & it dose +te same . CMTHORN-MX4,7.52

Tak sperwort CMTHORN-MX4,7.53

& stampe it CMTHORN-MX4,7.54

& droppe +te jeuse lewke in +te ere & it sall sla it or gare it come
owte qwyke . CMTHORN-MX4,7.55

<heading>

WORMES SCHEPELOUSE QWIK THYNGE IN +te ERE KYLES IN ERES SARE EGHNE
CMTHORN-MX4,7.57

<$$heading>

Take +te jeuse of mynt CMTHORN-MX4,7.59

& mak it lewke CMTHORN-MX4,7.60

& do it in +te eres . CMTHORN-MX4,7.61

Or take +te jeuse of fenelle lewke CMTHORN-MX4,7.62

& do it in +te eres & it sall sla +tam . CMTHORN-MX4,7.63

Tak of rewe a grete qwantite & sawge halfe als mekill & rose maryn +te
same quanttitee CMTHORN-MX4,7.64

& stamp +tam CMTHORN-MX4,7.65

& wrynge owte +te jeuse CMTHORN-MX4,7.66

& poure it in +te ere thre tymes , CMTHORN-MX4,7.67

for +tis es oft prouede . CMTHORN-MX4,7.68

If a schepe louse or any o+ter qwik thynge be cropyn in-to thyn ere ,
tak +te jeuse of rewe or of wormod or of horshoue CMTHORN-MX4,7.69

& do in +te ere & it sall sla it . CMTHORN-MX4,7.70

Tak grene +gerdis of esche CMTHORN-MX4,7.71

& lay +tam ouer a brandrethe CMTHORN-MX4,7.72

& make a fire vnder +tam CMTHORN-MX4,7.73

& kepe +te woyse +tat comes owt at +te endis in egges schelles
CMTHORN-MX4,7.74

& tak hony CMTHORN-MX4,7.75

& do to +tat woyse CMTHORN-MX4,7.76

& do it in his ere CMTHORN-MX4,7.77

& lat hym ly doun & slepe CMTHORN-MX4,7.78

& do swa thre dayes , ilk a day twyse or thryse , CMTHORN-MX4,7.79

bot do it firste in +te hale anes or twys , in auentour if +ter be
oughte qwike in it . & it will sone crepe owte . CMTHORN-MX4,7.80

Tak a hate hauyre cake CMTHORN-MX4,7.81

& lay it down CMTHORN-MX4,7.82

& lay thyn ere +ter-on als hate als +tu thole it & , if +ter be schepe
louse or any o+ter qwik thynge in it , it sall sone crepe owte .
CMTHORN-MX4,7.83

<P_8>

Tak wormode & women mylke with +te jeuse of grene colyandre
CMTHORN-MX4,8.85

& do it in thyn eres . CMTHORN-MX4,8.86

Tak a childes $vryn CMTHORN-MX4,8.87

& make it lewke with wyne CMTHORN-MX4,8.88

& do it in thyn eres & it dryes +te humours CMTHORN-MX4,8.89

& fordose werke CMTHORN-MX4,8.90

& heles wonderfully . CMTHORN-MX4,8.91

An o+ter : CMTHORN-MX4,8.92

Take +te galle of a schepe with womans mylke CMTHORN-MX4,8.93

& do it in thyn ere . CMTHORN-MX4,8.94

Tak wormod or harofe or wodebynde CMTHORN-MX4,8.95

& stampe it CMTHORN-MX4,8.96

& wrynge owt +te jeuse CMTHORN-MX4,8.97

& do it lewke in thyn ere . CMTHORN-MX4,8.98

Tak +te merghe of a fresche calfe CMTHORN-MX4,8.99

& braye it CMTHORN-MX4,8.100

& do it in thyn ere . CMTHORN-MX4,8.101

Tak a rede cale lefe CMTHORN-MX4,8.102

& anoynte it with +te white of an egge CMTHORN-MX4,8.103

& lay it to +te eghe , when +tu gase to bedde , CMTHORN-MX4,8.104

& late it lygge to +te morne CMTHORN-MX4,8.105

& do it ofte , CMTHORN-MX4,8.106

for it is proued for gude medcyn . CMTHORN-MX4,8.107

To make +te clere syghte : Ete ofte & drynke ofte puliolle rialle &
fenkell sedis . CMTHORN-MX4,8.108

Drynke ofte ewefrase , CMTHORN-MX4,8.109

for it helpis ofte souereynly +te syghte . CMTHORN-MX4,8.110

Tak white gynger CMTHORN-MX4,8.111

& rub it on a whetstane or on a basyn CMTHORN-MX4,8.112

& tak als mekill salte as +tu hase powdir CMTHORN-MX4,8.113

& stampe +tam CMTHORN-MX4,8.114

& grynde +tam wele to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,8.115

& temper +tam with white wyne CMTHORN-MX4,8.116

& late it stande in +tat bacyne a daye & a nyghte CMTHORN-MX4,8.117

& do +tan +tat o+ter +tat standis abouen in a ampull of glase or coper
CMTHORN-MX4,8.118

& anoynte thyn eghne +ter-with a littill when +tu gase to +ti bedde with
a fethir CMTHORN-MX4,8.119

& do so ofte & dowteles +tu sall be hale . CMTHORN-MX4,8.120

<heading>

EGHNE SARE EGHNE CMTHORN-MX4,8.122

<$$heading>

Take +te woyse of hondestonge or of centorye or of solsekill
CMTHORN-MX4,8.124

and do +te woyse in thyn eghne & it sal helpe +te wele .
CMTHORN-MX4,8.125

Tak pympernoll CMTHORN-MX4,8.126

& stampe it CMTHORN-MX4,8.127

& take +te jeuse +ter-of CMTHORN-MX4,8.128

& do +ter-to +te grese of +te allerone of +te gose wenge
CMTHORN-MX4,8.129

& drope it in thyn eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,8.130

For hurte eghne : Tak +te jeuse of egremone stamped <P_9> & egge whitt
CMTHORN-MX4,9.131

& menge +tam to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,9.132

& take cotom CMTHORN-MX4,9.133

& wete +ter-in CMTHORN-MX4,9.134

& lay it to +te sare eghe to it be hale . CMTHORN-MX4,9.135

Late +te blode +te vij daye of Maye on +te righte arme , +te laste day
of Aueryll on +te lefte arme . CMTHORN-MX4,9.136

Stampe +te leues of white thornes CMTHORN-MX4,9.137

& do +te jeuse +ter-of in thyn eghe . CMTHORN-MX4,9.138

Take Maye buttre & hony & +te white of an egge CMTHORN-MX4,9.139

& menge to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,9.140

and anoynte thyn eghne with_all . CMTHORN-MX4,9.141

Take wodbynde , rib and waybrede CMTHORN-MX4,9.142

& stampe +tam wele & smalle CMTHORN-MX4,9.143

& take a gude porcyon of fresche May buttre CMTHORN-MX4,9.144

& sethe +tam to-gedir wele to +tay be wele wellede , CMTHORN-MX4,9.145

+tan wrynge +tam thorow a clene clathe CMTHORN-MX4,9.146

& do it in thi boystes CMTHORN-MX4,9.147

& ilk a nyghte take +te montenance of a fiche CMTHORN-MX4,9.148

& do it in thyn eghne by-fore +tu laye the doune & it sall mend the .
CMTHORN-MX4,9.149

Take waybrede & bayneworte & powdir of gynger , a porcyon , & powdir of
alom glase , als mekil porcion als of thise , CMTHORN-MX4,9.150

& make water for thyn eghne of +tam . CMTHORN-MX4,9.151

Tak powdir of alom glase CMTHORN-MX4,9.152

& temper it with womans mylke +tat hase a knaue childe CMTHORN-MX4,9.153

& do it in thyn eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,9.154

Take rose floures and fenkell & filage , pympernolle , celidone ,
ewfrace . CMTHORN-MX4,9.155

Stampe +tam CMTHORN-MX4,9.156

& temper +tam al sammen with hony & +te grese of +te blake snyles & +te
whitt of an egge CMTHORN-MX4,9.157

& anoynte thyn eghne +ter-with . CMTHORN-MX4,9.158

Tak arenement , hony and +te white of an egge , of ilkan elike mekill ,
CMTHORN-MX4,9.159

& temper +tam to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,9.160

& tak herdes CMTHORN-MX4,9.161

& wete +tam in water CMTHORN-MX4,9.162

& wrynge it owte CMTHORN-MX4,9.163

& do +tir thynges one +te herdes as a playster & , if euyll blode or
whettour be +tare , it sall drawe it owte . CMTHORN-MX4,9.164

Tak calamynt CMTHORN-MX4,9.165

& bryne it in +te fire till +tat it glowe CMTHORN-MX4,9.166

& sloken it in white wyne CMTHORN-MX4,9.167

& efte bryn it CMTHORN-MX4,9.168

& efte sloken it CMTHORN-MX4,9.169

and do so ix tymes . CMTHORN-MX4,9.170

<heading>

SARE EGHNE COLORYE AN OYNEMENT CMTHORN-MX4,9.172

<$$heading>

+Tan may +tu halde it alle +te +gere CMTHORN-MX4,9.174

& , when +tu hase to do +ter-with , tak als littill als a bene
CMTHORN-MX4,9.175

& grynde it wele appon a borde CMTHORN-MX4,9.176

& temper it vpe with an egge schelle ful of white wyne CMTHORN-MX4,9.177

& late it sattill CMTHORN-MX4,9.178

and wete a fethir in +te clere abouuen , CMTHORN-MX4,9.179

& +tan wasche thyn eghne +ter-with , when +tu gose to bedde ,
CMTHORN-MX4,9.180

& do so thre nyghtis & withowtten <P_10> faile it sall slaa +te wormes &
clense +te eghne of many euylles , what so euyll es in +tam .
CMTHORN-MX4,10.181

Tak salte CMTHORN-MX4,10.182

& bryn it CMTHORN-MX4,10.183

& do hony +ter-too CMTHORN-MX4,10.184

& temper it to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,10.185

& doo it in thyn eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,10.186

And after all medcyns for eghne , wasche thyn eghne with water +tat
fenell is sothen in . CMTHORN-MX4,10.187

Tak tormentill , rewe , celidon , fenell & ryb , CMTHORN-MX4,10.188

& anoynte thyn eghne with +te jeuse a littill , when +tu gase to +ti
bedde . CMTHORN-MX4,10.189

Tak +te rede snyle +tat crepis houseles CMTHORN-MX4,10.190

& sethe it in water CMTHORN-MX4,10.191

& gedir +te fatt +tat comes of +tam CMTHORN-MX4,10.192

& anoynte thyn eghne ther-with CMTHORN-MX4,10.193

or bryn it to powdere on iren or in a pott scarthe CMTHORN-MX4,10.194

& do a littill of +tat powdir to thyn eghne when +tu gase to slepe .
CMTHORN-MX4,10.195

Tak a bacyn CMTHORN-MX4,10.196

& scoure it wele CMTHORN-MX4,10.197

& anoynte +te sydis wele with-in with +te larde of a galte
CMTHORN-MX4,10.198

& on +te larde anoynte it with hony +tat it gange ouer +te larde all
abowte a nynch . CMTHORN-MX4,10.199

Tak +tan a newe pott full of pys CMTHORN-MX4,10.200

& whelme +te bacyn ouer +te pott & latte it stande thre dayes & thre
nyghtis . CMTHORN-MX4,10.201

+te fourte day take +te bacyn CMTHORN-MX4,10.202

& , what +tu fyndis +ter-in , do it of clene CMTHORN-MX4,10.203

& gedir it in an ampull of glas or in a cle vrynall CMTHORN-MX4,10.204

& tak a littill CMTHORN-MX4,10.205

& anoynte thyn eghne +ter-with , when +tu gose to thi bedde .
CMTHORN-MX4,10.206

After this medcyn , ne after non o+ter , wasche not thyn eghne bot with
water +tat fenell is sothen in . CMTHORN-MX4,10.207

Tak celidon CMTHORN-MX4,10.208

& do it in hardes CMTHORN-MX4,10.209

& sythen do it in hate askes CMTHORN-MX4,10.210

& late it sethe +ter-in CMTHORN-MX4,10.211

& +tan draw it owte CMTHORN-MX4,10.212

& wrynge +te jeuse in a bacyn CMTHORN-MX4,10.213

& do it in +te sonne to drye CMTHORN-MX4,10.214

and , when +tu hase to do +ter-with , tak a littill +ter-of
CMTHORN-MX4,10.215

& distemper it with ayselle CMTHORN-MX4,10.216

& do a littill in thyn eghne +ter-of . CMTHORN-MX4,10.217

Tak vetoyne CMTHORN-MX4,10.218

& stampe it with water CMTHORN-MX4,10.219

& drynke it ix dayes & it sall dryfe a-waye all +te wikkede humours of
+te heued & of +te eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,10.220

Tak May buttre & comyn CMTHORN-MX4,10.221

& stampe +tam samen CMTHORN-MX4,10.222

& laye it on lyne CMTHORN-MX4,10.223

& +tan laye it on +te eghe CMTHORN-MX4,10.224

& ofte anewe it CMTHORN-MX4,10.225

and , when +te bolnynge es swagede , +tan tak safron & womans mylke +tat
fedis a knaue childe , if it be to a man , CMTHORN-MX4,10.226

& grynde +tam CMTHORN-MX4,10.227

& droppe in +te sare eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,10.228

<P_11>

Tak +te blode of swalow birdis CMTHORN-MX4,11.230

& anoynte thyn eghne +ter-with & euer_mare +tay sall be +te bryghttere .
CMTHORN-MX4,11.231

Tak strange vynegre or aysell CMTHORN-MX4,11.232

& do it in a vessell of bras , CMTHORN-MX4,11.233

& +te blak slaes of +te wode & wormode do +ter-with CMTHORN-MX4,11.234

& lat it stand langer couerde CMTHORN-MX4,11.235

and , when nede es , take it to thyn eghne & it sall brek +te web & do
a-way +te euyll . CMTHORN-MX4,11.236

Tak ewfrace , a gude porcion , CMTHORN-MX4,11.237

& stampe it wele CMTHORN-MX4,11.238

& wrynge owte +te jewse thorow a clathe . CMTHORN-MX4,11.239

+Tan tak galte grese & als mekill of gose grese & als mekill of henne
grese CMTHORN-MX4,11.240

& menge it to-gedir in a panne of bras or in a pott of bras
CMTHORN-MX4,11.241

& do +te jewse +ter-to CMTHORN-MX4,11.242

& boyle it wele CMTHORN-MX4,11.243

& stir +te bothome with a rownde staffe CMTHORN-MX4,11.244

& lat it kele CMTHORN-MX4,11.245

& do it in boystes CMTHORN-MX4,11.246

& , when +tu hase nede , do it in thyn eghne a littill , when +tu gase
to slepe , to +tu be hale . CMTHORN-MX4,11.247

Tak comyn , pepir , hempsede , of rewe sede , of fenell sede , of ache
+tat growes ouer yven , & sal maritimum , of ilkan ylike mekill ,
CMTHORN-MX4,11.248

& stamp +tam all to powdir CMTHORN-MX4,11.249

& do in thyn eghne +ter-of when +tou gase to thi bedde .
CMTHORN-MX4,11.250

Tak bawme & +te jeuse of ewe & hony , of ilkan elyke mekill ,
CMTHORN-MX4,11.251

& coyle +tam thorowe a clathe CMTHORN-MX4,11.252

& do it in a fyall of glase CMTHORN-MX4,11.253

& with a fethir do it in thyn eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,11.254

Tak +te jeuse of rede wortes & of hesill , elike mekill ,
CMTHORN-MX4,11.255

& do in a pot of bras CMTHORN-MX4,11.256

& couer it wele CMTHORN-MX4,11.257

& sett it in +te erthe ix dayes CMTHORN-MX4,11.258

& +tan do it in thyn eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,11.259

Tak powdir of brynte pepir CMTHORN-MX4,11.260

& do it in thyn eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,11.261

Tak +te galle of an hare & twa sa mekill hony CMTHORN-MX4,11.262

& temper it to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,11.263

& anoynte thyn eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,11.264

Ypocras sayse +tat their thynges will gare a man see +te sternes abowte
myddaye , +tat is , +te galle of a hare , +te galle of a coke , +te
galle of an owle & a littill jewse of fenell & aloe cicotrine +tat
suffice & camfire , CMTHORN-MX4,11.265

& mak colore . CMTHORN-MX4,11.266

Feniculus , veruena , rosa , celidonia , ruta , Si pimpernela ditis
ewfrasia iuncta , Ex istis fit aqua que reddat lumina acuta .
CMTHORN-MX4,11.267

Tak powdir of aloes CMTHORN-MX4,11.268

& do +ter-in a littill . CMTHORN-MX4,11.269

Bot firste wasche it with whit wyne . CMTHORN-MX4,11.270

Tak leues of henebayne CMTHORN-MX4,11.271

sothen in wyne CMTHORN-MX4,11.272

& bray +tam CMTHORN-MX4,11.273

& laye +tam ther-to . CMTHORN-MX4,11.274

<P_12>

Tak mynt CMTHORN-MX4,12.276

& grynde it CMTHORN-MX4,12.277

& lay +ter-to . CMTHORN-MX4,12.278

Tak +te galle of an ele CMTHORN-MX4,12.279

& temper it with hony CMTHORN-MX4,12.280

& do it in +tin eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,12.281

<heading>

SARE EGHNE SCHEPE LOUSE CMTHORN-MX4,12.283

<$$heading>

Tak +te rute of fenkell & vetoyne CMTHORN-MX4,12.285

& sethe +tam in water CMTHORN-MX4,12.286

& wasche thyn eghne +ter-with . CMTHORN-MX4,12.287

Tak daysies & +te whitt of an egge CMTHORN-MX4,12.288

& braye +tam CMTHORN-MX4,12.289

& do it in thyn eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,12.290

Tak ewfrase CMTHORN-MX4,12.291

& stampe it in grese of a gose or of a henne CMTHORN-MX4,12.292

& frye ewfrase CMTHORN-MX4,12.293

& do in a vessell CMTHORN-MX4,12.294

& anoynte thyn eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,12.295

Or tak +te sede of centory CMTHORN-MX4,12.296

& ett it fastande & +tou sall mow at +te nonne to see +te sternes .
CMTHORN-MX4,12.297

Tak ewfrase & glair ana , CMTHORN-MX4,12.298

$& wete thorgh a lyn clathe CMTHORN-MX4,12.299

& lay it on thyn eghne all nyghte , CMTHORN-MX4,12.300

for it wil draw owt wikkide homours . CMTHORN-MX4,12.301

Tak +te jewse of tansay or of vetoyne , CMTHORN-MX4,12.302

& wryng thorow a clathe CMTHORN-MX4,12.303

& do +ter-of in thyn eghne . CMTHORN-MX4,12.304

Tak a bryghte bacyn CMTHORN-MX4,12.305

and anoynte it with mylke $& reme , CMTHORN-MX4,12.306

& whelm it ouer a preue iij dayes CMTHORN-MX4,12.307

& sythen clens it CMTHORN-MX4,12.308

& anoynt thyn eghne +ter-with . CMTHORN-MX4,12.309

Tak pepir CMTHORN-MX4,12.310

and bryn it in a clout CMTHORN-MX4,12.311

& stamp it al to powdir CMTHORN-MX4,12.312

& blende it with the merghe of a gose wenge CMTHORN-MX4,12.313

& do +ter-of in thyn eghene . CMTHORN-MX4,12.314

Tak pure glare of an egge & hony & arnement wele grownden & $tempered
to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,12.315

& do to thyn eghne with hardes or lyne . CMTHORN-MX4,12.316

Tak +te jewse of egremon with +te whitt of an egge CMTHORN-MX4,12.317

& blende to-gedir wele CMTHORN-MX4,12.318

& laye to thyn eghne with cotome or clathe . CMTHORN-MX4,12.319

Tak +te rotes of fenell , vetoyne & yven terrestre , CMTHORN-MX4,12.320

& sethe +tam wele in water CMTHORN-MX4,12.321

& do hony in +ter-to CMTHORN-MX4,12.322

& sythen coyl it thorow a clathe CMTHORN-MX4,12.323

& anoynte thyn eghne +ter-with . CMTHORN-MX4,12.324

Tak ewfrase , pympernoll , veruayne , rede fenell , euen porcyon , &
halfe +te porcion of rew & celidon , CMTHORN-MX4,12.325

& braye +tam wele in a mortere CMTHORN-MX4,12.326

& welle +tam wele with May buttre clarifiede CMTHORN-MX4,12.327

& do +tam in an erthe pott CMTHORN-MX4,12.328

& couer +tam wele CMTHORN-MX4,12.329

& late +tam rote to +tay be white_harede . CMTHORN-MX4,12.330

+Tan <P_13> do +tat to +te fire CMTHORN-MX4,13.331

& boile it wele CMTHORN-MX4,13.332

& afterwardes drawe it owte thurgh a clathe clene or a canvase
CMTHORN-MX4,13.333

& +tan do it to +te fire to it be wele claryfied CMTHORN-MX4,13.334

& +tan do it in boystes . CMTHORN-MX4,13.335

When +tou hase nede to do +ter-with , do it in thyn eghne the montenance
of a perle at morne & as mekill at euen . CMTHORN-MX4,13.336

Take +te jewse of rewe or of wormode or of horshoue CMTHORN-MX4,13.337

& do in +te ere & it sall slaa it . CMTHORN-MX4,13.338

<heading>

SCHEPE-LOUSE EVYLL IN +te MOUTHE HASENESSE TO SYNG HYE CLERE VOYCE
CMTHORN-MX4,13.340

<$$heading>

Tak +te grene +gerdis of asche CMTHORN-MX4,13.342

& ley +tam ouer a brandreth CMTHORN-MX4,13.343

& mak a fire vnder theym CMTHORN-MX4,13.344

& kepe +te wose +tat rynnes owte at the endes in egge schelles
CMTHORN-MX4,13.345

& tak hony CMTHORN-MX4,13.346

& do to +tat wose CMTHORN-MX4,13.347

& do in his ere CMTHORN-MX4,13.348

& late hym ly downn & slepe CMTHORN-MX4,13.349

& do swa thre dayes ilk a day twyse or thrise . CMTHORN-MX4,13.350

Bot do firste in +te hale here anes or twise , in awntour if +ter be
oughte qwike in it , & it wil crepe out . CMTHORN-MX4,13.351

Tak a hate hauyr cake CMTHORN-MX4,13.352

& lay it down CMTHORN-MX4,13.353

& lay thyn ere +ter one als $hate als +tu thole it & , if +ter be any
schepelouse or any qwikke thynge , it sal sone crepe out .
CMTHORN-MX4,13.354

Tak pentafoyloyn , id est quintfoyle , CMTHORN-MX4,13.355

& welle it wele in water CMTHORN-MX4,13.356

& , when it es wele welled , halde thi mouthe ouer +te posenett
CMTHORN-MX4,13.357

& stewe +te wele . CMTHORN-MX4,13.358

+Tan take & soupe of +tat lewke water CMTHORN-MX4,13.359

& halde it in thi mouthe to +tat it be kelide CMTHORN-MX4,13.360

& +tan caste it owte CMTHORN-MX4,13.361

& +tan soupe mare CMTHORN-MX4,13.362

& +te thirde tyme do righte swa CMTHORN-MX4,13.363

& vse this thre dayes & +tu sal hafe helpe +ter-of . CMTHORN-MX4,13.364

Tak salte , comyn & pepir , of ilkan ilike mekill , CMTHORN-MX4,13.365

& mak of +tam a powdir CMTHORN-MX4,13.366

& gyff hym to drynke in a sponefull of hate water . CMTHORN-MX4,13.367

This medcyne is profitable , CMTHORN-MX4,13.368

for it is ofte tymms prouede . CMTHORN-MX4,13.369

Tak stalworthe ayselle in a vesselle of bras & jewse of ake appills
CMTHORN-MX4,13.370

& do +tam alle to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,13.371

& late +tam stande lange wele couerde CMTHORN-MX4,13.372

& , when sal be at nyghte , when +te seke sall ga to bedde , +tan do it
in his eghne & it sall for-do +te perle & breke +te strynge of +te eghn
. CMTHORN-MX4,13.373

<S_SAMPLE_2>

<P_67>

<heading>

SAUE CMTHORN-MX4,67.377

<$$heading>

$Here may +tu lere for to make Saue , the wilk es a gude drynke & ane
oynment for +te woundis or +te hurtes with-in & with-owtten of +te body
of man or woman CMTHORN-MX4,67.379

& it es called Saue . CMTHORN-MX4,67.380

And +te firste by-houes +te to gedir theis herbis +tat are here wretyn :
burnette , betoyne , pympernolle , dauk , morsus diaboli , tormentill ,
crois , bugill , pigill , sinagle , herbe Robert , herb John , herb
Wauter , herb yue , cosoud maior , cosoud milnen , consoud petit , crope
de cambre , fenell with +te sede rouge , cholet , waranc , mader ,
spourge , fawethistill , samson , gronswalle , melice , egrymoyn ,
cheuerfoille , id est wodrofe , violet , playntayne , id est waybred ,
launcelle , id est ryb , peluette , id est moushere , vesche , floures
de genest , id est brome , herb saunce crop , ache petit , auance , crop
de rouge runcebrere , lange de cheyn , cynkfoil , milfoil , rouge vrtice
, id est nettill rede , flosere , id est strabery wyes , tansay , id est
philoga , osmonde . CMTHORN-MX4,67.381

Of all thies herbes tak euen porcion out-tane of madir and of auance ,
CMTHORN-MX4,67.382

for of +te mader tak als mekill weghte as of twa o+ter bi-fore neuenned
. CMTHORN-MX4,67.383

& stamp +tam wele CMTHORN-MX4,67.384

& , when +tay are wele stamped , late +tam riste in a vessell of tre +te
space of ten dayes CMTHORN-MX4,67.385

and , after +te x daye es passed , do to thies herbis +te doubill weghte
of fresche buttre of Maye CMTHORN-MX4,67.386

& +tan sethe +tam ouer +te fire CMTHORN-MX4,67.387

& late +tam swa sethe to-gedir to +te buttre be halfe wastede .
CMTHORN-MX4,67.388

+Tan all warme coille +te confeccion swa boillede thurgh a canvace
CMTHORN-MX4,67.389

& afterwarde late it kele CMTHORN-MX4,67.390

& sithen clence it wele with calde water to it be clere clensede
CMTHORN-MX4,67.391

& +tan afterwarde tak a galon of gude whitte wyn & a porcyon of gude
vynagre CMTHORN-MX4,67.392

& do +tam ouer fire in a clene vesselle CMTHORN-MX4,67.393

& do +ter-in +te coylett wele weschyn CMTHORN-MX4,67.394

& sethe +tam to-gedir to +te wyn & +te vynagre be nere wastede
CMTHORN-MX4,67.395

& +tan tak +tam down of +te fire CMTHORN-MX4,67.396

& suffre +tam to kele CMTHORN-MX4,67.397

& sythen gedir vp +tat +tat fletis a-bown CMTHORN-MX4,67.398

& put it in boystes for to safe CMTHORN-MX4,67.399

& gyfe +ter-of to wonded men +tat hase wondis depe & standyng in wondis
& bolnynge in wondis & with +tis sal +tu safely hele +tam .
CMTHORN-MX4,67.400

& gyff +tam at drynk +ter-of arely at +te morne & late at euen of +te
grettnes of a mousfiche . CMTHORN-MX4,67.401

<P_68>

Medcyn +tat is called Gratia Dei , +tat is made on +tis manere :
CMTHORN-MX4,68.403

Tak litarge iiij vnces , ceruse iij vnces , roste of a belle of bras ij
vnces of vertgres ij vnces , of sarcocol iiij vnces , of mastik ,
galbanum , ammoniak , of ilkane iiij vnces , with encence iij vnces , of
bedellium halfe ane vnce , of pik greke , pik nauill , of +tam ij vnces
. CMTHORN-MX4,68.404

All this bi-fore be graythede & boylled in a ponde of oyle de olyue till
+tay wax blake CMTHORN-MX4,68.405

& sythen keped wele . CMTHORN-MX4,68.406

This emplaster clenses wondis CMTHORN-MX4,68.407

and sowdis +tam to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,68.408

& dose owte dede flesche CMTHORN-MX4,68.409

& newe flesche gars grewe . CMTHORN-MX4,68.410

It is a gud heler for brynnand werkes , wondis & kiles , whare so bee .
CMTHORN-MX4,68.411

Tak wax , rosen , turbentyn , of ilkan a pounde , of mastik iij vnces ,
betoyn , of pympernolle , of veruayn , of ilkan a quartron .
CMTHORN-MX4,68.412

+Tan stampe thies herbis wele CMTHORN-MX4,68.413

& sethe +tam wele in ij galouns of white wynne or rede vn-to +te thirde
party . CMTHORN-MX4,68.414

Afterwarde coyle +tam thorow CMTHORN-MX4,68.415

& saue wele +te coylett fra filthe . CMTHORN-MX4,68.416

+Tan take +ti rosen & thi wax CMTHORN-MX4,68.417

& resolue wele in a clene dowble vessell ouer +te fire & coyl +tam
thorow a clathe CMTHORN-MX4,68.418

& caste +tan +tat coylett of gummes to +te coylett of wyne & of gresses
CMTHORN-MX4,68.419

& sethe +tam to-gedir vn-to +te wastyng of +te wyne .
CMTHORN-MX4,68.420

Aftirwarde tak +tat ilk confeccion saa sothen CMTHORN-MX4,68.421

& do it in a doubill vessell ouer +te fire CMTHORN-MX4,68.422

& do +te mastik pouder +ter-in to +te mastik be resoluede & sythen
afterwarde +ti turbentyn CMTHORN-MX4,68.423

& moue it sotely til it be resolued CMTHORN-MX4,68.424

& , as swithe so it be resoluede , tak +te confeccion of +te fire
smertly with-owtten duellynge CMTHORN-MX4,68.425

and poure it thurgh a clathe CMTHORN-MX4,68.426

& suffre it to refraide CMTHORN-MX4,68.427

& +tan gedir vpe with clene handis , CMTHORN-MX4,68.428

anoynte with oyle de olyue CMTHORN-MX4,68.429

& safe +ti enplaster wele , CMTHORN-MX4,68.430

for it is gude till alde wondis & to newe & to synows coruen and bristen
and till junttours , to hewen flesche , to dede flesche in wondis & till
apostymms , of alkyn maner of kankir , festre , venyme & for helle fire
, for +te emeraudes & for brokes . CMTHORN-MX4,68.431

+Tis enplaster , it wirkes , CMTHORN-MX4,68.432

it heles , CMTHORN-MX4,68.433

it drawes and helis mare with-in woke +tan all o+ter enplasters dose
with-in a monethe . CMTHORN-MX4,68.434

Tak camamyle , wormot , mellilotum . CMTHORN-MX4,68.435

Tak brance vrcyne , wilde malue . CMTHORN-MX4,68.436

Tak ysop , germander , smalach , percell . CMTHORN-MX4,68.437

<P_69>

Tak wilde sauge , fymter , woraunce . CMTHORN-MX4,69.439

Tak mynt , borage , cicory , flour of oxtonge , +tat is longe de beefe .
CMTHORN-MX4,69.440

$Here bygynnes +te maner to mak salues & entretis & drynkes & cyroyns to
wondis & to all o+ter hurtes of mans body CMTHORN-MX4,69.441

and +te firste for wounde in +te heuede : CMTHORN-MX4,69.442

Tak betoyne CMTHORN-MX4,69.443

& stampe it with alde gres CMTHORN-MX4,69.444

& fry +tam to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,69.445

& sythen draw it thurgh a clathe CMTHORN-MX4,69.446

& do it appon lyn CMTHORN-MX4,69.447

& lay it on +te wonde CMTHORN-MX4,69.448

& ilk a third daye lay +te white of an egge +ter-on & he sall waresche
sone . CMTHORN-MX4,69.449

Tak wormot & stayncroppe ana , CMTHORN-MX4,69.450

& bray +tam CMTHORN-MX4,69.451

& boyl +tam in vynagre CMTHORN-MX4,69.452

& do +ter-to whete branne CMTHORN-MX4,69.453

& lay to +te sare . CMTHORN-MX4,69.454

Tak pugill , bugill , herb Robert , auance , red cale , tansay , hemp
croppes ana , CMTHORN-MX4,69.455

& tak of madir als mekill as of all +te o+ter herbis ,
CMTHORN-MX4,69.456

& do +ter-to ambros , burnet & +te crispe malue CMTHORN-MX4,69.457

& , if +ter be bane broken & +tu dare noghte serche it +git , gyf hym
+tis to drynke : CMTHORN-MX4,69.458

Tak the wort tansay , hemp croppes , horse mynt , rede nettill , brere
croppes & als mekill mader as of all +te o+ter herbes .
CMTHORN-MX4,69.459

Stamp +tam samen CMTHORN-MX4,69.460

& sethe +tam in white wyne CMTHORN-MX4,69.461

& gyf it hym at drynk & , if it come owte at +te wounde & he caste nott
, +tan it is a takyn +tat he sal lyfe . CMTHORN-MX4,69.462

+Tan gare serche +te wonde CMTHORN-MX4,69.463

& schaue +te broken banes qwayntely +tat +tu tame nott +te tay of +te
harnnes CMTHORN-MX4,69.464

& , if it blede faste , wipe softely with softe lyne CMTHORN-MX4,69.465

& syne tak softe lyne & wympill to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,69.466

& lay it ouer +te wonde CMTHORN-MX4,69.467

& tak whete flour wele boltede CMTHORN-MX4,69.468

& strewe on +te clowte +tat lygges on +te wonde . CMTHORN-MX4,69.469

& after +tat late a woman +tat fedis a knafe childe , if it be a man
+tat is woundide , mylke hir pappes softely on +te mele +tat is strewed
on +te cloute +ter-on & strewe it with flour , as +tu dide +te to+ter ,
& of +te mylk till it be euen with +te flesche , CMTHORN-MX4,69.470

& hille +te heuede CMTHORN-MX4,69.471

& late it be stille til on +te morn . CMTHORN-MX4,69.472

+Tan vnhill +te hede softely & , if +tu fynde +ter-aboun as it were a
burbill +tat standes on +te water when it raynnes , +tan is it a sygne
of dede CMTHORN-MX4,69.473

& , if +tu see bi-fore his tay als it ware a spynnande webbe or rede ,
+tat is taken +tat +te ryme of +te hernes es broken CMTHORN-MX4,69.474

& it is a sygne of hasty dede . CMTHORN-MX4,69.475

& , if +ter be many of thir sygnes , gyf hym ilk day twis at drynk ,
<P_70> anes at morne , ano+ter tym at euen , +tis drynk .
CMTHORN-MX4,70.476

Gars broken banes come owte CMTHORN-MX4,70.477

& clenses +te ryme of +te hernes of blode CMTHORN-MX4,70.478

& heles +te wonde , CMTHORN-MX4,70.479

and , if it be swa broken +tat men by-houes do +ter-in masere , late
+tan wele rounge +te broken of +te heuede als bi-fore it is said
CMTHORN-MX4,70.480

& sett +ter-in a pese of maser CMTHORN-MX4,70.481

& anoynt it with +tis oynement after wretyn . CMTHORN-MX4,70.482

Tak pulioll montane , baynwort , ambrose , rib , bubill , seterib ,
celidoun , cheuerfoill , rede nettill , lekes , ache , waybrede , morell
, tansay , & betoyn , of ilkane ilike mekill , CMTHORN-MX4,70.483

& stamp +tam wele samen with swyne gres fresche & fre rekills , a lytill
hony , vyrgyn wax , CMTHORN-MX4,70.484

& , when all thir thynges ere wele stampede samen , do +tam in a clene
bacyne or in a pan CMTHORN-MX4,70.485

& do +ter-to white wyn CMTHORN-MX4,70.486

& +tan lat it stande all a daye & a nyghte CMTHORN-MX4,70.487

& on +te morne do it vn-to +te fire CMTHORN-MX4,70.488

& sethe it wele CMTHORN-MX4,70.489

& gyf it gude walmes . CMTHORN-MX4,70.490

Syne tak it doune CMTHORN-MX4,70.491

and drawe it thorowe a clathe CMTHORN-MX4,70.492

& do it vp CMTHORN-MX4,70.493

& , +ter-@ @whils it is oghte sare , anoynt it +ter-with & it sall hele
full wele . CMTHORN-MX4,70.494

Tak a handfull of malues and a handfull of wormot & a handfull of
mugwort , CMTHORN-MX4,70.495

& stamp +tam samen full small , CMTHORN-MX4,70.496

& tak iiij vnces of +te flour of whete & iij vnces of hony & rede wyn
CMTHORN-MX4,70.497

& tak iij vnces of galte gres CMTHORN-MX4,70.498

& do +te hony in a panne CMTHORN-MX4,70.499

& scome it CMTHORN-MX4,70.500

& do +ter-in +te gres CMTHORN-MX4,70.501

& mak it to welle hate CMTHORN-MX4,70.502

& syne mak it in a playster CMTHORN-MX4,70.503

& lay it alle warme on +te heuede . CMTHORN-MX4,70.504

Tak +te heuedis of lekes with alle +te fases CMTHORN-MX4,70.505

& stampe +tam CMTHORN-MX4,70.506

& do +te woyse in +te wonde . CMTHORN-MX4,70.507

& tak lyne CMTHORN-MX4,70.508

& mak a tent CMTHORN-MX4,70.509

& wete it in +te woyse CMTHORN-MX4,70.510

& putt it +ter-in . CMTHORN-MX4,70.511

& tak +te substance of +te lekes at +te jus was wrongen thurgh
CMTHORN-MX4,70.512

& lay it appon CMTHORN-MX4,70.513

& bynde it +ter-to . CMTHORN-MX4,70.514

Do +tis plaster iij dayes to , CMTHORN-MX4,70.515

bot remowe it noghte bot ilk a daye anes , CMTHORN-MX4,70.516

& , after +te iij day , tak whete mele & gude wyn CMTHORN-MX4,70.517

& do whitte sayme +ter-to CMTHORN-MX4,70.518

& welle wele to-gedir . CMTHORN-MX4,70.519

+Tan tak a lyn clathe & do ij falde or thre or a pece of white lethir
CMTHORN-MX4,70.520

& do +tin enplaster +ter-on CMTHORN-MX4,70.521

& lay it ouer +te wonde CMTHORN-MX4,70.522

& do so ilk a daye CMTHORN-MX4,70.523

and gif hym at drynke thir iij gresses with a littill ale : pigill ,
<P_71> bugill & sanigle . CMTHORN-MX4,71.524

& , when he hase dronken +tam , +tay will come owt at +te wonde & clence
it with-in & hele it wele with-owtten . CMTHORN-MX4,71.525

Tak larde CMTHORN-MX4,71.526

& mak sayme +ter-of and tak hony & wyne & rye mele CMTHORN-MX4,71.527

& sethe +tam to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,71.528

& do +tam on a clathe CMTHORN-MX4,71.529

& lay it +ter-to & it sal clence it & hele it . CMTHORN-MX4,71.530

Or tak centory CMTHORN-MX4,71.531

& mak poudir +ter-of CMTHORN-MX4,71.532

& strewe it on +te wonde & it sal hele it . CMTHORN-MX4,71.533

Or take +te jus of ache & +te whitte of an egge & +te flour of whete &
pouder of rekills ana , CMTHORN-MX4,71.534

& menge +tam to-gedir so +tat it be thik CMTHORN-MX4,71.535

& do it one +te wonde CMTHORN-MX4,71.536

& remewe it ilk daye anes . CMTHORN-MX4,71.537

Tak betoyn a handfull , comfory a handfull , madir , baynwort a handfull
, of hemp sede ij vnces . CMTHORN-MX4,71.538

Stamp all to-gedir wele & small . CMTHORN-MX4,71.539

Tak +tan a quartron of white wyn & a quartron of water
CMTHORN-MX4,71.540

& do all in a pott ouer +te fire CMTHORN-MX4,71.541

& sethe it into +te halfe CMTHORN-MX4,71.542

& coyle it thrugh a clathe CMTHORN-MX4,71.543

& drynk ilk a day a mese at +te morne & at +te euen CMTHORN-MX4,71.544

& lay a brere lefe to +te wonde . CMTHORN-MX4,71.545

Tak comfery , marygolde , matfelon , millfoile , auance , +te white rute
of +te walwort , baynworte , cerfoil , herb Robert , ambrose , maro+gl ,
pelwet , rede dok , polipodi & celidon ana , & of mader halfe +te weghte
of all +tir o+ter herbis . CMTHORN-MX4,71.546

Sethe +tam in ale or in wyn CMTHORN-MX4,71.547

& drynke +tam morne & euen . CMTHORN-MX4,71.548

Do as it es said by-fore . CMTHORN-MX4,71.549

Tak +te rede nettill , rede cale , pympernoll , cerfoill , mynt , porret
, tansay , aueroyn , bugill , sanigle , waraunce . CMTHORN-MX4,71.550

Now here bene +te wertus of thies herbes : CMTHORN-MX4,71.551

+te nettill & +te rede cale suffers noghte +te wonde hele .
CMTHORN-MX4,71.552

Of thies herbes tak a pounde . CMTHORN-MX4,71.553

Mynt & porret , +tat swages werke in wondes . CMTHORN-MX4,71.554

+Ter-of tak halfe a pounde . CMTHORN-MX4,71.555

Bugill & sanegle haldes +te wondes fra perell . CMTHORN-MX4,71.556

+Ter-of tak a pound . CMTHORN-MX4,71.557

Pympernolle , cerfoill & waraunce ledis +te drynke in-to +te wounde .
CMTHORN-MX4,71.558

Of +tam tak halfe als mekill als of all +te to+ter herbes .
CMTHORN-MX4,71.559

+Tan stampe +tam in a mortere CMTHORN-MX4,71.560

& mak smalle balles of thaym , of +te mekilnes of a doufe egge ,
CMTHORN-MX4,71.561

& do +tam vp to drye fra +te wynde & +te sonne . CMTHORN-MX4,71.562

<P_72>

Tak auance , tansay , egrymoyn , hemp croppes , ony+gone sede , rede
cale croppes , ambros , matfelon & als mekill mader as of thre of theis
o+ter herbes , CMTHORN-MX4,72.564

& stamp +tam to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,72.565

& drynke +tam . CMTHORN-MX4,72.566

Tak auance , comfery , +garow , croppes of hempe , tansay , rede cale ,
aueroyn , & mader als mekill as halfe thies o+ter herbes ,
CMTHORN-MX4,72.567

and syne stamp +tam CMTHORN-MX4,72.568

& mak +tam in balles CMTHORN-MX4,72.569

& do +tam vp to drye . CMTHORN-MX4,72.570

Tak waybrede , rib , violett , auances , cropp of +te rede brere ,
matfelon , herb Robert , tansay , betoyn , milfoille , comfery ,
baynewort , of ilkane ilike mekill , & of +te rote of mader agayn all
thies o+ter herbes . CMTHORN-MX4,72.571

Stampe +tam all CMTHORN-MX4,72.572

& mak pelottes of +tam CMTHORN-MX4,72.573

& dry +tam in the sonne or in +te wynde CMTHORN-MX4,72.574

& drynk +tam in wynnter . CMTHORN-MX4,72.575

Tak a pound of virgyn wax , a pounde of olibanum , a pounde of encruce
of +te ere , a pound of ditayne , a pound of playntayn , a pound of
jubarbe , a pound of littill consoude , a pound of milfoille & a pound
of watercresses . CMTHORN-MX4,72.576

Tak thies gresses CMTHORN-MX4,72.577

& stampe +tam ilkan by $hym ane CMTHORN-MX4,72.578

& temper +tam with wyn CMTHORN-MX4,72.579

& late +tam rest a nyghte CMTHORN-MX4,72.580

& on +te morn do +tam in a pott ouer +te fire CMTHORN-MX4,72.581

& late +tam welle wele CMTHORN-MX4,72.582

& syne tak it doun CMTHORN-MX4,72.583

& drawe it thorow a clene clathe . CMTHORN-MX4,72.584

Tak herb John , herb Robert , bugill , pigill , milfoille , consoude ,
playntayne , auance , CMTHORN-MX4,72.585

of all thies herbis tak +te jus , & wax & pik & a littill gres ,
CMTHORN-MX4,72.586

& mak syroyn . CMTHORN-MX4,72.587

To all kyles & wondis it is gude . CMTHORN-MX4,72.588

Tak +te firste iij dayes CMTHORN-MX4,72.589

& lay +ter-to noghte bot lyne & +te white of an egge CMTHORN-MX4,72.590

& chaunge it morne & euen . CMTHORN-MX4,72.591

& +tan tak ix stalkes of gronswale with +te rotes & v of spourge with
+te rutes & als many croppes of +te rede brere , CMTHORN-MX4,72.592

& stampe all wele to-gedir with a sawcerfull of hony ,
CMTHORN-MX4,72.593

+tan wrynge owte all +te jus thurgh a clene clathe CMTHORN-MX4,72.594

& do it in a clene pane ouer +te fire CMTHORN-MX4,72.595

& boile it a whalme . CMTHORN-MX4,72.596

& +tan tak it doun CMTHORN-MX4,72.597

& stop +ter-in iij dices of whete brede CMTHORN-MX4,72.598

& gif hym thase thre at euen , when he gase to his bedde .
CMTHORN-MX4,72.599

& do so with ilk a sirope & brede viij dayes or ix . CMTHORN-MX4,72.600

And when +tu sees +tat +te wounde es wele rotyn & whelis whitoure faire
, tak +tan iij stalkes of gronswalle & v of <P_73> spourge & fyue of
brere croppe CMTHORN-MX4,73.601

& stamp +tam CMTHORN-MX4,73.602

& mak thi syrope als +tu dide bi-fore CMTHORN-MX4,73.603

& dice it with brede stoppede +ter-in morne till +tat it be hale
CMTHORN-MX4,73.604

& lay not to +te wonde bot firste smalle lyn +ter-on & a brere leffe
+ter-on abouen or a rede cale lefe CMTHORN-MX4,73.605

& luk ay +tat he ette no gowttous mettes . CMTHORN-MX4,73.606

He +tat will mak littill syrone , tak gud fresche schepe talghe , virgyn
wax , pik nauale , galbanum . CMTHORN-MX4,73.607

Gare +tam boyle welle CMTHORN-MX4,73.608

& styrre +tam softely CMTHORN-MX4,73.609

& do a littill wyn +ter-in . CMTHORN-MX4,73.610

Syne tak mirre & olibanum and powdir of mastike CMTHORN-MX4,73.611

& do +te foresaid thynges +ter-in CMTHORN-MX4,73.612

& lat +tam boile wele , CMTHORN-MX4,73.613

bot luk +tat +tay be wele stirrede . CMTHORN-MX4,73.614

+Tis syroyn is ful gude . CMTHORN-MX4,73.615

Tak a handfull of savyn & a handfull of sauge & a handfull of rewe & a
handfull of tansay , CMTHORN-MX4,73.616

& stamp +tam wele to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,73.617

& sethe +tam wele in oyle of olyue CMTHORN-MX4,73.618

& do wax & swyn grese +ter-to fresche & powder of mastik
CMTHORN-MX4,73.619

& do all to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,73.620

& mak ane oynement +ter-of . CMTHORN-MX4,73.621

Tak celydoyn rotes & of gouke flores with +te leues , centrum galli ,
wild louache , of ilkan a handefull , scabius , a handfull .
CMTHORN-MX4,73.622

Thies herbis stampe wele with a pounde of schepe talghe & a pounde of
olyue CMTHORN-MX4,73.623

& , when +tay are wele stampede , do +tam to-gedir CMTHORN-MX4,73.624

& lat +tam riste vij dayes or viij CMTHORN-MX4,73.625

& syne sethe +tam in a vesselle ouer +te fire to +te gresses falle to
+te grounde CMTHORN-MX4,73.626

& syne coyle +tam thorow a clathe CMTHORN-MX4,73.627

& do +tat ilk coylett in a caldron CMTHORN-MX4,73.628

& do +ter-to iij vnces of wax in somer , in wynter ij vnces ,
CMTHORN-MX4,73.629

& , when all es molten , caste in-to +tam pouder of olybane , mastik &
vertgrese & of ilkane halfe ane vnce . CMTHORN-MX4,73.630

Bot , or +tu do in the vertgres , proue +tam halfe to-gedir
CMTHORN-MX4,73.631

& loke if +tay change colour so +tat it wax grene . CMTHORN-MX4,73.632

Do it fra +te fire CMTHORN-MX4,73.633

& caste +ter-in an vnce of aloen epatik pouderd & in oyle resolued
CMTHORN-MX4,73.634

& menge al togedir . CMTHORN-MX4,73.635

+Tis oynement is gud for all wondis & to gedir new flesche ,
CMTHORN-MX4,73.636

& fordose dede flesche . CMTHORN-MX4,73.637

Tak galt gres , hony , & oyle of nuttes , CMTHORN-MX4,73.638

& do +ter-to +te jus of chesseboll croppes grene with all +te sede & +te
jus of rew & waybrede . CMTHORN-MX4,73.639

Sethe wele +te jewses of thiese herbis all samen CMTHORN-MX4,73.640

& mak thi salfe wele +ter-of CMTHORN-MX4,73.641

& syne coyle it CMTHORN-MX4,73.642

& do it in boystes . CMTHORN-MX4,73.643
