<BEGIN_cmtrinit-mx1>

<P_3>

<heading>

I . DE ADUENTU . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.4

<$$heading>

Ecce uenit rex occurramus obuiam Saluatori nostro . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.6

To dai is cumen +de holie tid +tat me clepe+d aduent . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.7

+tanked be ure louerd ihesu crist +t@ @it haue+d isend .
CMTRINIT-MX1,3.8

And hit laste+d +tre wuke fulle and sum del more . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.9

Et significat tria tempora . ante legem . subb lege . sub gratia .
CMTRINIT-MX1,3.10

and bitocne+d +tre time . On +te was bi-fore +te olde lage .
CMTRINIT-MX1,3.11

+te o+der was on +te holde lage . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.12

and +te +tridde was on +te newe lage . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.13

Men +te waren $wunende {TEXT:wunede} on elche of +tese +trie times
wisten gerne after ure lauerd ihesu crist@ @es tocume alse we do+d .
+te ben on +tesse +tre wuken ; +te ben cleped aduent . +tat is seggen
on englis ure louerd ihesu crist@ @es tocume . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.14

Aduentus autem duo sunt manifesti . et totidem occulti .
CMTRINIT-MX1,3.15

Ure louerd ihesu crist@ @es tocumes ; ben tweien openliche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,3.16

+te fireste is gon . +to +te patriarkes and +te prophetes and o+dre men
+te waren bi +to dages after wisseden . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.17

And +tat o+der tocume be+d on domes dai . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.18

and +tat we abiden . And alle +to ; +te habben ben se+den ure louerd
ihesu crist steh to heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.19

And alle +to +te ben tocumen her after abide+d his tocume .
CMTRINIT-MX1,3.20

And of +te firste tocume speke+d +te holi boc +tus que+dende . Ecce
uenit rex et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.21

here cume+d ure king . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.22

wule we fare togenes him . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.23

and him faire understonden . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.24

and heiliche wur+die . CMTRINIT-MX1,3.25

s . cordis <P_5> mundicia . oris modestia . operis sanctimonia .
+tat is fare togenes him . $noht lichanliche . ac on gode +tanke .
and understonden him on ure e+dele bede . and wur+dsupen him ; on ure
edie dede . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.26

Of +de lateste to-cume spec+d +te holie boc on o+der stede +tus
que+dende . Ecce dominus ueniet et omnes sancti eius cum eo .
CMTRINIT-MX1,5.27

Ure louerd wile cume . and alle hise halegen mid him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,5.28

+tat be+d on domes dai . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.29

Tweien o+der tocumes ben bo+de iliche . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.30

Altero uisitat quando mentium tenebras illuminat . uel caritatem
cordibus infundit . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.31

+tat o+der tocume is +tane he cume+d to men and turne+d his herte to
forleten and hatien his senne . and to luuien god ; and al his
emcristen . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.32

and +tis tocume we bidden +tane we singen . Ueni domine uisitare nos in
pace . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.33

Cum louerd CMTRINIT-MX1,5.34

and biwind us on seihtnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.35

Altero uenit rapere quemque de miseriis huius uite . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.36

+tat o+der digeliche tocume beo+d ; +tane he cume+d to elch man
sunderlupes . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.37

and do+d ut of +tisse worelde . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.38

and of +tis tocume spec+d ure helende seluen on +te holie godspelle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,5.39

and muneged us alle to ben warre +tarof ; CMTRINIT-MX1,5.40

and +tus que+d . Uigilate quia nescitis diem neque horam . +tat is
be+d wakiende . and forlete+d gure synne . +tat ge ne ben ifunden on
sunne . and swo forlorene . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.41

Horum autem aduentum alius fuit misericordie ; et ideo desiderabilis .
alius erit iusticie ; et ideo formidabilis . alius separationis ; et
horridus . alius gratie ; et blandus . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.42

Of ure louerd ihesu crist@ @es openliche tocume . +te forme was of
mildhertnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.43

and alle bileffulle men +te waren +to ; and +dar biforen wissede swi+de
+dar after . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.44

and +duhte long er he come . and alesede hem eche dea+de .
CMTRINIT-MX1,5.45

+tat o+der openliche tocume . +tat is te cumen a domes dei ; be+d of
rihtwisnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.46

for +tanne he wile +dere gelden elch man his hwile mid swilch mede swo
he ernede here . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.47

and +tat tocume is swi+de $eisliche . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.48

for +tanne be+d noman siker ; ar he ihere +tat lufliche word of ure
louerd ihesu crist@ @es swete mu+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.49

Venite benedicti patris mei et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.50

Cume+d ge ibletsede . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.51

and underfo+d eche lif . and blisse mid englen of heuene . +tat is
giarked si+den +te biginninge of +tes woreld . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.52

to +te o+der wur+d iseid +tat lo+deliche word . and ateliche . and
grisliche . +tat is to synfulle . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.53

Ite maledicti in ignem eternum . CMTRINIT-MX1,5.54

Wite+d ge awariede gastes into +tat eche fir on helle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,5.55

and wunie+d <P_7> +tar ; o and o abuten ende . mid alle deflen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,7.56

Eftsone ure helendes on tocume +tinc+d dieliche and grisliche alle manne
. CMTRINIT-MX1,7.57

Forwi ; CMTRINIT-MX1,7.58

for +tat he dele+d +te sowle ; and +te lichame . +tanne he wit of
+tisse woreld . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.59

His o+der dieliche tocume is softe . and swi+de milde . and licwur+de
alle +to ; +te he to cume+d . for to aleomen hem of rihte bileue . and
of so+d luue to him seluen . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.60

Swo cume he to us ; for his muchele mildhertnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.61

Qui uiuit et Regnat . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.62

AMEN . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.63

<heading>

II . DOMINICA SECUNDA IN ADUENTU . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.65

<$$heading>

Hora est iam nos de sompno surgere et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.67

+Te lauerd sainte powel +te is heued lor+deau of alle holie chirechen
bihield +tis wreche woreld . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.68

and sagh +tat mast mannen ladden here lif on sunnen . and +tat hem
likede here lodliche sinnes . alse werie men is lief to slapen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,7.69

and him +tat sore reu . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.70

and +tarfore +toghte +tat he wolde alle synfulle men ; munigin to
rihtlachen here liflode . for to forleten and to beten heore synnes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,7.71

and wrot +to a writ ; CMTRINIT-MX1,7.72

and sende hit synfulle men . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.73

and +taron wi+d hem +tus spec . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.74

and dude him seluen mid hem +taron ; alse +teih he sunful ware .
CMTRINIT-MX1,7.75

Hora est iam nos . et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.76

longe we habben lein on ure fule synnes . and swoldred +taron ; alse
slou man do+d on swete slape . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.77

Ac nu hit is time . +tat we rise $+tarof . and clensen us of ure fule
synnes . and after +tat ure lif laden on clennesse . and swo abiden
ure helendes tocume . +tat neihlache+d nu+de fram dei to daie . and
be+d on midewintres niht . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.78

+tus he spec+d wi+d us on stede ; in his holie write .
CMTRINIT-MX1,7.79

and o+der stede minege+d us . and wisse+t us to leden ure lif on
clennesse ; CMTRINIT-MX1,7.80

and +tus que+d . Sobrie et iuste . et pie uiuamus in hoc seculo .
CMTRINIT-MX1,7.81

Wile we leden ure lif on +tisse worelde me+deliche togenes us suluen .
+tat we +tenchen and que+den . and do +tat ure sowle and ure lichame be
biheue . CMTRINIT-MX1,7.82

and forlaten al +tat hem be+d unbiheue ; alse +te wise clerc seide on
<P_9> his boc . +tus que+dende . Si prodesse cupis tibi que sint
commoda quere . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.83

Gif +tu gierne waxest on godnesse ; sech after +ting +te +de be+d biheue
. CMTRINIT-MX1,9.84

Ure lif we lede+d richtliche togenes ure louerd ihesu crist . gif we
forbere+d al +tat ; +tat him is unqueme . and folge+d on +tonke and on
speche . and on dede ; +tat him is iqueme . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.85

Qui placet ipse deo proximus esse potest . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.86

+te man mai be god next . +te him be+d iqueme . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.87

Tegenes ure emcristene we sulle laden ure lif ; edmodeliche on two wise
. CMTRINIT-MX1,9.88

On is +tat +te holie boc of spech+d . +tus que+dende . Da egenti .
succurre non habenti et in omni necessitate pro Christo suoueni .
CMTRINIT-MX1,9.89

Gief +te nedfulle . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.90

help +te hauelease . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.91

and on alle wise bet +tin emcristene nede . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.92

Eximi nostri omnes quibus est unus dominus . una fides . unum baptisma
. CMTRINIT-MX1,9.93

Vre emcristene ben alle +to ; +te here+d one louerd . and haue+d one
bileue imene . and one fulcninge . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.94

On swilch liflode we mugen trustliche abiden ure louerd ihesu crist@ @es
tocume . and siker ben ; +tat he wile to us cume . and weren us mid
$wi+d ure dea+dliche liue . and wi+d eche wowe . and gieuen us eche
wele mid him seluen on heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.95

Qui uiuit et Regnat . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.96

<heading>

III . DOMINICA TERTIA . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.98

<$$heading>

Nox precessit dies autem appropinquabit . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.100

Hure heiest lor+deu after ure louerd ihesu crist . +tat is ure louerd
sainte powel . munege+d us to rihtlechen ur liflode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,9.101

and wisse+d us on wilche wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.102

and sei+d +tat we hauen riht +tarto ; CMTRINIT-MX1,9.103

and sei+d hwu +tus que+dende . Nox precessit . dies autem et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,9.104

+De niht is for+d-gon ; CMTRINIT-MX1,9.105

and dei neihleche+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,9.106

and for+ti hit is riht +tat we forleten . and forsaken nihtliche deden
. +to ben +te werkes of +tiesternesse . and scruden us mid wapnen of
lihte . +tat be+d so+dfeste bileue . and of brihtnesse . swo +tat we
gon a dei <P_11> bicumeliche . Non in commessationibus et ebrietatibus
non in cubilibus et inpudicitiis non in contentione et emulatione . sed
in horum oppositis . And $noht on derke wedes . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.107

ac her we seien eow of +tese derke wedes . wet +te holie apostle mene+d
; +to he nemnede niht . and niehtes dede . and dai . and leochtes
wapne . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.108

Nox accipitur multis modis . sed hic pro infidelitate .
CMTRINIT-MX1,11.109

Niht bitocne+d her unbileue . +tat is aiware aleid .
CMTRINIT-MX1,11.110

and rihte leue arered CMTRINIT-MX1,11.111

gode+donc . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.112

and na+deles get is sume +tarfore of unbileue ifild on one stede . and
swo faste bunden . and swo biwunde +tarinne . +tat no prest . ne no
bissop ne mai him chastien ; ne mid forbode . ne mid scrifte . ne mid
cursinge . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.113

and +tat is li+der custume . +tat man leue+d get . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.114

and +tat is after clepenge . and ascinge . and uncunne . and warienge
. and handselne . and time . and hwate . and fele swilche deueles
craftes . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.115

and +tat wreche man . +tat swilche +ting him mai letten ; of +tat +te
god him haue+d munt . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.116

Ac alle +to +te leue+d +tat swilch +ting hem muge fur+drie o+der letten
; ben cursed of godes mu+de . +te +dus sei+d on +te holie boc .
Maledictus homo qui confidit in homine . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.117

Cursed be +te man +te leue+d upen hwate . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.118

Ac ich wile segen undernime+d hit . hwat make+d swilch letten .
CMTRINIT-MX1,11.119

we rade+d on boc . +tat elch man haue+d to fere on engel of heuene ; on
his rihthalf . +tat him wisse+d . and munege+d eure to don god . and
on his lifthalf an wereged gost . +tat him aure tache+d to ufele .
CMTRINIT-MX1,11.120

and +tat is +te deuel . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.121

he make+d +te unbilefulle man to leuen swilche wigeles ; swo ich ar embe
spac . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.122

and +tare mide he him bicher+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.123

and binime+d him heuene wele . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.124

and bringe+d him on helle wowe . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.125

crist us +tarwi+d silde . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.126

and healde us rihte bileue . and elch man +te hit haue+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,11.127

and geue hine +to +te hit n@ @aue+d nocht . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.128

+De werc of +testernesse ; +tat ben alle heuie sennen . and swilche
o+dre so +te apostle her nemde . alse ben oueretes . and untimeliche
eten alehuse . and at ferme . and at feste . and masthwat at ilche
la+de+d metisupe . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.129

For +tar man ne can his mu+des me+de . ne cunnen n@ @ele . ne his
wombe met . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.130

and +teih he cunne of mete ; he n@ @ele cunne of drinke . er he be swo
iueid +tat he falle defle to honde . CMTRINIT-MX1,11.131

+De +tridde is +tat man sitte an euen at drinke . and ligge longe a
moregen . and slawliche arise+d . and late to chireche go+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,11.132

+Dat feor+de is unrihte luue . +tat is <P_13> hordom . and
mid-liggunge +te men drigen bi-twenen hem ; bute gef he ben lageliche
bispusede +tat is unriht and untimeliche . and mid unsel+de ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,13.133

for hordom ne haue+d non time ne scule . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.134

ac is defles hersumpnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.135

Ne_for+de gef man haue+d to done mid his rihte spuse on unsele . o+der
an untime +tan man faste sal . O+der halgen . he sinege+d gretliche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,13.136

for +te holie boc hit forbet . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.137

+tat fifte is chest and chew . and twifold speche and ilch fliting of
worde . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.138

+Dat sixte is +tat man egge+d his negebure to done o+der to speken him
harm . o+der same . and haue+d ni+d elch wi+d o+der . and make+d him
to forlese his aihte . o+der of his rihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.139

+tese ben +te six werkes of +testernesse . +te +te holie apostle
for-bet so swi+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.140

For elch man +te hem do+d ; bute he hem forlete . and bete ar his ende
dai ; he sal forlesen eche liht . and blisse and lif . and hauen an
helle eche pine . and +testernesse mid deflen . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.141

crist us +tare wi+d silde gef is wille be . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.142

+De dei +te +te apostle of spec+d is ure rihte bileue . +tat is ure
sowle liht . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.143

+te wapnes of his lihte ben six werkes of brihtnesse . +te hatten +tus
. Temperancia . Modica potio . Strenuitas . Continencia . Per
inuicem oratio . Inuicem dilectio . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.144

+Det foremeste is riht medeme mel . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.145

+te man +te hit me+de+d riht . +te sune+d ale+d gestninge . and idel
wil . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.146

and haue+d riht mel tid . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.147

and nutte+d timeliche metes . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.148

and geme+d his mu+des me+de . and of his wombe mete .
CMTRINIT-MX1,13.149

+Dat oder is emliche drinke . naht for te quenchen his lu+dere wil .
ne his lust . +te miswune haue+d on broht ; ac for to beten his
$+turstes nede . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.150

+De +dridde is +tat man be waker . and liht . and snel . and seli .
and erliche rise . and gernliche seche chireche . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.151

+Dat feor+de is . +tat man +te spuse haue+d . his golliche deden
wi+d-teo swo hit be untime . and +to +te be+d unbispused ; forleten mid
alle . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.152

+Dat fifte is . +tat elch man for o+der bidde ; alse for him seluen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,13.153

+Dat sixte is . +tat elch man luuie o+der al swo alse him seluen .
+teih he swo swi+de ne muge . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.154

Ista sex opera dicuntur et uestes et arma . Vestes ; quia nos ornant
apud deum . et homines . Arma ; quia nos muniunt apud hostes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,13.155

+Dese six werkes of brictnesse . ben cleped lihtes scrud . for +tat
hie sru+de+d and huihted togenes gode . and togenes manne elch +te hie
do+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.156

and ec he ben nemned lichtes wapne . CMTRINIT-MX1,13.157

for elch man +te hes do+d were+d him <P_15> seluen +tarmide wi+d
mankinnes unwine . CMTRINIT-MX1,15.158

+De lauerd sainte poul +te us lare+d +tus . and munege+d us to forleten
+te six werkes of +testernesse . +te bilige to nihte . and to done +te
six dede . +te ich later nemnede +te bilige to brihtnesse . he +tingie
us to +te holie fader of heuene . +tat he geue us mihte and streng+de
to forletene +testernesse . and to folgie brictnesse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,15.159

Qui uiuit et Regnat . CMTRINIT-MX1,15.160

<heading>

IV . {COM:Lambeth_Homily_VII} CREDO . CMTRINIT-MX1,15.162

<$$heading>

Tria sunt hominum saluti necessaria . scilicet fides . baptismus uite
mundicia . De fide aft dominus in euangelio . Qui non crediderit
condempnabitur . Et sapiens ait . Sine fide inpossibile est homini
placere deo . De baptismo autem dicit dominus in euangelio . Nisi quis
renatus fuerit ex aqua et spiritu sancto et cetera . De uite mundicia
dicit dominus per prophetam . Lauamini mundi estote . Et in psalmo .
Declina malo et fac bonum . Et apostolus . Immundicia nec nominetur in
uobis cupientibus igitur consequi salutem . Insinuandum est que sit
fides catholica . et que sit debita baptismo custodia . et que dei
mandatorum obseruantia . i . uite mundicia . Et primo que sit fidei
doctrina in simboli serie contenta . CMTRINIT-MX1,15.164

+Dre +ting ben +tat elch man habben mot . +te wile his cristendom leden
. CMTRINIT-MX1,15.165

+tat on is rihte bileue . CMTRINIT-MX1,15.166

+tat o+der is fulohtninge . +te +dridde +te faire liflode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,15.167

and he n@ @is naht fulliche cristene . +tat is ani wane of +tese +trie
. CMTRINIT-MX1,15.168

Of +te bileue spec+d ure louerd ihesu crist on +te holie godspelle .
+tus que+dende . Qui non crediderit condempnabitur .
CMTRINIT-MX1,15.169

+De man +te ne haue+d rihte bileue on him . he be+d dempd to +tolie
wowe mid deflen on helle . CMTRINIT-MX1,15.170

Of +te fulcninge he spec+d on o+der stede . on +te godspelle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,15.171

and sei+d . Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,15.172

Ne mai noman cume to godes riche . bute he be fulcned .
CMTRINIT-MX1,15.173

<P_17>

Of clene liflade spec+d ysaias +te prophete +tus que+dende . Lauamini
mundi estote . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.175

wasse+d geu CMTRINIT-MX1,17.176

and wunie+d clene . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.177

and daui+d in +te salter boc . A delicto meo munda me domine .
CMTRINIT-MX1,17.178

Clense me louerd of mine synnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.179

Et alibi . Asperges me domine ysopo et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.180

Bispreng me mid edmodnesse louerd CMTRINIT-MX1,17.181

+tanne be ich clene . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.182

Ac for +tat elch man be+d on fulcninge of alle synnen . and ogh to
cunnen his bileue ar he fulcninge underfo . +tarfore ic wile segen ow
gure bileue . and gure bede . and tachen hit ew bi godes fultume .
CMTRINIT-MX1,17.183

+De rihte bileue setten +te twolue apostles on write ; ar hie ferden in
to al middeneard to bodien cristendome . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.184

Ac elch of hem wrot his uers . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.185

and sainte peter he wrot +tat formeste . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.186

and +te salme +te hie alle writen is cleped credo . After +te formeste
word of +te salme . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.187

and ate biginninge of cristendom ; elch man leornede pater noster . and
credo ; ar +tan he fulcninge understoden . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.188

And +to weren manie childre dede fulehtlese and forlorene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,17.189

and +tarfore hit is iset lage bi ure drihtenes wissunge . +tat me sal
children fuluhtnie . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.190

and here godfaderes sullen for hem andswerie bifore +te prest ate
fanstone . and ben here boreges togenes gode ate chireche dure ; and
inboreges ate fanstone . +tat hie sulle cunne here bileue . and here
bede ; +tat is +te pater noster and credo . +tane hie lernie mugen and
ben bileffulle men and rihtwise . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.191

And +tat ne mugen +te godfaderes naht don ; bute hie here bileue cunnen
. and nime to +te children muchele geme . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.192

Ne noman ne agh werne . +tanne me him for nede +tar to bit .
CMTRINIT-MX1,17.193

Alle cunne ower crede +tas@ @+te ich wene . +teih ge alle n@ @uten hwat
hit bique+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.194

Ac luste+d nu and undernime+d hit . and ich wille tachen eu bi godes
fultume . +tat ge sulle witen . and segge ou +te crede word after word
. and +tarmid hwat elch word bitocne+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.195

Credo in deum . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.196

Ic bileue on god . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.197

Patrem omnipotentem . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.198

+tene almihti fader . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.199

Creatorem celi et terre . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.200

Suppende and wealdende of heuene and of eor+d . and of alle safte .
CMTRINIT-MX1,17.201

+Dis word credo man mai understonden on +tre wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.202

Credo deo . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.203

Ich leue gode . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.204

+tat o+der is . Credo deum . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.205

Ich ileue +tat god is . CMTRINIT-MX1,17.206

+tese <P_19> two +ting don alle he+den men . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.207

Ac +te +dridde ne do+d noman bute +te gode cristene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,19.208

Qui credit in deum . +tat is he +te bileue+d in god .
CMTRINIT-MX1,19.209

and +tarto moten fif +ting to bileuen in god . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.210

Scilicet eum dominum omnium recognoscere . super omnia obedire .
CMTRINIT-MX1,19.211

+tat on is cnowen him to louerd ouer alle +ting . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.212

tat o+der is luuien him ouer alle +ting . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.213

+tat +dridde is hauen eie of him ouer alle +ting . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.214

+tat feor+d is wur+den him ouer alle +ting . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.215

tat fifte is herien him ouer alle +ting . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.216

Man +te haue+d on him +tos fif +tinges ; he haue+d on him rihte bileue .
CMTRINIT-MX1,19.217

and gef him be+d oni +tarof wane ; he n@ @is naht bilefful man .
CMTRINIT-MX1,19.218

Nu ich eu habbe opened +tes fif word . Credo in deum patrem
omnipotentem creatorem celi et terre . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.219

Here+d nu +tes o+dre . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.220

Et in ihesum Christum filium eius unicum . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.221

and ich bileue on +te helende crist . his onlepi sune .
CMTRINIT-MX1,19.222

Dominum nostrum . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.223

Vre louerd CMTRINIT-MX1,19.224

he is cleped helende . for +tat he manken alesede of +te dea+dliche
atter . +te +te ealde deuel bleu uppen adam . and on his ofspreng .
swo +tat here fifealde mihte was altegeder attred . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.225

Ac ure louerd ihesu crist . +turh his holie fif wunden shedde his blod
. CMTRINIT-MX1,19.226

and +tat gef mankin to drinken . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.227

and +tarmide ut of hem +tat dea+dliche atter . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.228

and mid his shorte dea+de lesde hem ut of eche dea+de .
CMTRINIT-MX1,19.229

and mid his e+deliche sore redde hem ut of eche sicnesse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,19.230

and gef hem eche hele alle +to +te hit healde willen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,19.231

and +teih alle men ben godes children . for +tat he hem alle shop ; and
ches hem to sunes and to dohtres . na+deles ure helende crist is his
onlepi sune . noht after chesunge ac after strene for +tan he him
strende . alse +te sunne strene+d liht . +tane he tospret into al
+tesse wide worelde . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.232

and is +tarfore cleped +te heuenliche fader sune . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.233

for +te fader is on +te sune on +trie wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.234

+tat on is on westme . for +tat he is muchel and mihti ouer alle +ting
. CMTRINIT-MX1,19.235

+tat o+der is on wlite ; for +tat +te mone and +te sunne wundrie+d of
faire . swo fair is ure louerd ihesu crist . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.236

and +te +tridde is on +tewe ; CMTRINIT-MX1,19.237

for he is ful of alle godnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.238

And +teih ure louerd ihesu crist bie alre manne louerd . na+deles he n@
@is naht alre manne louerd . +teih hie ben alle on his name turned .
CMTRINIT-MX1,19.239

for hie ne heren him naht alle . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.240

nomo ne heren ure louerd ihesu crist bute +te rihtwise . and +te
bileffulle . and +te godfrihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.241

for alle +te unrihtwise men +te grete synnes drigen ; hersumie+d +te
deuel . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.242

and +te hwile here louerd he bie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,19.243

<P_21>

and +tarfore $hie lie+d +tan hie crist louerd clepie+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,21.245

and +te hwile ne helpe+d noht . +tat hie singe+d pater noster ne crede
. CMTRINIT-MX1,21.246

Ure louerd ihesu geue us rihte bileue . and alle +to nede habbe+d to
ure liues ende . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.247

amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.248

Qui conceptus est . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.249

we habbe+d bigunnen to sege ou on englis hwat bitocne+d +te crede .
+tat elch cristeneman oh to cunnen . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.250

and habbe+d seid +tarof tweien uers . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.251

and wile nu +te +tridde . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.252

Ich bileue on +te helende crist . +te +tat holie maiden ure lafdie
seinte marie on hire inno+de understod of +te holie gost . noht of
mannes strene ne on lichamliche luste . ac alswo gie on ower herte
$understonden +te word of mi mu+d +te ich speke to eu .
CMTRINIT-MX1,21.253

alswo +te engel hit seide +to he hire brohte +te blisfule ti+dinge .
+tus que+dende . Ecce concipies et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.254

+tu shalt understonde child on +tine inno+de . and cnowen for
cnauechild and clepen hit helende . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.255

and hit sal ben king on +te endelese kineriche . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.256

+to andswerede ure lafdi sainte marie CMTRINIT-MX1,21.257

and seide . Quomodo fiet istud quoniam uirum non cognosco ?
CMTRINIT-MX1,21.258

whu shal +ta wur+de si+d+den wapman me ne $atrine+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,21.259

and +te engel hire andswerede CMTRINIT-MX1,21.260

and seide . Spiritus sanctus super ueniet in te et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,21.261

+te holie gast wile cumen uppen +te . and godes mihte make +de mid
childe . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.262

and hwanne hit be+d iboren ; men sullen clepen hit godes bern .
CMTRINIT-MX1,21.263

+to andswerede +te lafdie sainte marie CMTRINIT-MX1,21.264

and seide . Ecce ancilla domini fiat michi secundum uerbum tuum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,21.265

Ich am cristes maiden . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.266

alse +tu hauest iseid ; swo mote hit wur+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.267

+tus mildeliche andswerede +te milde quen of heuene and of eor+de . and
of alle safte . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.268

and +tus bicam ure lafdi Sainte Marie mid childe . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.269

+tonked be ure louerd ihesu crist . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.270

+to +de time cam {she_brought_forth_a_son_omitted} swo +tat hire ne oc .
ne ne smeart . ne hire mai+dhod ne was awemned . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.271

Passus sub pontio pilato . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.272

he was pined on pilates andwealde . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.273

Crucifixus Mortuus . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.274

His holie lichame was tospred on +te holie rode , and nailed +tarto his
fet ; and his honden . and mid speres orde opened his swete side . and
his heued heled mid +tornene crune . and on fele wise rewliche tuked .
CMTRINIT-MX1,21.275

and +tus he +trewede for_to +tat ilche time . +tat he dea+d +tolede .
for to beten ure nede ; CMTRINIT-MX1,21.276

he ne hadde him selue nane . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.277

Et sepultus . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.278

And was his holie lichame leid in burieles in +te holie sepulcre . +tat
men sechen giet in ierusalem . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.279

Descendit ad inferos . CMTRINIT-MX1,21.280

and he ferde in to helle CMTRINIT-MX1,21.281

and <P_23> brac helle gaten ; CMTRINIT-MX1,23.282

and bond +te deuel CMTRINIT-MX1,23.283

.i. abstulit ei quam exercu-erat potestatem trahendi ad infernum animas
a corporibus exutas . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.284

formest he binam him alle +te mihte +te he hadde nutted fram +te
biginninge of +te worelde . for_to +te time cam +tat he heregede helle
. and nam ut mid him alle +te him hadden ar wel hersumed .
CMTRINIT-MX1,23.285

Tercia die resurrexit a mortuis . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.286

On +te +tridde dei he aros of dea+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.287

and wunede mid his apostles . for_to +te fowertu+de dai . noht alegate
; ac stund-mele . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.288

Ascendit ad celos . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.289

+to he steah to heuene . swo +tat his apostles and muchel o+der folc
mid eien bihielden hwu he upwende . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.290

Sedet ad dextram dei patris omnipotentis . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.291

and sit on rihthalf +tes almihtie faderes . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.292

Inde uenturus iudicatum uiuos et mortuos . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.293

+Danne he cume+d eft to demen +te quike and +te deade . and to geue +te
gode eche lif and blisse on heuene . and +te iuele ; eche wowe and pine
on helle . bo+de to same +te sowle and +te lichame .
CMTRINIT-MX1,23.294

Credo in spiritum sanctum . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.295

Ich bileue on +te holie gost . +te is mid +te fader . and mid +te sune
on mihti god . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.296

Sanctam ecclesiam catholicam . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.297

and ich leue . +tat chireche is holi godes hus on eor+de . and is
cleped on boc kiriaca .i. dominicalis +tat is on englis louerdlich hus
. and is +terto nemned . for +te heuenliche kinges lichame is to
setnesse +tarinne . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.298

and +tarfore men sullen aure +tider gon . and hem +tar bidden . and
godes word heren . and lernie hwu hie sullen here lif laden on godes
hersumpnesse . and hem swo gaderen on rihte bileue . +tat hie ben on
godes wunienge . tat he ben turned on one lauerd . to one bileue . to
one fulcninge . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.299

Sanctorum communionem CMTRINIT-MX1,23.300

and ich ileue +tat halgan ben on mode . and on rede . and habben
ferrede on alle holinesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.301

Remissionem peccatorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.302

and ich leue +tat +turh so+d scrifte synnes ben forgeuene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,23.303

So+d scrifte understonde+d man . +tanne he his muchele synnes mid alle
forlete+d . and sore bimurne+d . and shewe+d hem his messe preste .
and bete+d hem alse he him wisse+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.304

Carnis resurrectionem . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.305

And ich leue +tat mankin shal a domesdai risen of dea+de . and elch man
heren his dom bi eftemeste erdede . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.306

Et uitam eternam amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.307

and alle men shullen cume to libben echeliche . +te gode on eche blisse
and wele mid ure louerd ihesu crist on heuene . +te uuele on eche wowe
and pine mid +te deuel $on helle . sowle and licam abuten ende .
CMTRINIT-MX1,23.308

<heading>

V . PATER NOSTER . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.310

<$$heading>

Pater noster et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.312

+Du singest +te salm +te me clepe+d crede . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.313

+tu seist +tat on gode bileuest . and dost cnownesse +tat he is +ti
louerd . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.314

ac +tanne +tu singest +te salm +tat is cleped pater noster . After +te
forme word of +te salme ; abugest gode . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.315

and cnewlest togenes him . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.316

and biddest +tat all his wille wur+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.317

and menest to him +tine fele nede . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.318

and biddest +tat he hem alle bete . +tus que+dende . $Pater noster qui
es in celis . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.319

fader ure +tu ert in heuene . +te holie +tremnesse +te shop and biwalt
alle shafte ; CMTRINIT-MX1,23.320

we clepie+d ure fader for two +ting . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.321

on his for +to +te he us shop ; and feide +te lemes to ure licame . and
+te sowle +tarto . +te sene to +te egen . +te hlust to +te earen .
and to elche lime limpliche mihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.322

and swo digeliche hit al dihte ; +tat on elche feinge is hem on_sene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,23.323

and eft he us wile feie ; +tanne we shulen arisen of dea+de .
CMTRINIT-MX1,23.324

and for+ti we clepe+d him fader for +tat he us feide here .
CMTRINIT-MX1,23.325

O+der is +tat he fet alle liuiende +ting . +te bi mete liuien . alle
nutten openliche ; and gres and trowen dieliche . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.326

Ac on of alle nutten +tat is man . he fet on two wise . noht alle ; ac
sume . +Do unrihtwise openliche mid licames bileue ; and +te sowle mid
hire bileue . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.327

and +teih he alle +ting +tus fede ; he n@ @is na+demo nemned heore alre
manne +teih hem alle fede . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.328

ac sunderlepes he is here fader mid wisse . +te on rihte bileue . and
on so+de luue understant his holie fles . and his holie blod .
CMTRINIT-MX1,23.329

+tat ben +te rihtwise . and +te bileafule . and +te godfrihte men ;
+te lade+d her lif alse me hem in chireche lere+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.330

and +to +te swo ne don ; habben to fader +te deuel +te fet hem alle +to
+te him folege+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.331

and on +te forme men ; alle ueide er . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.332

and mid licames luste ; alle unbilefulle men +te +to weren . and get
ben . he fede+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.333

and is +tarfore hore fader . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.334

Sanctificetur nomen tuum . CMTRINIT-MX1,23.335

bledsed be +ti name on us . swo +tat we on alle ure +tanke . +te heien
on alle ure worden . +te herien ; on alle ure deden +te wur+dien . and
ouer alle +ting +te luuien . and swo <P_27> ernien +tat we habben moten
of +tine holie name +te tocne imene . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.336

Adueniat regnum tuum . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.337

Cume +ti rixlinge . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.338

To sume men cume+d ure louerd ihesu crist . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.339

and litle hwile mid hem bileue+d CMTRINIT-MX1,27.340

and si+d+den him forlete+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.341

Swilche ben alle +to +te here+d godes word on lor spelle . and +tenchen
+tat hie wille+d here synnes leten . and ne don . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.342

To sume men cume+d ure louerd ihesu crist . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.343

and bileue+d mid him . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.344

and na+demo ne rixle+d noht on him . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.345

Swilche ben alle +to +te hauen here synnes forleten . and bi prestes
wissinge hem gernliche bete+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.346

To sume men he cume+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.347

and biginne+d on him to rixle on +tis e+deliche liue .
CMTRINIT-MX1,27.348

and wille fulliche rixle on him eft on +te eche liue .
CMTRINIT-MX1,27.349

ac swilche ben arue+d finde . nu abuuen eor+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.350

and na+deles manie be+d get . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.351

+to ben +te godfrihte +te clene ben of synnes . and lete+d unwur+d of
alle woreld wunne . and luue+d rihtliche alle liuiende men . and ben
hersume alle godes hese . and is +tis woreld lo+d . and habbe+d
longinge to heuene . and ne gierne+d to none +tinge ; bute after godes
wille . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.352

Fiat uoluntas tua sicut in celo et in terra . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.353

Wur+de +ti wil on eor+de swo hit is on heuene . swo +tat me +te quemen
of here liflode on eor+de . alse don +te engles on heuene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,27.354

Panem nostrum cotidianum da nobis hodie . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.355

Gif us to dai ure daihwamliche bred . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.356

Al hit is cleped bred ; +tat is mannes bileue ; CMTRINIT-MX1,27.357

ac na+deles bred bitocne+d +tre bileues . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.358

On is +te mete . +te +te lichame bruke+d and biliue+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,27.359

+Dat o+der is godes word . +tat is +te sowle fode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,27.360

+te +tridde is for mete +tat ilch man agh mid him to leden . +tan he
sal of +tesse liue faren . +tat is cristes holie licame . +te giue+d
alle men eche lif . and blisse in heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.361

and gief we wise ben ; we mugen mid one worde +tese +trie +ting bidden .
and ben bene_ti+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.362

Et dimitte nobis debita nostra . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.363

And forgiue us ure gultes +te we hauen don . and ofte on idel +tonke .
on unnet speche . on iuele dede . and muchele mo si+de +tanne we segen
mugen . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.364

Sicut et nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.365

And swo forgiue us ure gultes . swo we don hem here +te us agult
habbe+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.366

Ne mai no man +tese word seggen +tanne he godes milce bisec+d . gief he
haue+d on his heorte onde . o+der ni+d . o+der hatiunge to his
emcristene . +tat he him seluen fram gode ne dele+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,27.367

Ac bidde+d +tat godes wra+d+de cume uppen his ogen heued .
CMTRINIT-MX1,27.368

Et ne nos inducas in temptationem . CMTRINIT-MX1,27.369

<P_29>

Louerd shild us fram elche pine of helle . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.371

Elch pine is fremed on +tre_fold wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.372

On is +te defles tuihting and mislore , CMTRINIT-MX1,29.373

+tat o+der is mannes licunge . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.374

+te +tridde is mannes wille . +tane he wile don . o+der que+den hwat
him +tanne lica+d after defles lore . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.375

+te egginge and +te likinge him bringe+d in to helle pine .
CMTRINIT-MX1,29.376

+Dre +ting be+d +tat mankin heuie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.377

On is +te selue lust . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.378

o+der is iuel lehtres . +de +tridde flesliche lustes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,29.379

and +tese two +te ben leihter and lust ; uulste+d +te +tridde +tat is
+te flesliche lust . +te mankinne forlere+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.380

and al hit is bi +te deuel . +tat men +tus forlerede . Alse hit bi +te
wimman and bi sheawere . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.381

hie bihalt hire sheawere . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.382

and cume+d hire shadewe +taronne . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.383

+te shadewe hire tache+d . hwu hie mai hire seluen wenlukest makien .
CMTRINIT-MX1,29.384

for hie wule liken alle +te lechures +te on hire loke+d . and swo
dragen hem to hire . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.385

Al swo cume+d +te deuel in to +te mannes herte +tan he wile healde
sunderrune wi+d him . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.386

and +tus que+d . +Du ert wel don man . and +tarto wur+dlich .
CMTRINIT-MX1,29.387

Gef +tu takest to huse +tu best men +te unwur+dure CMTRINIT-MX1,29.388

ac gef +tu werest elche dai faire clo+des . and best rum-handed to
glewmen and to hores . +tu shalt ben lef and wur+d . and liken alle
men . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.389

To +te man +tat is ni+dful . he speke+d on his herte
CMTRINIT-MX1,29.390

and +tus que+d . Ful mai +te +tinke +tat forcu+der haue+d faire weden .
and +tu unwreste . and he wereldes richeise and +tu ware betre wur+de .
CMTRINIT-MX1,29.391

Wi+d +te hatiende man he spec+d on his herte . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.392

Nu shalt <em> +tu hatien <$$em> +to +te iuel hauen don . and biremen
him mid euel wordes . and maken him to forlesen his aihte .
CMTRINIT-MX1,29.393

vnwreste +tu best gef +tu wreche ne secst . hwanne +tu time siest .
gief mihte +te $ne atiere+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.394

To +te eiht-gradi men he rune+d on his herte CMTRINIT-MX1,29.395

and +tus que+d . Gef +tu best aihteles +tu best unwur+d . and lo+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,29.396

ac gef +tu hauest woreld wele . +tu miht +tarof wur+dliche fare .
CMTRINIT-MX1,29.397

and swo loken +te +tat +tu best lef and wur+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.398

and miht for ure drihtenes luue fele almes dele . +teih +tu hit mid
unrihte bigete . o+der on untime . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.399

Gif +tarof for godes luue . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.400

+tanne be+d +te synne forgiuen . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.401

gef +ti prest n@ @is clene man . +te shal +tine to+dinge understonden .
del hit men +te muge bidde for +de . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.402

To +te narewe_herted man on his +tonke he sei+d . witte wel hwat +tu
hauest . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.403

walte hwat +te tide . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.404

and cune sume me+de +tenne +tu almesse makest . CMTRINIT-MX1,29.405

+Du hauest e+deliche bi aihte to helpen +tine kenne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,29.406

wel wur+d wunne be of wur+dshipe CMTRINIT-MX1,29.407

swo <P_31> hit be . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.408

On +te drunken men he rune+d mid his herte CMTRINIT-MX1,31.409

and sei+d . Esteliche eten . and drinken make+d +te man fair . and
wurliche . and on manie mihte CMTRINIT-MX1,31.410

+tat +tu etest and drinkest and werest . +tat +tu hauest .
CMTRINIT-MX1,31.411

and gef +tu ani +ting spelest and leuest . +tat +tu $forlest .
CMTRINIT-MX1,31.412

On +te gole men he gel+d wi+d his herte . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.413

and +tus que+d . Gef +te is lef +tin hele . heald +tin cunde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,31.414

and +tine licames lust kel ilome . and naht on feawe ac on fele wise .
CMTRINIT-MX1,31.415

+te wile falle wel to echen +tis woreld . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.416

Gef +tu strene wult haue ; ne haue +tu naht +tin ogen wif . ac o+der
mannes imene . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.417

+teih lerdemen segen +tat hit be muchel sunne +tat man his licames lust
drige . ofte +teih hie bispused ben . and don hit for strene . here
liflode ligne+d hem seluen . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.418

for ne do+d hit none swo ofte se +te hodede . +te n@ @aue+d him selue
naht on ac fele imene . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.419

and gef he +tat hielde synne . he wolde +te dede wi+dtien .
CMTRINIT-MX1,31.420

+Dus deuel egge+d +alch man on his herte . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.421

and maca+d +tat he wule do +tat he him to teihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.422

Set libera nos a malo . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.423

Ac les us louerd of his egginge . and of alle iuele .
CMTRINIT-MX1,31.424

amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.425

swo hit wur+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.426

<heading>

VI . IN DIE NATALIS DOMINI . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.428

<$$heading>

Natus est nobis hodie saluator qui est Christus in ciuitate daui+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,31.430

Gode ti+dinge and murie to heren . us telle+d +te louerd $seinte lucas
; on +te holie godspelle . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.431

and sei+d +tat on holie erndrake hem brohte fram heuene . to +te londe
of ierusalem . and tealde +te herdes +te wakeden ouer here oref .
biside +te burch belleem . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.432

luste+d nu CMTRINIT-MX1,31.433

and undernime+d hwu he se ti+dinge $tealde word after word .
CMTRINIT-MX1,31.434

On +te niht and on +te time . +te ure lafdi seinte marie kennede of
holie lichame ure louerd ihesu crist . were herdes wakiende bi_side +te
buregh and wittende here oref . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.435

+Do cam on angel of heuene to hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.436

and stod bisides hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.437

and godes brihtnesse bilihte hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.438

and hie waren swi+de offurihte . and ofdredde . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.439

Et ait angelus eis . Nolite timere . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.440

and +te engel qua+d to hem ne be ge naht ofdredde . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.441

Ecce enim euangelizo uobis et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,31.442

<P_33>

Ich ew bringe ti+dinge +te shule ben a folke to muchele blisse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,33.444

Ne wot no man hwat blisse is ; +te naure wowe ne bod .
CMTRINIT-MX1,33.445

Ac swo +te wowe +tinke+d biter . +te hwile +te he leste+d . swo
+tinc+d wele +te swettere +tan hit cume+d +tarafter .
CMTRINIT-MX1,33.446

Al mankin was wunende on muchele wowe . sum on +tisse worelde . and
sum on helle pine . forte +tat ilke time ; +tat ure louerd ihesu crist
hem +tarof aredde . and turnede swo here wowe to wele . and here sor
to muchele blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.447

and of +tesse blisse spec+d +te engel . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.448

and sewe+d a whilche wise . and +turegh hwam +tis blisse cumen sholde .
+tus que+dende . Natus est nobis hodie et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.449

Vs is boren to dai helende . +tat is crist+te louerd on daui+des burehg
. CMTRINIT-MX1,33.450

Hoc autem dixit . quia societas hominum erat ad impletura numerum
angelorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.451

+Dos word sede +te angel for +tat man sholde fuluullen englene sete .
+te was er iwaned ; +to +te lucifer and his ferreden fellen ut +tarof .
and naht for englen unhele +te habbe+d eche hele . ac for mannen unhele
. +te ben alle and hauen ben alle si+den unlimpe cam uppen ure forme
fader adam . alse ure drihten sei+d on +te holie godspelle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,33.452

Homo quidam descendebat ab ierusalem in ierico et incidit in latrones .
et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.453

Ure louerd $ihesu crist sei+d . +tat a man ferde fram iherusalem into
ierico . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.454

and bicam uppe +teues . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.455

and hie him bireueden alle hise riche weden . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.456

and wundeden him swi+de sore . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.457

and forleten him unne+de liues . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.458

+Tis is seid bi adam . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.459

Qui descendit a beatitudine c+oli . in defectus huius mundi .
CMTRINIT-MX1,33.460

+Dat was adam +te ferde ut fram +te fulle edinesse of paradis . in to
+tesse wrecheliche hateringe of +tisse worelde . and ledde after him
neih +tan al his ofspreng . Et incidit in latrones and bicam uppen
utlagen . +tat waren deflen . Qui despoliauerunt eum gratia
immortalitatis innocencia . +De bireueden him alle his riche weden .
+tat waren unerned giue . and unde+dlicnesse . and lo+dlesnesse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,33.461

Mid +tese +tre weden ure louerd ihesu crist him hadde warned togenes
+tre fon . Scilicet peccatum . dolorem . mortem . togenes synne .
and sor . and dea+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.462

Et plagis impositis abiecerunt . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.463

and si+den hie hadden bireued him +tus ; swo hie forwundeden him welneih
to dea+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,33.464

Inferentes eis plagas .i. humanorum defectuum causas .
CMTRINIT-MX1,33.465

+te wundes +tat hie on him makeden ; ben +te manifeald synnes . +te hie
on him brohten . +to +te hie <P_35> openeden $his earen to luste +te
defles lore . and his eien to bihealden +te forbodene appel . and hef
his honde hit to nimen . and mid +te nose +tarto te smullen . and mid
his mu+d +tarof et . CMTRINIT-MX1,35.466

and +turh +tes fifealde gultes . forleas +te fiffeald mihten +te god
him gef +to +te he him shop . swo +tat he ne +turte naure +tolen hunger
. ne +turst . ne woninge . ne chele . ne werinesse . ne elde . ne
unhel+de . ne de+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,35.467

ac for +tat he dide +tise synnes god wrac CMTRINIT-MX1,35.468

and binom him +tese mihtes alle : CMTRINIT-MX1,35.469

and he bicom unmihti . and wreche . and unhol . CMTRINIT-MX1,35.470

and his ofspring al . +trowude on synne . and on unmihte and on wowe
CMTRINIT-MX1,35.471

and gemerliche pineden . +te wile +te hie here weren ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,35.472

and wuneden . hwile mid hunger . hwile mid +turste . hwile mid chele
. hwile mid hete . hwile mid sorinesse . hwile mid werinesse . and
ofte mid wurmene icheu . and mid elde . mid unhel+de . mid o+dre wowe
inohg . and et@ @tan ende mid de+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,35.473

and on swiche unhel+de wisseden georne efter helende .
CMTRINIT-MX1,35.474

and he com . +tanked wur+de him ; to helen hem of heore synwunden .
and to winden hem on +ta wurhliche weden +te +te dieuel binom ure forme
fader adam . +tat wes . Sstola inmortalitatis . +tat is +te blisse of
eche liue . and to giuende +te mihtes +te adam forgremede us alle .
Scilicet gaudium plenum . +tat is +te uulle of endelese blisse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,35.475

And alse he sende erendrake biforen him to cu+den +tat he cumen wolde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,35.476

and +tat were patriarkes and prophetes . and engles .
CMTRINIT-MX1,35.477

ealse he sende erendrake +to he com . CMTRINIT-MX1,35.478

and +tat wes +te engel +te ich er embe spec . +te cudde +te herdes +te
biwakeden here oref ; bisides +te burehg bethleem +tat +te helende was
+terinne iboren . CMTRINIT-MX1,35.479

Ne was +te engel isend ne to kinge . ne to eorle . ne to barun . ne
to none hege ; ne oregele men on +te wurelde wi+d to spekende . ac to
loge ; and e+deliche men alse heordes bu+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,35.480

ac for+ti ich wile seggen giu nime+d geme +terto . and understonde+d it
hwat +to heordes bitocne+d . and wat +te $niht wecches . and hwat +tat
oref and alre erest hwat +te wilde deor +te +tis oref wane+d . and wile
bicachen it . and wile forstelen . and wile mid $streng+de binimen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,35.481

Of +tis deor spec+d seinte peter +tus que+tende . ADuersarius uester
diabolus tamquam leo rugiens circuit querens quem deuoret .
CMTRINIT-MX1,35.482

Vre fo +tat is +te deuel wuandre+d abuten us CMTRINIT-MX1,35.483

he te+d for+d geres hwile after fox . hwile after wulue . hwile <P_37>
after leun . hwile after o+dre . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.484

and on ech of hise deden is iefned to +te deore wuas geres he for+dteo+d
. CMTRINIT-MX1,37.485

GReges sunt . oues et boues . capre et porci . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.486

+Det oref +te +tis deor wane+d be+d shep and re+deren and Get . and
swin ; CMTRINIT-MX1,37.487

and bitocne+d men . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.488

Sume men lede+d clene liflode . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.489

and ne do+d ne ne que+de+d none manne lo+d CMTRINIT-MX1,37.490

ac luuige+d god . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.491

and go+d eche dai to chirche alse shep to uolde . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.492

and do+d gladliche here rihte to chirche and elmesse wreche men .
CMTRINIT-MX1,37.493

and be+d cleped shepisse men . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.494

Sume men ne willen non unriht ; CMTRINIT-MX1,37.495

ac winned wi+d +te eor+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.496

and tiliget michel to o+dre mann+as bihof+te . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.497

and +tese men be+d icleped ru+derihsse . men CMTRINIT-MX1,37.498

of +tese shepishse ; and ru+derishse men . spec+d +te prophete +tus
que+tinde . Subiecisti sub pedibus eius . oues et boues . +tis to
seggen +te shepisse and +te netisse men be+d under cristes +tralshipe .
CMTRINIT-MX1,37.499

Sume men leden here $lif alse get ; o+ter buckes CMTRINIT-MX1,37.500

Hoc animal pascit in altum et est libidinosum . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.501

+Dis oref is swi+de egerne . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.502

and feche+d his leswe . hwile uppen trewes . and hwile uppen cliues .
and hwile in +te dales . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.503

and stinc+d fule for his golnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.504

Swo ben alle oregel men . +te telle+d hem seluen heige . and drie+d
hordom . and of +te hore fule stinke+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.505

and of swilche men sei+d ure louerd ihesu crist . Statuet quidem hedos
a sinistris . et mittet in ignem eternum . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.506

A domes dai sulle buckes . and +te get . +to ben +te wapmen and +te
wimmen +te hordom drien . stonden an ure louerd ihesu crist@ @es lift
hond . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.507

and hem sal senden into +tat eche fur on helle mid alle deflen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,37.508

Sume men lade+d here lif on etinge and on drinkinge alse swin . +te
uulie+d and wrote+d and sneuie+d aure fule . and ful +ting muchel
bruke+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.509

and +tan hie fulle be+d . hie seche+d to +te fule floddri .
CMTRINIT-MX1,37.510

and +taron walewe+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.511

Swo do+d +te fule man +te folege+d his wombes wil . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.512

and of unrihte bigete ofte fille+d . +tane he bere+d abuten here
senibhakel . and +te est metes and drinkes ut spewe+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,37.513

and +tan he fulle ben . bisulie+d hem on +te fule floddri of
drunkennesse . and of hordom . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.514

and +tarfore ben icleped swinisse men . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.515

and on hem wune+d +te deuel . bi ure louerd ihesu crist@ @es leue alse
+te holie godspel sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.516

Dominus eiecit legiones demonum de homine quodam et rogauerunt demones .
Mitte nos in gregem porcorum . Et ingressi precipitauerunt porcos in
mare . CMTRINIT-MX1,37.517

+De holie godspel sei+d +tat ure drihten <P_39> drof fele deules
togedere ut of a man +te was of his wit . and him swuo helde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,39.518

and +te deules beden ure louerd ihesu crist +tat he hem sende into floc
of swin CMTRINIT-MX1,39.519

and he swo dide . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.520

and +te swin urnen alse deulen hem driuen ; into +te s+a .
CMTRINIT-MX1,39.521

and druncnede hem seluen . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.522

Swa giued ure drihten leue +te deule to ben on +te swinisshe man +te ihc
er of spec and on hem to wuniende and hem to drenchende . and of here
wit to bringinde . and to driuen fram unrihte to o+ter . fram
e+deliche laste to michele . fram synne to synne fram iuele to iuele
CMTRINIT-MX1,39.523

and et@ @tan ende hem drenche+d on shameliche de+de CMTRINIT-MX1,39.524

and mid hem to helle lede+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.525

+Dese fower mannisshe +te ich er inemd habbe . be+d +tat erf +te +to
herdes ouer wuakeden . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.526

and +te selue herdes be+d +te lor+tewes of holi chiriche . +te lesewe+d
here orf alse +te boc sei+d IN pascuis uberimis pascunt ea . on swete
leswe . +to bin +te gode word of holi boc +te be+d +te saules lustliche
bileue . alse estliche etingge and dringkinge is te lichames .
CMTRINIT-MX1,39.527

INers pastor aut sedet in ignorancia aut accubitat in negligencia aut
iacet in uoluntate . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.528

+De unwreste herde sit on unwisdomnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.529

for he ne can is orf gemen . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.530

o+der hlone+d and slepe+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.531

and synege+d on gemeleste alse he +tat is recheles and non eige ne stand
of louerde . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.532

o+der li+d on li+tere wille . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.533

and feste slepe+d on his synne . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.534

+tanne cume+d +te wilde deor +te ich er seide CMTRINIT-MX1,39.535

and +tat orf wane+d CMTRINIT-MX1,39.536

Set boni pastores uigilant . et noctis uigilias custodiunt supra greges
suos et pro illis se se hostibus opponunt . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.537

Ac +te gode herdes wakie+d on faire liflode ouer here orf ; +te +tei
leswue+d on halie larspelle . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.538

and wisse+d hem , to understanden wat is uuel and wat is god .
CMTRINIT-MX1,39.539

and munege+d hem ofte un+dewes to forberen . and gode +teawes to folgen
. CMTRINIT-MX1,39.540

Vita presens caliginosa est tenebris peccatorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.541

al +tis lif +te we on liuen is to nihte iefned for +tat it is swa
+tester of ure ateliche synnes CMTRINIT-MX1,39.542

Huius noctis sunt iiii=or= uigilie SEro .i. puericia . MEdia nox
adolescencia . GAlli cantus uirilis etas . MAne senium .
CMTRINIT-MX1,39.543

on +tis niht be+d fowuer niht wecches . Biforen euen +te bilimpe+d to
children . Mid-niht +de bilimpe+d to frumberdligges . hanecrau +te
bilimpe+d +towuene men . morgewile to alde men . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.544

+Dese herdes +te be+d lor+tewes . alse bisshupes . and prestes wakie+d
biforen euen ; CMTRINIT-MX1,39.545

+tanne +te childre wuel +tewuen . CMTRINIT-MX1,39.546

On midniht he wakeged +tanne <P_41> he frumberdlinges binime+d un+deawes
and gode teche+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.547

to hanecrau he wakege+d +tanne he +to ful +togene turne+d to godes
bihou+te . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.548

In morgewile he wakege+d +tanne he halde men turne+d to ure louerdes
cristes blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.549

+Dus agen alle gode herdes to wakegen gostliche . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.550

for +tus wakeden +to herdes +te ich er of spec . +to +te hem +te
ti+dinge com . +tat ure louerd ihesu crist was boren . QVi est uerus
samaritanus scilicet custos hominum . +tat is alre herdene herde . and
alre lechene leche . +te com to helen +te wundes . +te +te deuel hadde
on mancun broht . alse ge er herden . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.551

Alligauit uulnera infundens uinum et oleum : CMTRINIT-MX1,41.552

Alle synfulle men +te heued-synnes don habbe+d . and n@ @elle+d +terof
no shrift nimen ; he bihat hem eche fur on helle bete hie forleten beten
and milce bidden . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.553

Alle +to +te here synnen forlete+d and bete+d he hele+d heRe
{COM:sic_in_edition} synwunden mid fulcnege . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.554

and gife+d us his holi fleis to daiwamliche bred and his holi blot to
drunche . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.555

and bit us +tat we shule +tis notien on +tis longe wowe and on +tis
wreche worelde . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.556

and bihat us to mede eche hele on +te helendes worelde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,41.557

QUod qui promisit dignetur reddere nobis . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.558

AMEN : CMTRINIT-MX1,41.559

<heading>

VII . <em> IN EPIPHANIA DOMINI . <$$em> CMTRINIT-MX1,41.561

<$$heading>

Reges tharsis et insule munera offerent . Reges arabum et saba dona
adducent . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.563

Mid mede man mai ouer water faren And mid weldede of giue ; frend
wuerche . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.564

and mid bicumeliche loke ; man him mai cu+dleche wid kinge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,41.565

Swo +te wise +te be+d seli . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.566

and +te unwise ne wile ; CMTRINIT-MX1,41.567

for he is unseli . CMTRINIT-MX1,41.568

+De unwise man . and forwened child ; habbe+d bo+de on lage for +tat
hie habben wille+d bo+de here wil ; +teh it bi unwrast .
CMTRINIT-MX1,41.569

and be+d +terefore unwur+de eche manne CMTRINIT-MX1,41.570

+te wise man and +tat wel-+teaud child . habbe+d bo+de on lage . for
+tan ei+der lete+d his agen wille . and folge+d his lar+dewes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,41.571

Swo we age+d to don ure lichames wille to forleten . and folgen ure
helendes lore . and his faire forbisne bi ure mihte .
CMTRINIT-MX1,41.572

<P_43>

Legitur quod dominus aliquando sub mercede nautica transfretauit
CMTRINIT-MX1,43.574

We finde+d on +te holie boc . +tat ure helende +tat is alre ; wateres
herde . he ferde sumwile mid mede ouere water . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.575

Swo bihoued us +tat we don . +te be+d on +tis shipe ; +tat is holi
chirche . In +tis watere +tat ich of speke ; +tat is +tis wreche
wuereld . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.576

and is mid storme faste bistonden . +to be+d ure fule synnes . and
fele odre wosi+des . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.577

PRoferamus ergo ei de cordis nostri thesauro fidei sensum . et
sacrificacio laudis honorificemus eum . ut sine periculo uehet nos
trans seculi pontum . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.578

Vnderstonde we on ure heorte his holie wordes . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.579

and for+te we him ure rihte bileue . and luue ; for gersum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,43.580

and herien him ; CMTRINIT-MX1,43.581

and hegen on alle ure mihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.582

and cunnen gif he wile setten us ouer +tat michele water ; hole and
sunde . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.583

and seien mid +te salmwrihte . NOn me demergat tempestas a. nec. o.
et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.584

louerd ne +taue +tu +tat storm me duue . ne +tat +te deuel me swelge .
ne +tat +te pit tune ouer me his mu+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.585

Woreldes richeise weche+d orgel on mannes heorte . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.586

and deu+d him on helle ; alse storm do+d +tat ship in +te watere .
CMTRINIT-MX1,43.587

Wanrede weche+d on mannes heorte ortruwe +te deu+d him on helle alse
storm do+d man on watere . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.588

wi+d +tese tweien stormes wolde +te wise ben borgen ; +te sei+d +tus .
Diuicias et paupertates ne dederis michi sed tantum uictui necessaria .
CMTRINIT-MX1,43.589

louerd ne gif +tu me no+ter ne woreld winne ne meseise ac mi bare bileue
. CMTRINIT-MX1,43.590

+tat deuel forswuelge+d +te man . hwanne he falle+d on fule synnes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,43.591

+te pit tine+d his mu+d ouer +te man ; +te li+d on fule synnen +te him
wel like+d and ne wile hem forleten . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.592

crist shilde us alle +ter wi+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.593

and gif ure ani is +tus forswolgen . and +tus penned . clupe we to ure
louerd ihesu crist +tus seggende DE profundis clamavi ad $te domine
domine exaudi uocem meam . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.594

On diepe wosi+des ich clupe to +te hlouerd . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.595

hlouerd her mine stefne . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.596

do we ec mid ure wel dede +tingen us wi+d ure helende . was fo we be+d
+tanne we togenes his hese flite+d . and +tis wreche weorld folgi+d .
alse +te boc sei+d CMTRINIT-MX1,43.597

AMicus mundi constituitur inimicus dei . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.598

Ech +tat is weorldes frend is ure drihtenes fo . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.599

and halt flit wi+d him ; alle +te wile +te he +te weorld folge+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,43.600

for ure gult god man bicom CMTRINIT-MX1,43.601

and Ure eldre waiteden him to dea+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,43.602

o+der hadde +te gult ; CMTRINIT-MX1,43.603

and ure hlouerd <P_45> ihesu crist hit acorede . alse him self sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,45.604

QVe non rapui exsoluebam . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.605

Ich geald +tat ich noht ne nam . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.606

and swo he dude CMTRINIT-MX1,45.607

$+toncked wur+de him . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.608

+turh mannes gemeleste and +turh mannes recheleste and +turh mannes
unwraste wil and naht bi his agene wille +te dea+d him wes iwealde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,45.609

And +tus man makede him sulfen fo +ter he $frendshipe sholde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,45.610

ac ure hlouerd ihesu crist is swo mild_heorted . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.611

heged and wur+ded bie he . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.612

for wanne +te man forlete+d his synnen . and bete+d . and milce
bidde+d ; +tanne is here foshipe turnd al to frendshipe
CMTRINIT-MX1,45.613

Eftsone we +te be+d uncu+de +te heuenliche kinge . for +tat ure liflode
him swi+de mislike+d . alse ne wile noht cnowe bute +tat $we {TEXT:+te}
him be+d queme . wile we ne cu+dleche+d us wid him mid bicumeliche loke
. and folged bi ure mihte +te faire forbisne of +te +tre kinges +te
comen of estriche . and cu+dlecheden hem wi+d him ; mid +trefeld loc .
Avro . Thure . Mirra . +tat is gold . and recheles . and mirre .
CMTRINIT-MX1,45.614

Tres reges significant .iij=es=. ordines in $ecclesia scilicet Uirginum
. Coniugatorum . Continentium . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.615

+Do +tre kinges bitocne+d +tre hodes of bilefulle men .
CMTRINIT-MX1,45.616

on is meidhod . +tat o+der spushod . +te +tridde widewehod .
CMTRINIT-MX1,45.617

elch man +te lede+d is lif rihtliche on an of +tese +tre hodes he is
cleped king . for +tat he kenne+d eure to rihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.618

and for+ti him bicume+d +tat he offri +te heuenliche kinge . +te +tre
loc +te ich er nemde . +tat is gold . and recheles . and mirre .
CMTRINIT-MX1,45.619

Avrum in tributum regi . Thus in sacrificium deo . Mirram in
sepulturam homini . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.620

Gold bicume+d to kinge . Recheles to gode . mirre to dea+dliche men .
CMTRINIT-MX1,45.621

Avrum significat orationis cordis mundiciam propter sui puritatem .
Thus significat orationis deuocionem propter sui redolenciam . Mirra
carnis affliccionem propter sui amaritudinem . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.622

Gold for is clennesse bitocne+d clene +tonc . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.623

Rechelis for his swetnesse bitocne+d inwardliche bede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,45.624

Mirre for ure biternesse bitocne+d +te lichames pine . +tat man his
synne mide bete+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.625

Wille we mid +tese +tre lokes cu+dlechen us wi+d alre kingene king .
and mid swiche weldede cu+d+den us wi+d him . and giuen to mede wi+d
+tan +te he us lede of +tis water . +tat is +tis weorld wowe . and to
eche blisse lede . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.626

Qui viuit et regnat deus per omnia secula seculorum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,45.627

AMEN . CMTRINIT-MX1,45.628

<P_47>

<heading>

VIII . <em> IN PURIFICATIONE S. MARIE . <$$em> CMTRINIT-MX1,47.631

<$$heading>

Optulerunt pro eo domino par turturum aut duos pullos columbarum . et
cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.633

To dai man mai iheren he +te wile wich +teau wes on +te olde lage mid
wimmen on +tre +tinges . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.634

+tat on is childbed . and +tat o+der chirchgang . and +te +tridde +te
offring . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.635

of childbed spec+d +te halie boc +tus que+dinde . MVlier que peperit
masculum octava die circumcidit eum . et in tricesima secunda die
deferet eum ad templum . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.636

+Danne wimman hadde cnaue child . on +te ehte+de dai efter his bur+te ;
dide +te lage +tat wes of his hlichame . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.637

and after +tan ; on +te two and +trittu+de dai ; gede to chirche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,47.638

+tat was +te fowerti+de dai ; after +tes childes burde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,47.639

and +tat dai hie ne com nauwer ute . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.640

ne no+ding ne $handlede bute +tane mete +tat hie hire self et . for
+tat men telden it ful al +tat hie handlede ; forte +tat hie gede to
chirche . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.641

+tanne hie to chirche gede to +te temple in ierusalem hire ferede was
bifunden alse hie frend hedde CMTRINIT-MX1,47.642

and brohte +tat child mid hire in to +te temple . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.643

and offredde loc for him ; alse hie aisie wes . gif hie was riche
wimman ; a lomb . gif hie was bitwene two ; two turtle briddes . gif
hie was poure two duue briddes . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.644

Swich +teu wes bi +tan dagen . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.645

and +tis +teu folgede +te heuenliche quen ure lafdi . Seinte Marie .
on childbedde . and on offringe and on chirche gonge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,47.646

and we ogen ec to folgen hire faire forbisne CMTRINIT-MX1,47.647

and alse hie bar hire holie cunebern on heorte gostliche and on honde
lichamliche . alse we ogen to heren ure hlouerd ihesu crist on ure
heorte . fide et dilecclone . +Durh rihte bileue and so+te luue to
gode and to manne . and on ure honde beren candele berninde . taper
o+der candele . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.648

ei+der bitocne+d +tis +teau . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.649

IN Christo enim corpus et anima et diuinitas . et in candela cera
exterius . luminulum interius . $Ignis in arnbobus .
CMTRINIT-MX1,47.650

On ure helendes lichame wi+duten sene . +te holie saule wi+dinne unsene
. and te michele wisdom on ei+der . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.651

Alse wex on +te candele sene . +te wueke wi+dinnen unsene . and +te
fur on bo+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,47.652

and for+ti ech cristene oh to habben on honden <P_49> to-dai in chirche
; lege bernende . alse ure lefdi Seinte Marie hadde ; and hire holie
fereden . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.653

+tis was +te lage bi holde dagen . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.654

and +tes loc offrede ure lafdi seinte marie CMTRINIT-MX1,49.655

and +tre loc offrede weren ure drihten CMTRINIT-MX1,49.656

+tat is to understonden to eureche manne wet ech bitocne+d
CMTRINIT-MX1,49.657

+tat on is lomb CMTRINIT-MX1,49.658

+tat o+der is turtle CMTRINIT-MX1,49.659

+tat +tridde is duue CMTRINIT-MX1,49.660

Vte we ure ech $fonden himself to offren +tat on ; of +tese +tre lokes .
and wat it bitocne+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.661

Agnus quod est animal mansuetum et significat innocenciam . que nescit
cordis . nec oris . nec operis maliciam . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.662

lomb is drih +ting and milde . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.663

and bitocne+d lo+dlesnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.664

lo+dles is +te man +te ne do+d ne ne qua+d . ne +tenc+d no +ting +tat
he +turue ben +te lo+tere ne +te unwur+dere ne gode ne manne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,49.665

et hec oblacio perfectorum est . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.666

Ac +tis loc ne haue+d non to offren . bute +tese lif_holie men of
religiun . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.667

and for +tis loc is +tus arue+d winne . nime we +te turtles bitocninge
+tat is e+dwinne . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.668

Tvrtur significat castitatem . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.669

Turtle ne wile habbe no make bute on . and after +tat non .
CMTRINIT-MX1,49.670

and for+ti it bitocne+d +te clenesse . +te is bideled of +te hore ;
+tat is cleped hordom . +tat is alre horene hore . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.671

and ech man +tat is ful +teroffe wapman o+der wimman is hore ; forte hie
it for-leten and beten CMTRINIT-MX1,49.672

Castitas autem distinguitur in uirginalem . coniugalem . vidualem .
CMTRINIT-MX1,49.673

Alle +to mugen offre clennesse +te libbe+d clenliche on maiden-hode .
o+der on spus-hod . o+der on widewe-hod . and non o+der .
CMTRINIT-MX1,49.674

and ech man +te ne haue+d noht redi . lombbes lo+dlesnesse . ne
turtles clennesse . habbe we hurend hure mildshipe of duue . alse ure
drihten bit on +te godspelle and sei+d . Estote simplices sicut columbe
. CMTRINIT-MX1,49.675

bu+d admode alse duue CMTRINIT-MX1,49.676

QVe nullum ore . uel ungue ledit . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.677

duue ne harme+d none fugele ne mid bile ne mid fote .
CMTRINIT-MX1,49.678

and fede+d briddes +teh hie ne ben noht hire . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.679

and +dus ki+d +tat hie is admod and unbaleful . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.680

and gif we ne mugen for+den non of +tese +tre ; bidde we +tenne +te
heuenliche quen +tat hie us +tinge to hire holie kinebern . +tat he us
giue +te bitocninge . +tat is imene turtlen and duues . +tat is
bireusinge ; of ure fule sinnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.681

Utraque enim auis habet gemitum pro cantu . quo significatur meror
compunctionis . CMTRINIT-MX1,49.682

Ei+der turtles and duues habbet sorinesse for song .
CMTRINIT-MX1,49.683

vte we folgen +tat here song bitocne+d . and habben on ure heorte
sorinesse . and reu+de of ure synnes . and +ter mide dihten ure loc
<P_51> +te we on honde bere+d . +tat we mid ure loke ben gode to_queme
. CMTRINIT-MX1,51.684

Quod ipse prestare dignetur qui viuit et Regnat per omnia secula
seculorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.685

<heading>

IX . <em> IN SEPTUAGESIMA . <$$em> CMTRINIT-MX1,51.687

<$$heading>

Qvomodo cantabimus canticum domini in terra aliena ?
CMTRINIT-MX1,51.689

+te holie prophete dauid spec+d on +te sealmboc . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.690

and on a stede +teron munege+d sume of +te wordes +te weren speken
bitwine two folkes . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.691

+tat on was of ierusalem . and +tat o+der of babilonie .
CMTRINIT-MX1,51.692

and +to word munege+d us to rihtlechen ure liflode . and nime+d
forbisne efter +te olde men +te +to weren and lif holie .
CMTRINIT-MX1,51.693

Ierusalem . and babilonie be+d two burges . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.694

and flite+d eure . and winne+d bitwinen hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.695

+tat israelisshe folc was walkende toward ierusalem on swinche . and on
drede . and on wanrede CMTRINIT-MX1,51.696

and +to wile was hersum godes hese . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.697

Ac efter +tan +te hie weren wuniende in ierusalem . and weren hole and
sunde . and sikere of here giue . and hadden +te fulle of wurldes
richeisse . +to hie forleten godes lore . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.698

and folgeden here lichames wille . nameliche on two +tigges .
CMTRINIT-MX1,51.699

+tat was mu+des me+de +tat o+der hordom . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.700

and +termide brohten godes wra+de uppen hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.701

and he nam stronge wrache +ter-of . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.702

here+d nu wich . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.703

he let hise wi+derfulle hine +to ben deules on helle bringen on +te
kinges heorte of babilonie . +tat he sholde fare to +te burh of
ierusalem . and strugen it . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.704

and he gederede michel ferde mid alle . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.705

and sende in to ierusalem . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.706

and com him self +terwi+d CMTRINIT-MX1,51.707

and bilai +te burh forte +tat hit wan and struide hem +to . and al +te
lond +ter abuten . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.708

and nam +tat folc CMTRINIT-MX1,51.709

and dide into bendes . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.710

and sende hie in to babilonie to +tralshipe . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.711

and on +tralshipe hie wuneden two_and_sixti wintre . and sume
hund_seuenti wintre fulle . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.712

and +tat lond folc hem ouer-sette mid felefelde pine and mid swinche and
michele wowe . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.713

and to_eken o+ter +to gremeden hem sore +tus que+dinde . Hymnum cantate
nobis d. c. s . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.714

Singe+d us of +te loft songes of syon . CMTRINIT-MX1,51.715

+tus sede +tat folc of babilonie <P_53> to +te folke of ierusalem .
CMTRINIT-MX1,53.716

+tat israelisse folc andswerede +tus CMTRINIT-MX1,53.717

and sede . Qvomodo cantabimus canticum domini interra aliena ?
CMTRINIT-MX1,53.718

hu muge we singen godes loft song in uncu+de londe ?
CMTRINIT-MX1,53.719

+te wile +te we weren on ure herde sikere . and sunde . and on alle
richeise we sungen ofte ure drihtenes loft songes . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.720

ac nu we bu+d on +tralshipe and +tolie+d meseise . we mugen michel
e+dere for+den wepinge +tene song . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.721

and +tus leten bileuen +te blisfulle songes . alle +te wile +de hie
wuneden on +tralshipe . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.722

+tat was two_and_sixti wintre . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.723

+to com a king +te was cleped chirus . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.724

and wan babilonie . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.725

and makede frie +tat israelisse folk . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.726

and let hem sume faren hom in to ierusalem . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.727

Nu age we alle and al cristene folc nime forbisne after +tat israelisshe
folc . and leten alse fele dages alse hie diden geres . +tat be+d
two_and_sixti . +tat we ne singe+d +to blisfulle songes . Alleluia and
te deum laudamus . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.728

and swo fele dages be+d unen to estrene dai . for +tat we be+d ec on
+tralshipe . gostliche for ure gultes . alse hie weren lichamliche for
here gultes CMTRINIT-MX1,53.729

and +tis mai ech man understonden . +te wot wat bitocne+d +tese two
burges . ierusalem and babilonie . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.730

IErusalem enim interpretatur uisio pacis . et significat moraliter
animam iusticie . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.731

ierusalem bitocne+d so+d of sehtnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.732

Quoniam oculis contemplacionis semper intuetur saluatorem nostrum . qui
deo petri reconciliauit genus humanum . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.733

for he do+d alse holie write sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.734

Oculi mei semper ad dominum . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.735

vre egen ben eure opene to biholde ure helende +te +turh is agen de+d
makede +ten heuenliche fader sehte mid mankin ; CMTRINIT-MX1,53.736

+donked wur+de him . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.737

Qve n . dicitur ciuitas eo quod humilitatis et paciencie ceterumque
uirtutum habitacio est ; ut ciuitas ciuium . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.738

+te saule is cleped burh for +te admodnesse and +doleburdnesse . and
Swiche o+dre holie mihtes . +te wunie+d on hire alse folc inne burh .
CMTRINIT-MX1,53.739

Et in anima regnat spiritualis apetitus ut dux in urbe .
CMTRINIT-MX1,53.740

and on hire rixle+d +te gostliche wil ; alse king on is burh .
CMTRINIT-MX1,53.741

Babilonia interpretatur confusio . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.742

babilonie bitocne+d shame . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.743

Et significat corpus subditum peccato . CMTRINIT-MX1,53.744

and bitocne+d +te synfulle lichame . Quod est confusum quoniam dominus
spernit illud . +te is riht attenshame . for +tat he erne+d here .
+tat ure louerd ihesu crist him $shende+d . and wile shufe fro him a
domes dai . biforen alle heueneware and her+de ware . and ec helleware
; +tus <P_55> que+dende . Ite maledicti in ignem eternum . et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,55.745

wite+d ge awerhgede gostes in to helle . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.746

Qvod eciam dicitur ciuitas quod uicia habitant in eo ; ut in urbe ciues
. CMTRINIT-MX1,55.747

+te lichame is cleped burh . for +tat +te fele lehtres . and fule
lastes wunen +teronne alse folc inne burh . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.748

Et in eo regnat carnalis appetitus ut dux in urbe sua .
CMTRINIT-MX1,55.749

and on him rixle+d lichamliche wil ; alse eldrene man on his burh .
CMTRINIT-MX1,55.750

Et fecit gulam milicie sue principem . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.751

and sette mu+des mesure on his ferde . +tat he gaderede . scilicet
carnalia desideria . que militant aduersus animam . +to ben +te fule
tuderende of flesliche lustes and fule sinnes . +te flited eure toganes
+te wreche saule . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.752

and of +tis flite spec+d +te apostel CMTRINIT-MX1,55.753

and sei+d . Caro concupiscit aduersus spiritum . spiritus aduersus
carnem . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.754

+Te lichame flite+d and winne+d togenes +te gostes wille . and +te
saule agenes +te lichames wille . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.755

we auen forgult ure saules wille si+de mid_winter com hiderwardes and
ouercumen it . and don us in to helle wite ; for ure mu+des mete on
+tre wise . on etinge to michel . on estmetes +te brede+d sinnes .
and on ouerete ; +te hem fede+d and on untimliche ete ; +te hem for+de+d
. and on two wise on drinke untimeliche ; and on ouerdede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,55.756

and on swiche drinkeres cume+d godes curs . alse +te prophete sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,55.757

UE nobis qui potentes estis ad bibendum . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.758

Wo +to ilche +tat ben mihti to drinken . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.759

on two wise men drinke+d golnesse . on untime . and on $unluued stede
. CMTRINIT-MX1,55.760

and ne ben naht like +terto bute hie ben togedere bispusede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,55.761

and alle +te wile +te hersumie+d +tese two +ting +te ich nu nemde ;
mu+des me+de and golnesse . ne muge we noht singe +te blisfulle songes
; alleluia . ne te deum laudamus . ne Gloria in excelsis gode to
quemnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.762

Vte we +tenne +tis hersumien . and bireusen +tat we auen don . and gon
to shrifte +terof . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.763

and beten ech bi his mihte mid gode bedes . mid almes dede . bi ure
shriftes rede . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.764

and al +tese two_and_sixti dages ; forleten blisfulle songes . and
plege . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.765

and leden clenliche ure lif ; alse +te holie boc us lere+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,55.766

and +termide lesen us ut of helle pine . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.767

Quod ipse nobis prestare dignetur qui viuit . CMTRINIT-MX1,55.768

<P_57>

<heading>

X . <em> DE CONFESSIONE . <$$em> CMTRINIT-MX1,57.771

<$$heading>

Vnderstonde+d get an $+ting +tat ich giu wile warnie fore .
CMTRINIT-MX1,57.773

gif man be+d forwunded . he wile anon sechen after leches . and shewen
him his wunden . and bi his wissinge leden is lif . forte +tat he bie
hol . alse we ogen to don . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.774

Ure saule is sore forwunded . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.775

for ech synne is +te saule wunde . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.776

and prest is saulene leche . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.777

and for+ti we agen to cumen to ure preste er +tanne we biginnen to
festen . and of him understonden shrift . +te we shulen leden al +tis
leinten . on festing . on elmes dede on gode bedes . on wecche . on
swinke . on unwasshen weden . on smerte swinginge and on o+dre swiche
gode dedes ; elch man alse him bu+d lief to beten his fule synnes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,57.778

for no man ne mai synnes beten er +tanne he hem forlete . and shewe em
his prest . and nime shrifte +teroffe . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.779

TRibus de causis ieiunant $ieiunantes . alius quidem ad purgacionem
culpe scilicet peccator . alius uero ad custodiam iusticie scilicet
iustus . alius ad augmentum glorie scilicet sanctus .
CMTRINIT-MX1,57.780

On +tre wise faste+d man . +te wel faste+d here leinten . +te synfulle
for to clensen him . +te rihtwise for to witiende his rihtwisnesse .
and nehlechen to holinesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.781

+te holie man faste+d for@ @to hegen his sete on heuene . and to eken
his holinesse . and to egen his blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.782

$Qvod melius patefacit ; exemplar lotricum . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.783

and +tis us do+d to understonden +te forbisne of +te wasshestreu .
CMTRINIT-MX1,57.784

Sume bere+d sole clo+d to +te watere for@ @to wasshen it clene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,57.785

Swo faste+d +te sinfulle man his festing to clensen him seluen of his
fule sinnen . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.786

Sume bere+d clene clo+d to watere to blechen him +tat hit beo wit .
CMTRINIT-MX1,57.787

Swo do+d +te rihtwise man for to quemen ure louerd ihesu crist . and
for to habben eche lif mid him . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.788

Sum o+der bere+d clene clo+d . and faire wit . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.789

Swo faste+d +te holie man for ben hegh on heuene . and nehg ure drihten
. and for to habben +te fulle blisse mid him . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.790

Sanctus indiget confirmacione . Ivstus autem conuersacione . Peccator
uero penitudine . Confessione . Sanctificacione . CMTRINIT-MX1,57.791

+Te holie man is ned +tat he festned on his <P_59> holinesse . +te
rihtwise +tat he bileue on his rihtwisnesse CMTRINIT-MX1,59.792

+te sinfulle man is ned . +tat he synne forlete and swi+de bimurne and
shewe hem his preste at shrifte . and after his wissinge hem bete .
CMTRINIT-MX1,59.793

and +terfore we agen alle to ben shrifene of ure synnes her we biginnen
to fasten . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.794

for no man ne mai his sinnes bete ; er he habbe nume shrift +terof .
CMTRINIT-MX1,59.795

Ure louerd ihesu crist leue us swo ure synnen to beten . and swich
elmesse to wurchen . +tat we mo ben on his riht hond on domes dai .
CMTRINIT-MX1,59.796

Quod ipse prestare dignetur qui viuit . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.797

<heading>

XI . IN CAPITE IEIUNIJ . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.799

<$$heading>

Conuertimini ad me in toto corde uestro et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.801

Non eor+dliche fader ne moder ne haue+d swa milde heorte to hire liefe
child . swo ure heuenliche fader haue+d to us ; CMTRINIT-MX1,59.802

+tonked wur+de him . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.803

and +tat he ci+d on alle wise . and nameliche on +tat +te he hus
mineget ofte on his holie write bi his erendrake +tus que+dinde .
Conuertimini ad me et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.804

Turne+d giu to me . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.805

feren it is +tat we and ure heldrene habb+a+d ben turnd fro him ; eure
si+d+den +te deuel com on neddre liche to adam . and mid his hinder
worde bicherde him ; +tat he forlet +tat god him het don . and dide
+tat god him forbet . and on +tese wise turnde fro him . noht him one
ac al his ofspring . alse +te holie boc sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.806

Recessit a deo salutari quo . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.807

forlet god his helende . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.808

forlet god his louerd . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.809

Et abiit in consilio ympiorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.810

and turnde on +te hinderfulle rede . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.811

Et stetit in uia peccatorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.812

and stod on +te weie of synnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.813

Et sedit in ca . pestilencie . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.814

and set on +te setle of unhele . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.815

and +teh ure drihten be mild_heorted . +to +te him bidde+d he is
no+deles rihtwis togenes +to ; +te his milce biseche+d . alse +te boc
sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.816

Misericors dominus et iustus . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.817

vre louerd is mild_heorted . and rihtwis . CMTRINIT-MX1,59.818

for +turh his mild_hertnesse he hadde maked adam louerd ouer +tis
middelherd . and ec ouer paradis +te wile +te he wolde heren him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,59.819

and +turh his rihtwisnesse . drof him ut of paradis . +to +te was
turnd <P_61> fro him . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.820

and makede him fleme +tere he hadde er louerd iben . and erming +ter he
was er king . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.821

Swo do+d to dai ech bishup . +te in his minister be+d . driue+d ut +to
forsinegede men . +te habbe+d +to sinnes don ; +te biligge+d to here
shrifte . and shulen don here penitence ; forte +tene +turesdai biforen
estrene dai . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.822

and +tenne he wile hem fecchen in to chirche . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.823

Swo ure louerd ihesu crist fette adam ut of helle . +to +te hedde his
penitence enden . and swo he wile us ec . +tanne we hauen ure
penitence fulended . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.824

Adam was in helle in pine fuwerti_hundred wintre . for his sinne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,61.825

and we shulen ben fulle .xl. dages in penitence . for to beten ure
sinnen . and +ter after ben alesd of pine +turh +tat holie huse +te we
shulen +tanne understonden . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.826

and gif we clenliche it understonde+d ; +tanne bie we turnd to him ; and
he to us alse him self sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.827

Conuertimini ad me ; et ego conuertar ad uos . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.828

Turne+d giu to me ; and ich wile turne me to giu . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.829

We turnen ofte to him ; and fro him . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.830

for we be+d unstedefaste . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.831

At ure fulcninge biforen +te uantstone . we turnden fro ure fo to him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,61.832

and biheten him festliche +tat we wolden eure to him holden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,61.833

and habbe+d logen ure hese . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.834

and eft_sone ech at shrifte +tat ilke bihote+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.835

Ac liste+d nu wich +treat dauid setted uppen us bute lesten ure bihese .
and turnen to him anradliche . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.836

Nisi conuersi fueritis gladium et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.837

bute $we turnen to gode anradliche he wile his swerd dragen ; +tat is
his wrake . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.838

Et aut in latere quassabit . aut in aice findet . aut in mucrone
comburet . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.839

and he wile smite mid bredlinge swuerde and brisen . o+der mid egge .
and cleuen . o+der mid orde . and pilten . and bernen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,61.840

Vuele he us brise+d . gif he binime+d us ure agte . o+der +turh fur .
o+der +turh +tiefes . o+der +turh roberie . o+der +turh unrihte dom .
o+der +turh gemeleste . o+der +turh o+der unlimp . o+der +turh orf
qualm . o+der +turh smerte gier . and gif he binime+d us ure sihte .
o+der ure liste . o+der us croke+d on fote o+der on honde . o+der on
alle ure limes binime+d us ure hele . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.841

and reuliche he us cleue+d gif he +turh ferliche de+d ; saule fro +te
lichame dele+d . alse ich drede +tat he wile bute we turne to him +te
erur . CMTRINIT-MX1,61.842

Grisliche he us mid orde pilted . and berne+d . gif he us sende+d .
into helle saule . and lichame to wuniende on eche fur .
CMTRINIT-MX1,61.843

Min red is +tat we bergen us wi+d ech of +tese +tre duntes . and don
alse +titege dauid us <P_63> minege+d +tus que+dinde . Declina a malo
et fac bonum . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.844

forbue iuel CMTRINIT-MX1,63.845

and do god . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.846

Et apostolus . EMendemus in melius que ignoranter peccauimus . et
cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.847

and seinte poul sei+d . turne we to gode . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.848

and beten . for +tat we hauen agilt her biforen . Per ignoranciam .
Per negligenciam . Per inpotenciam . Per maliuolenciam . o+der +turh
nuteluste . o+der +turh uniweald +te bu+d e+dbete gif hie us sore
riewe+d . o+der recheluste +de is erne+der to betende . o+der to
bi+tohte +tinge +te is swi+de erue+der to betende . bute hie +te more
hem bimurne . and +te gernere milce bidde ; and +te more pine +tolien .
CMTRINIT-MX1,63.849

Nu ge hauen herd +tat ure drihten bit turnen to him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,63.850

here+d nu o hu uele wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.851

scilicet In toto corde . IN ieiunio . IN fletu et planctu .
CMTRINIT-MX1,63.852

On fuwuer wise us bihoue+d turnen to him ; on heorte . on festene . on
wope . on meninge . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.853

+te man turne+d to gode on sumdel of his heorte ; +te sume of his sinnes
forlete+d . and sume et-hele+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.854

ac swo ne bihoue+d us noht to don . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.855

+te man turne+d on al his heorte +te alle his synnes forlete+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,63.856

and swo we ben beden turnen . +tat we ne athelde none on ure heorte .
and nameliche no wra+d+de ne onde . ne hatiginge . ne habbe non to
o+der +teh he haue to us . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.857

On festing he bit us us turnen . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.858

IEiunium corporis est abstinencia cibi et potus . Ieiunium mentis est
abstinencia uicii . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.859

Two kinne festing be+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.860

+te lichames festing ; is wi+dtiging of estmetes . and oueretes . and
untimliche etes . and untimliche drinke . alse +te holie loftsong
sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.861

CArnis terat , superbiam potus cibique parcitas . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.862

Me+deliche eting . and drinking agen to temien +te lichames orguil .
CMTRINIT-MX1,63.863

+te man +te faste+d his +tonkes festing is widtigig of flashes lustes .
and of o+dre fule lastes alse seinte poul sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.864

Abstinete uos a carnalibus desideriis que militant aduersus animam .
CMTRINIT-MX1,63.865

Wi+dtie+d giu fro flesliche lustes +te winnen togenes +te saule .
CMTRINIT-MX1,63.866

and of +tis festing spec+d ure drihten +turh +te holie prophetes mu+d ;
+tus que+dinde . Hoc est ieiunium quod magis elegi . scilicet
dissoluere colligaciones impietatis et soluere fasciculos deprimentes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,63.867

ei+der que+d he ich wile . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.868

ac +tat me is quemere +tat unbinde+d +te bendes ; of wi+derfulnesse .
and +to ouersemde burden . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.869

gif we wi+deri+d on dede . and on speche . togenes ure chirche .
o+der togenes ure emcristen . and +terto wunie+d us . +tenne bie we
bunden of wi+derfulnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,63.870

and gif beden hem bote . <P_65> o+der forgiuenesse beden ; +tanne
unbunde we +te bendes ; +te we her uppen hem bunden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,65.871

and +tat bit ure drihten . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.872

and gif man haue+d wi+d us agilt . woerdes . o+der wurkes . we +tat
him forgiue+d . +tanne unbinde we +te burden +te he hadde us mide
ouersemd . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.873

+tat +tridde +ting hwanne ure drihten us bit turnen to him ; is wop +te
we for ure synnes wepe+d . alse +de holie prophete sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,65.874

Lacrimis meis stratum meum rigabo . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.875

Swo ich wile biwepe mine synnes . +tat mi bed bie iwasshen mid mine
teares . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.876

and gif hit is swo . me +ting+d ne brin+d no synful man quemere loc ;
+tene teares sheding for his sinnen . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.877

and wiste $seinte peter . and Seinte Marie magdaleine +te mid wope
wessen hem seluen of heued synnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.878

On +te feor+de +tinge . +tat is meninge . god bad us turnen to him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,65.879

and +tat us bihoue+d to don ; on +trefeld wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.880

Vos ipsos de peccatis reprehendo . $SAcerdoti ea confitendo . dei
misericordiam pro eis supplicando . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.881

and is +tat we agen to gabben us seluen for@ @+tat we synegeden . alse
+te holie man iob sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.882

Reprehendo me et ago penitenciam . in fauillo et cinere .
CMTRINIT-MX1,65.883

Ich haue syneged and gabbe me suluen +teroffe CMTRINIT-MX1,65.884

and pine me seluen on asshen . and on iselen . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.885

and we agen to dai understonden +tese pine . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.886

o+der is +tat we agen ure synnes menende to shewen hem +te preste . and
bi his wissingge beten hem sy+d+den alse seint iacob sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,65.887

Confitemini alterutrum peccata uestra et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.888

shewe+d giwer synnes +te preste . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.889

for al +tat prest binde+d so+dliche bu+d ibunden CMTRINIT-MX1,65.890

and al +tat he unbinde+d be+d unbunden . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.891

+te +tridde is menende his synnes bifore gode . and milce +ter of
bidden . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.892

+tis us bihoue+d +tat we eche dai don . and mid alle ure limes ure
synnes beten . alse seinte poul sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.893

Sicut exibuistis membra uestra seruire $inmundicie et iniquitati ad
iniquitatem ita nunc exibete membra uestra seruire iusticie in
sanctificacionem . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.894

Alse ge hauen giwer lichame don to hersumiende fule lustes ; and unriht
. alse do+d giwer lichame he+denfor+d to hersumiende clennesse . and
rihtwisnesse . and holinesse . +tat ech lime synderlepes turne to gode
and bete his gilt . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.895

Oculus uidit uanitatem fleat nunc . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.896

wepe +tat ege for@ @+tat hit idel bihield . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.897

Avris audiuit ociosa . conuersa audiat utilia . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.898

eare luste unnitte speche . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.899

turne +terfro . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.900

and here godes word on holie lorspelle . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.901

PEs cucurrit ad malum . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.902

fot gide to uni+dor ; CMTRINIT-MX1,65.903

swike nu . CMTRINIT-MX1,65.904

<P_67>

and gon ofte to chirche . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.906

Circa membra se tetigere illicite abstineant . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.907

+ti shape dide . +tat hit ne sholde . and +ter hit ne sholde and
+tenne hit ne sholde . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.908

wi+dteo it nu . bi here mihte +teh hie bien togedere bispused .
CMTRINIT-MX1,67.909

and gif hie ne be+d noht togedere bispused . forleten hit mid alle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,67.910

Manus effudit sanguinem . desinat et faciat elemosinam .
CMTRINIT-MX1,67.911

hand dide ofte harmes . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.912

swike nu . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.913

and do almesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.914

Corinuidit & odiuit habeat pacem et dileccionem . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.915

heorte hadde onde and hatiunge CMTRINIT-MX1,67.916

habbe nu sehtnesse . and luue to ech liues man . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.917

Os peccauit manducando bibendo male loquendo . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.918

Mu+d synegede on eting . on drinking . and on uuele speche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,67.919

ete nu leinte mete . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.920

and enes o dai and euene fille . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.921

and drinke o tige atte mete . and noht +ter after bute hit for unhele
be . o+der swinke . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.922

speke so+d and riht . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.923

and bidde gerne milce . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.924

+tus bit ure drihten . +tat we shulen to him turnen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,67.925

and sei+d +tat he wile to us . and mid us bileue . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.926

Qui viuit et Regnat per omnia secula seculorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.927

<heading>

XII . <em> DOMINICA I <$$em> IN XLA . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.929

<$$heading>

Preocupemus faciem domini . et in psalmis iubilemus ei .
CMTRINIT-MX1,67.931

+te holie prophete dauid minege+d us on +te sealmboc to beregen us +te
wile +te we mugen . wi+d +te eiseliche shame . and mid te bitere grame
+tat alle synfulle men shule +tolen on domes dai . +tat ne haue noht
here sinnes forleten . and bet ; er +tan al mankin . +te was . and
wurh . and nu is ; cumen to one mote . and ure louerd ihesu crist
cume+d of heuene to hem . and shode+d +te gode fro +te iuele .
CMTRINIT-MX1,67.932

Et statuet oues a dextris ; hedos autem a sinistris .
CMTRINIT-MX1,67.933

and shode+d +te rihtwise an his rihthalue CMTRINIT-MX1,67.934

and wur+de+d hem . and here+d . for hie hauen him er wel quemed .
CMTRINIT-MX1,67.935

and giue+d hem to medes eche lif . and blisse . and heuene mid him
seluen ; CMTRINIT-MX1,67.936

and sei+d . Uenite benedicti patris et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.937

cume+d ge blescede . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.938

and underfo+d +tat riche +tat giu is igarked fro +te biginnigge of +te
worlde . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.939

Si+den he sette+d +te synfulle on his lifthalf . CMTRINIT-MX1,67.940

and wite+d <P_69> hem +tat hie bi here lif dages ne wolden him quemen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,69.941

and here agene synnes . on dede . and on speche . unhile+d hem seluen
. CMTRINIT-MX1,69.942

and shameliche hem bigrede+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.943

and fule shende+d . biforen al heueneware . and eor+deware . and
helle ware . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.944

and +tenne sende+d ure louerd ihesu crist hem mid saule . and mid
lichame into helle . to wuniende on eche wowe . +de +de+den for+d shal
wexen alse he seide . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.945

Ite maledicti . et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.946

wite+d ge aweregede gostes in +tat eche fur +tat is garked to deuules
and here fereden to wuniende eure . and o abuten ende .
CMTRINIT-MX1,69.947

+tus here agene sinnes hem shende+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.948

and hie ben of-gramede wi+d hem selfen . for +tat hie n@ @edden here
synnes er bet . and wi+d +tis michele shame boregen +te wile here bot
dai laste . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.949

Ure bot dai is nu . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.950

and laste+d +te wile +te god wile . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.951

bete we gerne . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.952

and ben afterward +te edinesse +te +te salm boc of spec+d +tus que+dende
. Beati quorum remisse . et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.953

Edie ben alle +to ; +te here giltes ben atleten . and helid here sinnes
. +tat ben +to +te hem rihtleche+d . alse +te prophete dauid hem lerde
. CMTRINIT-MX1,69.954

Preocupemus f. d. in. con . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.955

+tenche we ure giltes er +te dom cume . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.956

and forleten ure synnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.957

and bimurnen hem sore . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.958

and shewen hem at shrifte . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.959

and beten hem swo +te prest us wisse+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.960

and beten swo mid bote al +tat we er breken . +tat god ne finde +tanne
on us no gilt unpined . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.961

+tanne ne +tarf us no+der gramien . ne shamien . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.962

To forleten ure sinne us minege+d +te holie prophete ieremie . +dus
que+dinde . Derelinquat impius uiam suam et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,69.963

Forlete +te iuele man his wei . and +te unrihtwise his fele unnette
speche . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.964

and turne to gode . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.965

Iuel is +tat ne wile his agene saule helpen . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.966

and we ben mest alle . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.967

and ure wei +te we shule leten . is ure liflode +te we shule rihtleche
. CMTRINIT-MX1,69.968

Unrihtwise we ben +tanne we ne don ure helendes wille . +te lesde us of
dea+de . and gif+d us al +tat we habben . and eche lif bihote+d . and
wile lesten alle +to +te him heren . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.969

and gif we don ure wille +te us teo+d eure to herme . and here iuel don
and werse +tenchen to don ; +tat is unriht . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.970

+te holie man iob +te non ne was his efning on eor+de . he us giue+d
fair forbisne to bireusen ure saule sor . +tat is ure sinnes . +ter he
sei+d . Dimitte me domine u. p. p. d. m. a . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.971

+tole me louerd a@ @litel@ @wan +tat ich bimurne mi sor ; er ich wite to
+te +testere wunienge . CMTRINIT-MX1,69.972

and +te holie boc sei+d on o+der <P_71> stede . Qvacunque hora homo
ingemiscit peccata sua remittuntur ei . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.973

alse wat swo +te man his sinne sore bimurne+d ure drihten le+de+d +te
sinne bendes . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.974

and blisse+d swo +te soule alse +te boc sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.975

Secundum multitudinem dolorum m. in. c. m. et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,71.976

alse fele sorinesses swo ich haue on min herte ; for mine sinnes ; mid
alse fele frefringe +tu hauest blissed min soule . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.977

and +tanne we hauen ure sinnes forleten . and +tus bimurnen us bihoue+d
+tat we don ; alse +te holie prophete us minege+d +tus que+tinde .
Confitemini domino quoniam bonus ; CMTRINIT-MX1,71.978

kneowe+d ure louerd for +tat he is wel god . and swo mild_heorted .
CMTRINIT-MX1,71.979

and sein iacob sei+d on his pistle . Confitemini alterutrum peccata
uestra et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.980

shewe+d giwer sinnes on o+der stede . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.981

and a@ @wich o+der stede age we hem to shewen . vre drihten us sei+d on
+te godspelle . +te sein lucas makede . +ter +te .x. li+d+droweres
clepeden biforen ure drihten . and seiden . Iesu preceptor miserere
nostri . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.982

+tu helend +te mid +tine wordes helest . alle +to +te wilt . haue
milce of us . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.983

Et dixit eis . Ite et ostendite uos sacerdotibus CMTRINIT-MX1,71.984

and he andswerede hem alse he do+d us nu . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.985

go+d CMTRINIT-MX1,71.986

and shewe+d giu giuwer prest . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.987

prestes we shewed us +tanne seien hem ure ateliche sinnes +te we hauen
don . and que+den . and +toht mid lestinde fule +tonke
CMTRINIT-MX1,71.988

and +tanne we bien toward him . gif we hauen on ure +toht to shewen him
ure sinnes . and forleten . and beten . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.989

we ben clensed of ure sinnes . gif we riht lesten +tat we +tere bihoten
CMTRINIT-MX1,71.990

+tere we shule tellen . alle ure gultes +tat we ne hauen noht bet .
and noht mid faire worde hihten . +to ateliche sinnes . and no +ting
seien +tere +tat les beo . and no +ting of +te so+de forlete . ac
shewen +tere openliche wich he is . and gif hit was don on untime .
o+der on unluuede stede . o+der mid unluued lete . o+der on unluued
wise . o+der gif it was erfe+d to for+den . and smeihliche bicharede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,71.991

and gif we shewe+d +tus ure sinnes . +tenne muge we fulliche ben
shrifene . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.992

ac fewe ben +tat +tus shewen heore sinnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.993

and +tat is long on felefelde iuele lastes . and iuele +teawes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,71.994

Decem sunt que impediunt confessionem . scilicet hec . Obliuio .
Ignorancia . Neggligencia . Verecundia . Timor . Diffidencia .
Delicacia . Fiducia . Pertinacia . Desperacio . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.995

Ten +ting ben +te letten men of here scrifte . Noht alle on . ac sum
on . and sum o+der . CMTRINIT-MX1,71.996

+tat ben +tese CMTRINIT-MX1,71.997

and haten +tus . forgetelnesse . nutelnesse . recheles .
shamfestnesse . drede . <P_73> Ortrowe . Trew+teleas . $Softgerne
Trust . wilfulnesse . Misleue . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.998

+te man +te n@ @aue+t . luue ne eie to gode . he +tenche+d selde o+der
naure of heuene wele ; +te forgult mid his sunnes . and helle wowe .
+te he erne+d mid his sunnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.999

and for +tat gult he solde his sunnes at srifte sheawen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1000

and for +ti cume+d uppen him +tat unlimp +te +te prophete wisste on se
salmboke +tus que+dende . Adhereat lingua mea faucibus meis . et
cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1001

Cleued be mi tunge to mine cheken gif ich forgete +te ierusalem .
CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1002

+tanne man forgiet +tat he seien sholde . +tanne be+d his tunge alse
hit $cleued were . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1003

$Nutelnesse lete+d +te mannes shrifte +te ne wot neure hwanne he
sinege+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1004

and swiche ben alle +to +te ne wilen listen lorspel . and +teron lernen
wiche ben sinnen . and beregen hem . and +tat bilimpe+d to godcunnesse
. and folegen +tat . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1005

and +teroffe sei+d +te boc . Nvllus uitare laborat quod ignorat .
CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1006

no man ne fle+d +ting bute he wite . o+der wene +tat it him deren wille
. CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1007

Recheleste lette+d +te mannes shrifte . +te +turh his misleue
herberge+d +te fule gost on his heorte . +te him teche+d to folgen his
fule lustes . and no wuerse of scrifte . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1008

and of hem +te holie boc spec+d and sei+d . Peccator cum uenerit in
profundum contempnit . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1009

+tanne +te sinfulle man beo+d bifallen on depe sinne . ne reche+d no
+ting of scrifte . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1010

Shamfestnesse lette+d +te mannes shrifte . +te ne wile his sinne seien
+te preste . +te he ofte sinege+d . for him sholde shamen of him .
and ne understant noht +tat +te shame +te +te man haue+d of his sinne .
+tanne he hem prest shewe+d ; hit is +te biginnigge of fremfulle sinbote
. CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1011

and +tat wiste wel +te prophete +te +tus que+d . Tota die uerecundia
mea contra me est ; et cetera CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1012

min shamfestnesse is to-genes me . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1013

and ouerhele+d min bend ofte . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1014

Drede lette+d +te mannes shrifte . +te ne dar his sinnes seien +te
prest . leste hit uttere cume +tat hie tweien witen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1015

and swiche men blame+d +te prophete on +te sealm boc +ter he sei+d .
$Illic trepidauerunt timore u. n. e. t . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1016

+ter hem stod eie ; +ter hem ne sholde . +tat is of idele +ting . and
+ter non ; +ter hem sholde michel eie stonde . +tat is of gode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1017

Ortrowe of agene mihte lette+d +te mannes shrifte . +te +tinche+d +tat
he ne mihte his sinne forlete . +teh he hem seide at shrifte . and
forhete hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1018

Sed hii sunt filii diffidencie de quibus dicit scriptura . Venit ira
dei in filios diffidencie . CMTRINIT-MX1,73.1019

and swiche ben +te deules bernes +te aren <P_75> cleped ortrowe for +tat
hie sinege swo michel . +tat hie wenden to hauen forloren milce .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1020

and godes wra+d+de cume+d ofte uppe +to ; +te +tat wenen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1021

softgerne and ednesse lette+d +te mannes shrifte . +te +tinche+d +tat
he ne mai +tolen hunger . ne +tirst ne o+ter pine to betende his sinnes
. CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1022

vnde scriptura dicit . Delicati se nutriunt ad incendia gehenne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1023

+te softgerne fede+d hem seluen helle fur to honde . and to fote .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1024

Trist to longe lif . lette+d +te mannes shrifte . +te sei+d to him
seluen on his heorte . Ich n@ @am noht giet sad of mine sinnes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1025

and for+ti ; ne mai ich hie noht forlete . CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1026

ac o+der ich mai ben sed +teroff CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1027

and +tanne ich wille hem forleten . and nime shrift . and beten hem .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1028

ac +te holie boc blame+d +tese men +tus que+dende . $Deus promittit
ueniam penitenti sed non crastinum diem penitencie differenti .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1029

god bihet milce +to +te here sinnes forleten and beten .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1030

ac he ne bihet noht +te lif til amoregen ; +to +te li+d on sinne
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1031

ac sei+d . Qva hora non putatis mors ueniet ; CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1032

+Tanne +tu lest wenst dea+d cume+d to fecchende +te .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1033

Willfulnesse lette+d +te mannes shrift . +tat +tinche+d uuel +tat man
him wile neden his sinnes to forleten . and fro +te deuel to gode
turnen . CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1034

and of hem sei+d +te holie boc . Pertinaces in malo eliminat ecclesia .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1035

holie chirche dele+d fro cristendom . +to +te wilfulle ben here sinnes
to luuen . and lo+de to forleten . CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1036

Ortrowe of godes milce . lette+d +te mannes shrift . +te haue+d michel
sineged . and n@ @ele lete . ne bete . ne milce bidde . for +tat he
wene+d +tat god ne wile swo michel sinne forgiue ; for none bote +tat he
for+de muge . CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1037

and of +tis sei+d +te holie boc . Qvi desperat iam iudicatus est .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1038

+te man +te ortrowe+d godes mildhertnesse . he is idemd to eche wowe on
helle . CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1039

+terwi+d us wite ure louerd ihesu crist gif his wille beo .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1040

and berege us wi+d alle iuele customes . CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1041

and giue us mihte ure sinnes to forleten . and prest shewen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1042

and wise us . CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1043

and filste hem to beten . swo +tat us beo biheue ; and him to queme .
CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1044

Qui viuit et Regnat deus per omnia . CMTRINIT-MX1,75.1045

<P_77>

<heading>

XIII . <em> DOMINICA II <$$em> IN QUADRAGESIMA . CMTRINIT-MX1,77.1048

<$$heading>

Ecce nunc tempus acceptabile . ecce nunc dies salutis . In his ergo
diebus exibeamus nosmet ipsos sicut dei ministros . In multa paciencia
. In ieiuniis . In uigiliis . In caritate non ficta . et cetera
Celestis medicus ut cognouit quod ope sua prius creati postmodo uariis
languoribus peccatorum uexarentur . Scripto uisitans eos . hortatur
eos ad medicinam confessionis . quia ut ait scriptura . Omnia in
confessione creantur et ne pretenderent ad excusacionem temporis dicit .
Ecce nunc tempus acceptabile ecce nunc dies salutis . Uidelicet aptum
creacioni .i. satisfactioni .i. remissioni et dietam proponit dicens .
Viuite sicut dei ministri . et quia que parat medicamenta asperant .
scilicet ferrum pacieris et ignem . Monet eos ad pacienciam dicens .
In multa paciencia . Ferro quidem secatur superfluum ignis urendo curat
in quo notantur . scilicet calor compunutionis . et feruor gemine
dilectionis que curant et sanant omnem langourem peccati . et $de
compunctione quidem dicitur . quacunque hora ingemit homo peccatum ;
remittuntur ei . De dileccione dominus dicit . Ego diligentes me
diligo . Sic ortatur nos apostolus ut emendemus $in melius ; que huc
usque peccauimus . Ne diuina ulcio spacium penitencie preripiat nobis .
CMTRINIT-MX1,77.1050

+Te heuenliche leche seinte poul nime+d geme of ure saule sicnesse .
+tat ben ure sinnes CMTRINIT-MX1,77.1051

+tonged wur+de him . CMTRINIT-MX1,77.1052

and minege+d us bi his holie write . +te we reden to dai inne chirche .
+tat we shewen ure agene michele nede . and +te wile +te we mugen
+tenchen . and cumen festliche to ure saule leche and unhelen him ure
saule wundes . +to ben ure fule synnes . and bidden +tat he wisse us
hu we mugen ure saule of hem clensen . and ure sor helien . and weche
us of ure heuie slape . and rere us of ure fule lust bedde . +tat we
don alse +ting do+d . +te haue+d lein on swete . for-quichie+d +tan
here time cume+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,77.1053

and +tat is nu+de CMTRINIT-MX1,77.1054

for +tis time is licwur+de +tarto ; alse +te apostle sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,77.1055

Eecce nunc tempus . CMTRINIT-MX1,77.1056

Nu hit is god time to beloken +te sicnesse of +te sowle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,77.1057

Ecce nunc <P_79> dies salutis . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1058

And +tos fuerti dages ben bicumeliche to helen +te sowle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1059

biseche we +tanne +te sowle leche +tat is +te prest . Vt ferro
prohibitacionis recindat a nobis exterius carnis et mentis uicia . +tat
he us wissie to wi+d-tien of alle flesliche lustes +te derie+d ure sowle
. and don uppen us swilch manifeald pine . +tat mid here biternesse .
driuen ut of ure +toght ; +te fule $lustes +te heuien +te sowle . In
multa patientia . et cetera . and ben swo +toleburde to-genes his
wissinge to forleten +tat he forbet . and don +tat he bit . +tat +te
selue +toleburdnesse be ure swole hele . alse ure drihten sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1060

In patientia uestra possidebitis animas uestras . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1061

On giwer +toleburdnesse ; ge shulen wealden giwer saule .
CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1062

Tanta est uirtus paciencie . quod quis eam exibendo animam suam s.
ostendendo ita . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1063

swo holie mihte is +toleburdnesse . +tat he +te hit ki+d ; +ter +turh
haue+d his soule weald . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1064

ac swo ne haue+d he +te shewe+d +toleburdnesse . +te ne +tole+d . and
forbere+d noht a misbode . and wolde him seluen wreke gif he mihte .
and +terto ettle+d and abit his time . and ne+deles ne mai him non harm
don . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1065

he make+d lete of +toleburdnesse CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1066

and ne+deles ne haue+d non . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1067

and +ter for ne haue+d his soule weald . for +tat he lichamliche lustes
and +de fule lehtres him holden bunden on here +tralshipe . swo +tat he
ne mai his soule no +ting wealde . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1068

+Te man haue+d and ki+d +toleburdnesse +te +tole+d and forbere+d and ne
wile seche after wreche . and na+demore haten him . +te him agilte+d .
ne him iuel unnen . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1069

gif hit is man +tat haue+d +tis . and he halt uppen him . on speche .
and on dede . o+der on ei+der he be+d +toleburde CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1070

and do+d alse he hit noht ne wite . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1071

and +teremide ouercume+d him . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1072

and his soule loke+d CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1073

and eft hire swo walt . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1074

gif +te unfele man his wille folge+d . and mid felefolde wigeles te+d
him to unwrenches . to stele . o+der refloc . o+der swikedom . o+der
drunkenesse . o+der hordom . o+der swiche . o+dre un+teawes . and
lef mede bihote+d gif he wile his lore liste . and he n@ @ele . ac
+dole+d and forbere+d . and +termide ouercume+d +te unfele .
CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1075

and his soule loke+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1076

and haue+d swo wald . CMTRINIT-MX1,79.1077

gif lichames lust o+der +tankes lust . te+d him to ani un+teau . and
he n@ @ele ac +tole+d and forbere+d . +teh hit bie his lichame queme .
ac flite+d to-genes his agen wille . alse +te wise bit +tus que+dinde .
Sperne uoluptates nocet empta dolore uoluptas . Shune lustliche <P_81>
wil . for +tat it dere+d swi+de and be+d afterboht mid bitere sor .
and +tus ouercume+d alle hise fon ; CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1078

and +terfore haue+d his soule weald . CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1079

for +tenne be+d on him sene +tat +te wise seide . CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1080

Qvem superare nequis pacienter uince ferendo . CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1081

+Tat +tu mid strenc+de ne miht ouercume . ouercum mid +toleburdnesse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1082

and on ech swich flite ; is man of +toleburdnesse abuuen at ende .
CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1083

Swo mote we flite togenes ure fule lustes . al +te fuwerti dages . and
ouercumen at ende hem . and alle +te +ting +tat us to sunne te+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1084

Quod ipse prestare dignetur qui uiuit et regnat . CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1085

<heading>

XIV . IN MEDIA XLA . CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1087

<$$heading>

Cum inmundus spiritus exierit ab homine ambulat $uadit per loca arida
querens requiem et non inueniens dicit . Reuertar in domum meam unde
exiui . et ueniens ; inuenit eam scopis mundatam et ornatam . Tunc
uadit per loca arida querens requiem et non inueniens dicit . Reuertar
in domum meam unde exiui et ueniens inuenit eam scopis mundatam et
ornatam . Tunc uadit et sumit vii=tem= alios spiritus secum nequiores
se ; et ingressi habitant ibi . et fiunt nouissima hominis illius
peiora prioribus CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1089

+te louerd seint matheu spec+d on his holi godspel of +te grimliche
wordes +te ure helende at sume time gaf to andswere +te unbilefde
iudeuisshe men . +te $gernden of him fortocne and seiden . Magister
uolumus a te signum uidere . CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1090

Meister we wolden sen sum fortocne of +te . Warbi we mihten cnowen gif
it so+d were +tat +tu seist ; and leuen . CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1091

and he hem gaf to andswere eifulle word . +tus que+dinde . Generacio
mala et adultera signum querit . et non dabitur signum nisi signum ione
prophete . CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1092

Iuelmennish and forhored mannish acse+d after fortocne of heuene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1093

and hie ne shulen hauen bute eor+dliche . CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1094

and he hem shewede fortocne bi ionan +te prophete . of his holie
+trowegunge +te he wolde +tolien to lesen al mankin of eche wowe .
+tonked wur+de him . and of his riseng . and of de+de al mankin bringe
to blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1095

and si+den blamede here un-bileue . and here unwreste liflode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,81.1096

and seide . <P_83> Viri niniuite surgent in iudicio cum generacione
ista . et condempnabunt eam . quia penitenciam egerunt in predicatione
ione . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1097

On domes dai shal +tat folc arisen on +te michele dome ; and fordemen
+tis mannish . Non equidem sentencie lacione . sed meritorum
comparacione . Noht mid domkete wordes . ac mid wuredluker wordes .
for +tat +te hie undernomen +te wise lore of ionan +te prophete . and
lete here sinnes . and bi wissinge betten and milce beden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1098

Et ita facta est niniue speciosa que prius turpis existebat .
CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1099

And swo war+d iturnd +tat folc of ateliche to wenliche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1100

and was here ende betere +tene here biginninge . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1101

ac +tis wi+derfulle mannisshe +te fonde+d me hinderfulliche . and
here+d mine wise word . and se+d mine wunderliche deden . and na+demo
me ne leue+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1102

ne here sinnes ne forlete+d . ne beten . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1103

ne to me abugen . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1104

ne milce bidden . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1105

and +terfore wur+d here ende werse +tene here biginninge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1106

+tus seide ure drihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1107

and we mugen seien to so+de +tat al to fele swiche men bien get . +te
ne wilen noht here sinnes forleten ac +tinche+d hem swete . ne ne wilen
don none sinbote . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1108

and his here lichame unnit swo . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1109

hie gon to chirche noht for godes luue . ac for to biregen nehebores
speche . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1110

hie giuen here tige+de noht for to hauen heuene blisse . ac for to
hauen here . +te hereword of eor+dliche richeise .
CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1111

hie giuen here elmesse noht for godes luue ac for neheboreden . o+der
for kinraden . o+der for onur to hauen . o+der ne mai elles for shame
. o+der for +tonc to hauen . o+der for hereword to hauen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1112

Gif he cneule+d in chirche . and buge+d alle hise limes ; +tat is idel
. CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1113

+teh he him bidde mid his mu+d . he ne feche+d noht +te sore siches .
onne+derward his heorte . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1114

ne for reu+de ne wepe+d none hote teres . of his egen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1115

and +tese ben false cristene . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1116

and ben forcu+dere +tene he+dene men . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1117

and be+d here ende forcu+dere +tene here biginnenge CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1118

Sone +terafter seide ure drihten . Regina austri surges in iudicio cum
generacione ista . et condempnabit eam . quia uenit a finibus terre
audire sapienciam salomonis . et ecce plus quam salomon hic .
CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1119

+Te so+de quen shal a domes $dai arisen ; on +te michele mote . and
fordemen +tis frakede folc . For +tat hie com fro +te wereldes Ende to
heren salomones wisdom . CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1120

and +tis wi+derfulle folc ne wile liste +de lor+dewes wisdom . +te
tehte salemon . and alle wise witege here wisdom .
CMTRINIT-MX1,83.1121

and +terfore wur+d <P_85> $here ende werse +tene here biginninge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1122

Quatuor sunt genera hominum in seculo iuuencium . Alii enim habent
bonum principium et finem . Alii autem malum principium et finem .
Alii quidam malum principium et bonum finem . Alii principium et malum
finem . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1123

Fuwerkinne mannisshe liuen on +tis woreld . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1124

Sume biginne+d on here guwu+de clene lif leden . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1125

and helde+d for+d +terone ; CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1126

and feire enden . alse $seint iohan baptist . +te on his childhode
bicom eremite and hield for+d +terone ; and faire endede . and $seint
martin +te bigan on his guwu+de +te clene lif leden . and to bien
almesful ; and hield for+d +terone . and faire it endede . and $seint
nicholas . +te on his chilhode wunede him to fasten . and +tat wune
heold to his liues ende . and o+dre manie +te swo ledden here lif .
+tat te biginninge was fair . and te middel fairere . and te ende alre
fairest . Swo +tat bi hem was so+d +tat +te wise seide
CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1127

Primo ne medium . medio ne discrepet primum CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1128

here lifes ende was bicumeliche . +te middel and +te biginnenge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1129

Sume men biginnen erest to leden clene lif . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1130

and eft hit forleten . alse dide iudas scariot . and o+dre inoge .
alse +te holie godspel sei+d +tus que+dinde . Ex hoc multi abierunt
retro . et iam cum illo non ambulant . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1131

Fele folgeden erest ure drihten . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1132

and eft him forleten . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1133

and bi hem was so+d +tat +te prophete seide . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1134

Cepisti melius quam desinis . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1135

+Du bigunne betere +tene +tu ende . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1136

Item dissimilis que fuit . huic similis ille uiro .
CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1137

Here ende was unliche here biginnenge . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1138

Sume men leden erest iuel liflode . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1139

and turnen eft to god . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1140

and +teron sewe+d alse seinte poul . and Seinte Marie magdaleine . +te
dide alse wise hire lerden . +tanne hie wi+d hire speken +tus que+dinde
. Hinc te melioribus offer . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1141

wi+d-te +te wi+d iuel wune . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1142

and wune +te he+denfor+d to betere . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1143

Sume men leden unfele liflode . +tat te biginninge be+d iuel ; and swo
leng +te werse . and te ende alre werest . alse +te iudeuisshe folc .
+te ure helende wi+d spec ; and seide . Cum immundus spiritus exierit
ab $homine uadit et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1144

+Denne +te iuele gost fared ut of +te manne and weue+d wide . and
wandre+d ouer al . fro drige stede to oder sechende reste .
CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1145

Explorat . enim corda fidelium que ideo dicuntur arida ; quia sunt
feruore sancti spiritus desiccata . et a mollicie fluxe cogitacionis
purgata . CMTRINIT-MX1,85.1146

+De drige stedes +tat +te fule <P_87> gost wandre+d abuten sechende him
reste . +tat is +te bileffulle mannes heorte +te clene ben wasshen of
+te embe+tonke ; of fleshliche lustes . and drigen bi +te hete of so+de
luue to god and to men . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1147

Swiche hertes fonde+d +te fule gost ; deies and nihtes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1148

and cunne+d gif he mai +ter-inne herbergen . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1149

and +tenne he a none ne mai he sei+d to him seluen Reuertar in domum
meam unde exiui . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1150

Ihc wile turnen agen to mine huse +te ich er ut of wende .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1151

Et ueniens $inuenit eam uacuam scopis mundatam et ornatam .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1152

And cume+d +terto CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1153

and fint hit emti . and mid beseme clene swopen . and faire maked .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1154

+tis iudeuisse folkes lage was . and get is . +tat on +te ehtende dai
after +te childes burde ; +te frend shopen +te child name .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1155

and mid stone +te for +te nones was maked for to keruen +tat fel biforen
on his strenende lime . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1156

and +tis lage sette ure drihten bi +te patriarche abraham .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1157

and bed him holden hit . and al his ofspring after him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1158

and +tat hem clensede of sinnes alse us do+d fulnenge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1159

Et habuit circumcisio eandem iudei quam habet nunc baptismus delendo
peccatum . sed non aperiendo celum . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1160

and +te lage hadde +to alle +te mihtes +te haue+d nu fulluht .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1161

for +tat clensede +te man of sinne ; swo do+d nu fulluht .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1162

ac it ne openede hem noht +te blisse of heuene alse fulcneng do+d us .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1163

and +tis lage fleme+d +te fule gost ut of +te child .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1164

and he wandrede wide weruende longe sechende him o+der stede . on
bileffulle manne . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1165

and +te children weren clensed of sinnen . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1166

and +tus bilefden for+d +tat hie understonden wurldes wit and mannes
munde . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1167

+Tanne com eft +te fule gost +te was er flemd ut of him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1168

and fint it emti of iuele gostes . and clensed of fule sinnes . and
diht mid lo+dlesnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1169

Et tunc uadit et alios sumit $vii=tem= spiritus nequiores se et ingressi
habitant ibi . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1170

and +tanne ferde +te fule gost . and seuene o+dre gostes mid him
forcu+dere +ten him self were . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1171

and bitrumede +tat child . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1172

and waiteden hit on eche wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1173

and fortehten hit CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1174

and biwunden it . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1175

and biwalden it al . swo +tat it eft bifel on his o+der wune .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1176

+tenne com +te fule gost $eft into his wunienge . CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1177

and forte+d +tat child ; swo leng swo more to here wille .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1178

and +ter fore was here ende werse +tane here biginnenge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1179

+te seuen fule gostes +tat ich nu embe was . waren +te seuen difles
giltes ; +tat ure drihten drof ut of seinte marie magdaleine .
CMTRINIT-MX1,87.1180

and for+ti weren <P_89> here $biginning of here liflode swich se he were
. CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1181

+te ende war+d fair . and god . and blisful . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1182

Swo wur+de ure alre . +tat wile ure drihten . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1183

Qui viuit et Regnat . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1184

<heading>

XV . DOMINICA PALMARUM . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1186

<$$heading>

Turbe que precedebant dominum . et que sequebantur clamabant dicentes .
osanna filio dauid ; benedictus qui uenit in nomine domini .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1188

It is custume +tat ech chirchsocne go+d +tis dai a procession .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1189

and +tis wune haue+d +te biginnigge of +te holie procession . +te ure
helende makede to_ward te stede +ter he wolde de+d +tolen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1190

Et cum uenisset bethfage ad montem oliuarum . Mittens $duos de
discipulis iussit adduci asinam et sedit super eam .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1191

+To +te com to bethfage Swo hatte +te +trop +te preste one wunien .
bi_sides ierusalem on +te fot of +te dune +te men clepen munt oliuete .
+to sende tweien of hise diciples into +te bureh of ierusalem .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1192

and bed hem bringen a wig one te riden . no+der stede . ne palefrei .
ne fair mule . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1193

ac +teh he alre louerdes louerd . and alre kingene $king . na+teles he
sende after +te alre unwur+teste wig one to riden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1194

and +tat is asse . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1195

and gaf us forbisne of admodnesse on his dede . alse he do+d on o+dre
stede on his speche +tus que+dinde . Discite a me ; quia mitis sum et
humilis corde . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1196

lerne+d of me for +tat ich am milde and admod on herte .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1197

and +to tweien sanderbodes ferden CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1198

and cudden in +te bureh . +tat +te helende was +tiderward .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1199

and funden an asse mid fole . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1200

and ledden hit to-genes him . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1201

and +te holie apostles leiden here clo+tes +teruppe CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1202

and ure helende rod +terone ; into +te holie burh .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1203

and +tat burh folc hihten +te hege strete CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1204

and bihengen it mid palmes . and mid o+dre riche wedes . +ter he wolde
+turh faren to +te holi temple . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1205

and wenden ut togenes him . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1206

and beren on here honde blostme sum palm twig . and sum boh of oliue
alse +te holie boc sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1207

Occurrunt turbe cum floribus et palmis redemtori $obuiam . et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1208

+Det folc com togenes him . mid blostmen . and mid palmes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1209

and understoden him mid procession . swo me $king shal .
CMTRINIT-MX1,89.1210

and +to +te ferden biforen him and +do +te after him comen . remden
lude <P_91> stefne +tus que+dinde . Osanna filio dauid benedictus qui
uenit in nomine domini . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1211

Silof daui+des bern CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1212

blesced bie he +te cume+d a godes name . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1213

and +to children +te weren biforen diden alse +te godspel sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1214

Pueri hebreorum viam pro et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1215

+Te children briggeden +te wei biforen ure drihten . sume mid here
clo+des . and sume mid boges +te hie breken of +te trewes
CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1216

and swo him brohten into +te holie temple . alse in his heor+dliche heg
settle . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1217

+Tus makede ure helende his holie procession . fro betfage to ierusalem
. CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1218

and elhc cristene man make+d +tis dai procession fro chirche to chirche
. and eft agen . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1219

and bitocne+d +te holie procession +te he makede +tis dai .
CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1220

and +tat mai ech man understonden . +te wot wat bitocne+d +tese tweie
names . betfage . and ierusalem . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1221

Betfage interpretatur domus bucce . uel buccarum siue maxillarum . et
significat ecclesiam in qua bucce funguntur officio suo peccata
confitendo ueniam postulando . deum laudando . Carnem christi
manducando . et sanguinem eius bibendo . gratias agendo .
CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1222

Betfage is cleped on englisse mu+dene hus . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1223

and bitocne+d holie chirche . +tat men noten inne here mu+des wike .
+tanne hie seien here sinnes . and forgiuenesse bidden . and ure
louerd ihesu christ herien . and bruken his fles and his blod . +tat
his +te holi husel . and him +tanken . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1224

Ierusalem interpretatur uisio pacis et item significat ecclesiam in qua
pax uera uidetur dum passio christi recolitur . et pacis osculum datur
. CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1225

Ierusalem is cleped so+d of sahtnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1226

and bitocne+d holie chirche +ter bileffulle men inne be+d sehte .
+tenne prest cristes +troweinge minege+d . and of +te calice
understonde+d tocne of sehtnesse . +tat is messe cos . and +te folc
sent . and +termide bitocne+d +tat ure drihten is +tureh +te holie loc
wi+d bileffulle men maked sehte . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1227

and +terfore chirche haue+d +te tocninge of bethphage +tenne +te
procession ut go+d of ierusalem . and eft +tenne it in cume+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1228

Nime we +tenne geme gif ure procession bi maked after ure helendes
procession . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1229

On his procession ferde sume biforen him CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1230

and makede his weie toward ierusalem . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1231

and sume briggeden +te asse mid here clo+des . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1232

and sume mid boges +te hie breken of +te trewes . CMTRINIT-MX1,91.1233

+Do +te +te weie makeden biforen him . bien folkes lor+teawes .
bisshopes and prestes . +te mid here wise lore <P_93> ride+d . and
maked godes weie in to mannes heorte . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1234

+Do +te briggeden +te asse mid here clo+des . ben +to +te wisse+d +te
folc mid faire forbisne of here weldede . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1235

+Do +te briggeden +te asse mid +te brokene boges . ben +to +te leren
+te folc to understonden god noht mid weldede . ac mid wise speche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1236

+to +te after him comen ben +to +te here lif $leden alse here lor+deawes
hem lere+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1237

+to +te bisides weren on his riht half . ben +to +te clene lif leden to
quemende gode ; noht for hereworde . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1238

+to +te on his lift hond comen ben +to +te clenliche liuen noht for@ @to
quemende gode ; ac for hereword to hauen . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1239

+De asse +te ure helende uppe set . ben +to forsinegede +te hauen al
here +tonc uppen eor+dliche richeise . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1240

and sinne hem is lo+d to leten . and $unwilliche to bete .
CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1241

for hem +tinche+d +tat godes hese heuieliche seme+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1242

and na+deles gif hie ful don hie shulen on heuene endelese mede fon .
CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1243

Ure louerd ihesu christ +te makede into ierusalem +tis dai his holie
procession . +te ech chirche to-dai minege+d . wisse and fulste us swo
to folgen his holi $eor+tliche procession +tat we mo ben on +te holie
procession +te he wile maken a domes dai mid hise chosene ; fro +te dome
in to heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1244

Quod nobis prestet qui secula per omnia regnat . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1245

<heading>

XVI . IN DIE PASCHE . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1247

<$$heading>

HEC est dies quam fecit dominus exultemus et letemur in ea .
CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1249

+Tis dai haue+d ure drihten maked to gladien . and to blissen us
+tonked wur+de him . and giarked +tat holie gestninge . +te he offe
spec+d +tus que+dinde . Ecce prandium meum paratum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1250

Mi bord is maked . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1251

and us bidded alle +terto +tus seggende . Venite prandium
CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1252

Cume+d to borde CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1253

and understonde+d bred . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1254

ac er +tenne +te holie bord bugen . and +tat bred understonde do we
alse +te apostel bad . seiende +tus . Probet autem se ipsum homo . et
sic de pane illo edat et de calice bibat . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1255

Proue ech man him seluen . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1256

and gif he fele+d +tat he is wur+de +ter to ; +tenne understonde he +tat
husel . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1257

and drinke of +te calice . CMTRINIT-MX1,93.1258

+te man hit understonde+d wur+dliche +te cume+d +terto on bicumeliche
wise . and mid <P_95> bicumeliche wede . and on bicumeliche time .
CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1259

On bicumeliche wise cume+d +te man +te Erest shewe+d preste his sinnes
and forlete+d and bimurne+d and nime+d +terof god wissinge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1260

and o+der si+de +te holie acxen uppen his heued . and +te six pinen +te
+terto bilien . scilicet vigilias . labores . saccum . inedia .
sitim . +tat is wecche and swinch . harde clo+des . smerte dintes .
selde eten and lesse drinken . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1261

+Tridde si+de palm sunedeies procession . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1262

feor+de si+des shere+duresdaies $absolucion +te li+de +te sinne bendes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1263

+te fifte si+de crepe to cruche on lange fridai CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1264

sixte si+de on ester euen gon abuten +te fantston . +te bitocne+d +te
holie sepulcre . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1265

and +te seue+de si+de +tat holie bord bugen and +tat bred bruken .
CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1266

bicumeliche wede ben tweire kinne . lichamliche and gostliche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1267

+te lichamliche wedes ben manie kinnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1268

ac of hem ne speke ich noht CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1269

ac do of +te gostliche . +te ben ec fele kinnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1270

and alle hie bien faire him +te +te husel underfo+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1271

ac two +teroffe ben swiche +tat no man ne mai underfo . him seluen to
hele bute he haue here o+der on him . +te ben +tus clepede . Vestis
innocencie . Vestis misericordie . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1272

an is lo+dlesnesse o+der sinbote . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1273

Vestis innocencie restituitur in baptismo dicente sacerdote $Accipe
uestem candidam et inmaculatam . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1274

lo+dlesnesse understonde+d +te man at his folcninge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1275

and +tat bitocne+d +te crisme clo+d . +te +te prest biwinde+d +tat
child mide . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1276

and +tus sei+d . Underfo shrud wit and clene . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1277

+tis shrud haue+d ech man on him after his fulcninge . alle +te wile
+te he him berege+d +tat he ne do ne ne que+de . ne ne +denche no +ting
for +tat he bie unwur+dere gode ; ne lo+dere men ; +te iuele is soule ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1278

+Tis wede is wel bicumeliche and biheue ech man to hauen +tenne he husel
underfo+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1279

+Det o+der gostliche shrud ich embe spece ; is mildhertnesse . +te is
nemed ec ; armhertnesse CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1280

armheorted is +te man . +te swi+dere reowe+d his sinne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1281

and he hem forlet and bet . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1282

and milce bit . alse ure drihten bad seien +tus . Miserere anime tue
placens deo . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1283

haue reo+de of +tin ogen sovle . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1284

+tenne likes@ @te gode . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1285

Mildheorted be+d +te man +te reou+d his nehgebures unsel+de . and
like+d here alre sel+de and of+tin+d sore wrecche mannes wanrede . and
freure+d hem mid his weldede . CMTRINIT-MX1,95.1286

No man +te sineged haue+d ne mai wi+duten +tus wedes holi husel <P_97>
underfon ; bute to eche harme his soule and lichame CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1287

and ech man +te hit underfo+d wi+duten ei+der +tese wedes shal ben
shameliche driuen ut of +tis holi gestninge . and bunden togedere his
honden . and his fet . and worpen in to +te ateliche pit of helle bi
ure drihtenes word +te sei+d to swiche men . Amice quomodo huc intrasti
non habens uestem nupcialem et cetera CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1288

hwu come +tu ider in mid unbicumeliche weden . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1289

+tis dai is bicumelich time husel to underfon . Quia hec dies quam
fecit dominus . non quod magis hanc quam alias . sed quia maiora quam
in aliis a morte resurgendo . et nos a morte resuscitando . for +tat
+tis makede ure drihten +te makede alle o+dre . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1290

ac he kidde o+derluker his mihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1291

and mankin more milce dide on +tis dai ; +tanne on ani o+dre .
CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1292

+Do he aros of dea+de rerde us mid him . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1293

Vnde exultemus et letemur in ea , CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1294

he us fette ut of helle wowe . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1295

and +termide us gledede . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1296

and gif we him folgie+d he gif+d us heuene wele CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1297

and +termide us blisse+d to dai CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1298

+tonked . wur+de him . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1299

for+ti +tis dai is cleped estrene dai . +tat is aristes dai . for +tat
+te he +tis dai aros of dea+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1300

and we alle don ; +tanne we holi husel undernimen . gif we ben +te
togenes on clene liflode . and on rihte leue . and wi+d alle men sehte
. CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1301

Ure louerd +te us bit to +tis gestninge . and bringe us to his holi
fleis and to his holi blod and leue us hem to bruken . and +tus
que+dinde . Accipite et commedite ex hoc omnes hic est e. c. s. m.
n. et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1302

Understonde+d +tis CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1303

and bruke+d it alle . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1304

for it is mi lichame +te giu shal alle lesen . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1305

he bet us ec his holi blod +te shal ben shad giu to lesende
CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1306

and sei+d +tat +tese two +ting bien ure bileue . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1307

Caro mea uere est cibus et sanguis meus uere est potus .
CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1308

Mi fleis is wis mete . and mi blod iwis drinke CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1309

and after +tat he sei+d . Nisi manducaueritis carnem filii hominis et
biberitis eius sanguinem non habebitis uitam in uobis .
CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1310

Ne muge hauen no lif on giu bute ge liuen bi mi fleis and bi mi blod .
CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1311

+tat husel +te ge understonden ; is his holi fleis and his blod .
CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1312

Erest it be+d ouelete and win . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1313

and +tureh +te holi word +te ure helende him self seide mid his holi
mu+d ; and efter him prest hem sei+d at@ @te swimesse turne+d +te bred
to fleis and +te win to blod . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1314

Set in carne remanet forma color et sapor . CMTRINIT-MX1,97.1315

ac on +te holi fleis bileue+d +te <P_99> shap and hiu . and smul of
ouelete . and on +te holi blod hew and smul of win .
CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1316

More mihte do+d ure helende +tenne +te holi word +te he +turh his mu+d
spec . +tanne he giue+d mannes cuinde . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1317

and Na+teles +tanne man ete+d and drinke+d +tureh +te lichames cunde
+tat bred wur+d to fleis . and +te drinke to blod . for +ti mai godes
word turnen +te ouelete to fleis . and +tat win to blod .
CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1318

and swo do+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1319

and +tat is +te felefolde heste . +te is alre hestene heste +tat alle
cristene men agen to dai to noten . for +tat +tis dai is cleped estre
dai +tat is estene da . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1320

and te este is husel . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1321

and no man ne mai seien husel ; wu god it is . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1322

Quia est precium mundi . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1323

for it is wur+d al +te wereld . and betere +tene al +te wereld .
CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1324

+tis is +te holi manne +te ure drihten sende alse snow sle+drende alse
+te prophete sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1325

Pluit ille manna ad manducandum et panem celi dedit eis . $Panem
angelorum manducauit homo . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1326

he let hem reine manne to bi-liue . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1327

and gef hem bred of heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1328

and men eten englene $bred . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1329

Manna interpretatur . quid est hoc ? CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1330

Manne bitocne+d wat is tis ; CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1331

and +to ure drihten sende +tis mete fro heuene +te israelisse folke ; it
war+d on eches mu+d wat mete se he mest luuede . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1332

and bitocne+d holi husel ; +te ech cristeman understont nu+de . +te is
+te manne hegeste sweteste este +te is of sinne clensed . o+der bigunne
to clensende . and alre bitere biterest eches mannes soule +te ne
haue+d alle michele sinnes forleten . and bet . o+der bigunnen alse
+ta apostel sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1333

Qui manducat corpus domini et bibit et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1334

Ech +te understande+d +tat holi husel unwur+dliche he understant him
seluen eche pine . and endelese wowe . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1335

Nime we nu geme ure ech agen him seluen . gif we bien cumen on
bicumeliche wise . +tat is to so+d shrifte . to holi axen a palm
sunedai ; to procession . a shere+dursdai to absoluciun . a
langefridai to holi cruche . an ester euen to procession <em> abuten
+te fanstone <$$em> . and gif we ben cumene mid bicumeliche wede . of
lodlesnesse +tat is clensinge . swo +tat we hauen ure sinnes forleten .
and bi shriftes wissenge bet . o+der bigunnen to beten . and milce
bidden . CMTRINIT-MX1,99.1336

+tanne muge we bicumeliche to godes bord ; bugen . and his bode
wur+dliche bruken . and +tureh +te holi este cumen <P_101> to Ariste .
CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1337

Quod nobis prestet qui hodie surrexit et uiuit cum deo patre in unitate
spirituc sancti . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1338

<heading>

XVII . <em> DOMINICA I POST PASCHA . <$$em> CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1340

<$$heading>

Stetit ihesus in medio discipulorum suorum & dixit eis . pax uobis .
legitur in ewangelio quod dominus ante passionem sedit dum discipulos
docuit inter passionem et resurrectionem iacuit et quieuit . post
passionem uero stetit . pacem eis $optauit . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1342

we reden on +te holi godspel boc . +tat ure helende +trowede on +te
holi rode . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1343

and dea+d +tolede . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1344

and mid his e+deliche dea+de lesde us of eche dea+de .
CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1345

and on +te +tridde dai aros of dea+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1346

and arerde us mid him . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1347

and bihet us eche lif on blisse . gif we lede ure lif nu swo he us
wisse+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1348

We nime geme of +tre +ting on +tis tale . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1349

on is +tat biforen his +troweunge he sat ofte and tahte wisdom +tan +te
him folgeden . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1350

o+der is +tat bitwenen his +trowenge and his ariste he lai on his
sepulcre and swiede . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1351

and for +tat ben +te +tre dage biforen estre cleped swidages .
CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1352

+De +tridde is +tat he stod among hise diciples . and bed hem fri+d
alse seint lucas sei+d on his godspelle +tus quedinde . $Stetit ihesus
et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1353

Ure louerd stod among his diciples ; CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1354

and bed hem fri+d . and sehtnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1355

Fri+d ; for +tat he hadde maked hem fre ; of +te deules +tralsipe . +te
hie hadden and al $ofspring one wuned . fro +te time +te adam ure forme
fader gilte forte +tat ure helende mid his dea+de hem alesde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1356

Sehtnesse ; for +tat +te he makede sehte +te heuenliche fader wi+d
$mankin . and $openede togenes hem +te giate of paradis . +te +turh
eue gilte wi+d hem was er tined . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1357

His tribus Modis ponimur in huius exilii miseria quod alii sedent , alii
iacent . alii stant . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1358

On +tese +tre wise we wuneden on +tis wreche wereld .
CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1359

sume sitte+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1360

and sume lige+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1361

and sume we stonde+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1362

+Danne we hauen ure sinnes forleten . and bireused . and bet . and
ben huseled . we ben hege . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1363

ac alse wat se we sinegen . we ben fro hege to loge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1364

and +teh us ure sinnes rewe . and imint hauen +tat we hem wile forleten
, na+deles we sitte+d for+d +tat we hem forleten . and beten alse ure
drihten us minege+d bi +te prophete +tus que+dinde . Surgite postquam
sedistis q. m. p. d . CMTRINIT-MX1,101.1365

Arise+d <P_103> +tanne ge hauen seten . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1366

ac we ne mugen +tat don ; wi+duten his elpe . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1367

seie we +tanne to him . Domine tu cognouisti sessionem meam et
resurrectionem meam . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1368

louerd +tu wost wu ich habbe seten . and +tat ich ne mai wi+d-uten +tin
elp risen . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1369

Exurge domine adiuua me .i. fac me exurgere . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1370

aris louerd ; CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1371

and elp me up . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1372

+Dus sit man on his sinne swo ich seid haue . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1373

and +tus li+d swo ich nu seie wile . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1374

+Danne man sinege+d gretliche . and him +tinche+d +te sinne swete .
and ne wile noht forleten hit . for +tat it him on sume wise like+d .
and +teh he hem forlete ne wile noht bi shriftes wissinge bete . he
be+d ne+der +tanne he er was . alse fro sete to leire and demd to
dea+de . and +terto bunden . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1375

swo is +te man +te halt faste his sinne . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1376

he is demd fro heuene to helle . fro ure louerd ihesu christ to alle
deules . fro eche liue ; to eche pine . bote he +te bendes breke .
and berege him mid bote . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1377

and alle +te wile +te he +tus li+d on his sinne ; +te rihte bileue and
+te so+de luue . +te he hah to hauen to gode ; ben leirede . and
slaine on his heorte CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1378

and +ter +turh he swike to undernimende alle holsum lore .
CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1379

Et sic ihesus iacet in sepulcro cordis illius . et quiescit aput illum
a doctrina usque in diem tercium scilicet mentis illuminacionem .
Primus enim dies est lux boni operis . Secundus clarificacio sermonis .
Tercius illuminacio mentis . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1380

and on +tat wise li+d ure helende on his heorte . alse on sepulcre .
CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1381

and swige+d of holsumnesse lore togenes him ; forte +tat on +ten +tridde
dai ; +tat is heorte be liht CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1382

for +teh he do edie dede . +te is nemned to o+der dai . bo+de him
helpe+d litel o+der noht . bute he haue god +tonk +te is euened to +te
+tridde dai . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1383

ac alse wat swo +te +tridde dage+d . +tat be+d +tanne his heorte
understant +te liht of rihte bileue . and of so+de luue . +tenne
rise+d ure helend on his heorte . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1384

and teche+d him holsum lore . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1385

and +tus sei+d . Cur iaces pronus in terra ; Surge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1386

Wi list +tu turnd on +te eor+de ; CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1387

aris . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1388

+tat is to seien hwi luuest +tu +tine fule sunnes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1389

forlet hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1390

and bireuse hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1391

and bet hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1392

and bide milce ; +terof . CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1393

and gif he +tis lore understonde+d ; he arist and stant .
CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1394

and ure helende stant on is heorte CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1395

and bede+d him +tanne fri+d . and sehtnesse CMTRINIT-MX1,103.1396

and +tus que+d . Pax uobis . fri+d=a= ; for +tat he ben +tanne fried
of +te deueles <P_105> +tralshipe ; alse ich er seide .
CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1397

Sehtnesse ; for +tat hie ben +tenne sahtnede wi+d +te heuenliche fader .
CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1398

and is +te giate of paradis opened to-genes hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1399

Per quam nos introducat . Qui viuit et Regnat per omnia secula
seculorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1400

amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1401

<heading>

XVIII . <em> DOMINICA IV POST PASCHA . <$$em> CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1403

<$$heading>

Omne datum optimum et omne donum perfectum desursum est ; descendens a
patre luminum . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1405

Seint iacob +te holie apostel . +te ure drihten sette to lor+teawe .
+te folc of ierusalem . he nam geme of +te wune ; +te weren +to ; and
get bien mid mannen ; fewe gode ; and fele iuele .
CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1406

and bigan to turnen +te iuele to gode . mid his wise wordes . +te he
wi+d hem spec mu+d wi+d mu+de . +te hwile he wunede lichamliche among
hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1407

and agen +te time +te ure drihten wolde him fechen fro +tis wreche
woreld to his blisfulle riche ; +to sette he on write +te wise word +te
he spec . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1408

and +tat writ sende into chirchen . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1409

and hit is cumen into +tis holi minstre to dai . and biforen giu rad
+teh ge it ne understonden . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1410

ac we wilen bi godes wissinge and bi his helpe . +terof cu+ten giu
+tese lit word . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1411

Omne datum optimum et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1412

Ech god giue and ful giue cume+d of heuene dunward . and ech idel .
and unnit . and iuel ; ne+den uppard . +teh +te unbileffulle swo ne
lete . ac lat +tanne he haue+d sineged . on +tonke o+der on speche .
o+der on dede . Werpe+d +tat gilt uppen ure drihten . and sei+d . gif
god hit ne wolde ; swo hit ne were . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1413

and o+der while werpe+d it uppen sheppendes +te none ben . bute god
self +te alle +ting shop ; CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1414

and sei+d . ne was me no bet shapen . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1415

and o+der hwile uppen hwate . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1416

and sei+d . n@ @ahte ich no betere wate . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1417

and wile uppe +te deuel ; CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1418

and sei+d . he me drof +terto +te ne sholde . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1419

and lige+d eches wordes . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1420

for +teh +te deuel muge man bi-charre ; he ne mai no man neden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1421

and on +tis wise werpe+d +te unbileffulle man his agen gilt uppe +te
giltlese . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1422

Omnis autem praua cogitacio in corde ascendit . tam innata quam illata
unde dicitur in ewangelio . Ut quid ascendunt cogitaciones in cordibus
uestris . CMTRINIT-MX1,105.1423

ech unnit speche and +tonc <P_107> astigh+d in +te mannes heorte . be
swo it beo . alse +tis writ sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1424

Vnus quisque traitur a concupiscencia sua . abstractus . et illectus .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1425

ech man beo+d bi sleht of his agene lichames luste alse +te boc sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1426

$Diabolus per sugestionem inmittet homini malam cogitacionem .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1427

+te deuel mid his for-tihtingt bringe+d unnut +tonc on mannes heorte .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1428

and te+d him swo to iuele speche and to werse dede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1429

and on +tis wis cume+d ech iuel +tonc . and speche . and dede .
ne+den uppard . sam it haue angun of +te mannes lichames wille sam it
haue +te biginning of the deules fortuhting . CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1430

and for to bileande +tat no man werpe +te gilt of his sinne anuppen god
; and +terfore seid seint iacob +tos word . Omne datum optimum et
cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1431

ech god giue ; and ful giue ; cume+d of heuene send of lemene fader .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1432

Datum aliud est bonum ut quod fouet corpus Aliud est melius ut quod
ornat cor . Aliud est optimum ut quod sanctificat hominem .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1433

+Tat godes giue is god +te fet and shrut +te lichame alse +te blostme
+te cume+d of coren of eor+de . and of treuwe . +te ben cleped werldes
winne . CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1434

and +tat godes giue is betere . +te alime+d +te man of fiffolde mihte .
his egen to sen his earen to listen his nose to runien . his mu+d to
smellen . and his lichame al mid to fri+dende CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1435

and +tat godes giue is best . +te clense+d +te man . of all sinnes .
and lese+d of helle ; and to-genes him opene+d heuene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1436

and +tat is fulcning erest and si+den husel . CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1437

Bonum autem aliud incoatum ut fides . Aliud prouectum ut spes . Aliud
perfectum ut caritas . CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1438

Eft_sone sum godes giue is bigunnen alse rihte leue .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1439

and fur+dre+d alse trust . and longenge to godes bihese and sum mid
alle ful alse so+d luue to gode and to mannen . CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1440

and swiche ben +te seuene . +te ben cleped Carismatum dona .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1441

scilicet Sapiencie et intellectus et cetera . Item remissio peccatorum
que datur in baptismo est datum optimum . Bonum uite eterne est donum
perfectum . CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1442

Eftsone +te giuenesse of sinne is +te beste giue .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1443

and +tie giue he giue+d ech man in +te fulluht . CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1444

+te giue of eche $lif on blisse . is te fulle giue .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1445

and +teo giue he giue+d mid +te holi husel . +tanne man it
understonde+d rihtliche . and holsumliche . CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1446

Swiche giues . and none iuele sende+d lemene fader ; mankin .
CMTRINIT-MX1,107.1447

Leomene fader we clepe+d ure drihten for +tan +te he sunne atend . +te
steores of hire leome . <P_109> and te mone of hire leome . and al
+tis middelherd aleme+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1448

and ure ihesu christi aleme+d +te selue sunne ; +te alle o+dre +ting
aleome+d . and ec +te man . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1449

Lumine intellectus et fidei . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1450

aleme+d of understondinesse . and of rihte bileue .
CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1451

Angelorum autem et o. m . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1452

and brin on englen and on mannen . +te hete of so+de luve to him seluen
. CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1453

He sende us +te gode giue +te alle sinnes forgif+d . and +te fulle giue
+te giue+d eche lif on blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1454

Qui viuit et Regnat per omnia <em> secula seculorum <$$em> .
CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1455

<heading>

XIX . IN ASCENSIONE DOMINI . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1457

<$$heading>

Eleuatus est sol in celum et . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1459

+Te holi prophete abacuc . +te wunede on +tis weorlde . and eft +terof
wot . fele hundred wintre . er +te time +te ure drihten understod
mannisshe . and was boren . so+d $god and so+d man of +te holi
maidenes inne+de ure lafdi Seinte Marie . and na+deles seh suterliche
fele of +te wundren . +te ure helende dide si+den ; and on middenerd
wrohte CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1460

and +terof spec . and nameliche of +tat michele wunder +te he +tis dai
dide . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1461

and +terefore +tese word seide . Eleuatus est sol et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1462

+Te sunne was efed into heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1463

and te mone stod on hire stede . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1464

On +tis tale is ure helend nemned sunne . for fuwer +ting .
CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1465

On is +tat the sunne is on ; and nanmo . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1466

o+der is +tat hie arist anes a dai . and eft sige+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1467

+Te +tridde is . +tat he +tinke+d ful of liht for heo liht al +tis
middenerd and te sterres on heuene ; and te mone .
CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1468

+tat feor+de is +tat heo +tinche+d ful of hete for +tat hat alle +ting .
+te on eor+de wecse+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1469

alswo hure helende is almihtin god . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1470

and n@ @is non o+der bute he . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1471

Vnde dicitur pater et filius et spiritus sanctus unus deus .
CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1472

+Te fader and +te sune and +te holigost ben on almihtin god .
CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1473

Eft-sone ure helende aros alse sunne . +to +te ure lafdi Seinte Marie
hin kennede of hire clene mei+dhode . alse +te holi minster boc sei+d .
to +te heuenliche quen +tus que+dinde . Ex te ortus est sol iusticie
christus dominus noster . CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1474

Of +te is arisen +te sunne of rihtwisnesse ; +tat is ure drihten christ
. CMTRINIT-MX1,109.1475

and he eft aseh alse sunne to-glade . +to +te iudeus him pineden on +te
$holi <P_111> rode to dea+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1476

and his holi lichame was leid on +de sepulcre alse seinte peter sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1477

CHristus semel pro peccatis nostris mortuus est . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1478

Ure helende crist +tolede enes de+d for ure sinnes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1479

+tonked wur+de him . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1480

Eft-sone he is alse +te holi boc sei+d . Fons luminis . welle of liht
. CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1481

et lux uera que illuminat omnem hominem uenientem in hunc mundum et
omnia . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1482

and he is +tat so+de liht ; +te lihte+d ech man . of al +te liht +te he
haue+d lihamliche wi+duten . and gostliche wi+d-innen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1483

and +te selue sunne ; he lihtte+d of al hire liht .
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1484

Eft_sone he is sendere of alle holie heten . alse him selfen sei+d on
his godspel . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1485

Ignem ueni $mittere in terram quam uolo ut ardeat .
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1486

Ich com for to senden fur on eor+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1487

and wile +tat it berne . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1488

+De fur +te he embespec+d ; is +te hete +te atent on mannes heorte .
+te make+d him his sinnes swi+de bimurnen . and luuen ure drihten more
+tene him seluen . and his emcristene alse him seluen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1489

+tis sunne +tat we of speken ; +tat is ure helende +te was +tis dai
heued on hegh . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1490

Set cum sit supra omnem altitudinem que potuit ascendere ?
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1491

ac si+d+den he is buuen alle hegnesse hwider sholde he stige .
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1492

+te holi $apostel us sei+d hwu hit war+d CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1493

and +tus que+d . Quod autem ascendit quid est nisi quia descendet
primum in $inferiores partes terre . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1494

Erest he steg neo+der and si+den on hegh . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1495

of neo+derstienge spec+d dauid on +te salm boc . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1496

and +tus que+d . Inclinauit celos et descendit . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1497

+De heuene abeh CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1498

and dun asteh . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1499

Et ascendit super cherubin et uolauit . et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1500

and steh eft abuuen cherubin . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1501

and fro hwu $hegh he to hwu loge steh ; CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1502

and eft agen seint ambrosius +tat sei+d on his loft songe . +tus
que+dinde Egressus eius a patre excursus usque ad inferos . et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1503

he ferde fro +te fader ; for +tat he com ne+der to helle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1504

Et in horum uia bibit de torrente mortis . propterea exaltauit caput
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1505

and on +tis longe weie +te he ferde fro heuene to helle he dranc of
de+des flode . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1506

and +tarfore heuede si+den up +tat heued . alse seint ambrosie sei+d
+tus que+dinde . Recursus ad sedem dei . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1507

he steh to heuenliche heh settle . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1508

and wiche strides he makede dunward . and eft uppard ; +tat sei+d
sanctus salomon +te wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1509

and +tus que+d . Ecce uenit saliens in montibus et transiliens colles .
CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1510

here he cume+d stridende fro dune to dune . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1511

and ouer_strit +te cnolles . CMTRINIT-MX1,111.1512

Septem igitur ut ita dicam saltus dedit . $De celo in uirginis uterum .
Inde <P_113> in presepium . Inde in crucem . Inde in sepulcrum . Inde
in infernum . INde in mundum . Et hinc in celum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1513

Seuen strides he makede . On of heuene into +te maidenes inne+de .
O+der +tenne in to +te stalle . +Dridde in to +te holi rode . feor+de
; +tanne in to +te sepulcre . fifte ; into helle . Sixte ; into +tis
Middenerd . +te seue+de ; eft into heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1514

Ac +to he to helle com . +te engles +te mid him comen . clepeden to
+te deuel CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1515

and seiden . Tollite portas principes uestras et e. p. e. et
intrabit rex glorie . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1516

ge maisterlinges of +testernesse opene+d giwer gaten .
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1517

+te king of blisse wile faren herin . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1518

+De stefne herden +te witeies . +te +terinne weren
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1519

and on of hem +tat was . dauid andswerede +tus . Dominus fortis et
potens dominus potens in prelio . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1520

+te louerd +te is strong . and mihti and on fehte .
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1521

and dide ure louerd alse +te boc sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1522

Portas ereas contriuit et uectes ferreos confregit . et dedit lumen his
qui erant in penis tenebrarum . et ligauit satanan et capituam ducit in
capitiuitatem . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1523

and ure helende brac +to +te irene herre CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1524

and alto_shiurede +te giaten . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1525

and in wende . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1526

+to was helle liht enes and nefre eft ; of heuene liht .
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1527

and bond te holde deuel . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1528

and herede helle of +to +te him hadden her er quemed . alse +te salm
wrihte sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1529

Eduxit eos de tenebris et umbra mortis et uincula eorum disripuit .
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1530

and he brac here bendes CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1531

and ledde hem ut of +testernesse . and of dea+des shadewe .
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1532

and ros of de+de . +te +tridde dai ; +tat is estrene dai .
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1533

and wunede mid his diciples noht alegate ; ac stundmele forte +te
fuwerti+de dai ; +tat is todai . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1534

and +to he dide alse +te holi boc sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1535

Eleuatis manibus <em> suis benedixit eis . Et factum est dum bendiceret
illis recessit ab eis et <$$em> ferebatur in celum et benedixit eis .
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1536

he heuede up his hond . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1537

and giaf hem his blescinge . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1538

and swo ferde to heuene alse dauid sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1539

Ascendit deus in iubilo et dominus in uoce tubarum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1540

and ure drihten steh on wordlese songe . and on bemene stefne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1541

Iubilus est exultacio mentis . habita de eternis . que nec taceri
potest nec lingua explicari . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1542

Wordles song is +te herte michele blisse . +te heo haue+d of heuenliche
+dinge . and ne mai +teroffe be stille . ne mid worde hem atellen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1543

swiche ben +te songes +te me singe+d hege dages alse alleluia . and
swiche o+dre . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1544

Swo dide +te apostles +to hie bihelden ure helende . +to he to heuene
wende . CMTRINIT-MX1,113.1545

and folgeden him mid egen +to hie mid lichame <P_115> ne mihten .
CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1546

and of +tat mihte swi+de wundreden . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1547

and +terof weren swo bli+de +tat hie ne mihten mid worde here blisse
tellen . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1548

Etiam in sono tube prout regem decet ascendit . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1549

On bemes steuene he . asteh to his hege home . alse me king
undertstant +tanne he to his home cume+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1550

+te bemes weren +te engles +te wi+d +te apostles stoden ; mid snouwite
shrude . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1551

and +tus seiden to hem . Hic est ihesus . qui assumptus est a vobis in
$celum sic <em> ueniet quemadmoddum uidistes <$$em> eum euntem in celum
. et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1552

+te his faren fro giu into heuene he cume+d eft alswo ge him segen faren
into heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1553

+to folgede ure helende michel feord of englen . and of holie soules .
+te he lesde ut of helle CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1554

+tonked wur+de him . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1555

and +to engles biforen him blewuen +te heuenliche beme .
CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1556

and swo kidden +tat he king was cumen fro fehte . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1557

and hadde his andsete ouercumen . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1558

and +te bemene drem +te +te engles blewen . +te +tere comen biforen ure
helende to heuene gaten ; CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1559

and +tus que+den to +te engles +te +ter wi+dinnen weren . Tollite
portas principes uestras et elevamini porte eternales et intrabit rex
gloriae . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1560

gie maisterlinges herwi+d-innen opene+d giure gaten ,
CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1561

and ech gate untine+d giu seluen to-genes +te king of blisse +te wile
faren herin . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1562

and hie +te +ter-inne weren ; +tus andswereden . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1563

Quis est iste rex glorie ? CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1564

hwat is +tis blissene king ; CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1565

and +to wi+duten seiden . Dominus uirtutum ipse est rex glorie .
CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1566

he +te is alre mihtene louerd he is alre blissene king .
CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1567

+De sunne +te ich of specce . +tat is ure helende self ; +te alle
brihtnesse lihted of him seluen . he alihte to dai ure +tonc of rihte
bileue . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1568

and alse he atent alle holi heten . he atende todai ure herte +te
twifelde hete . +tat is +tat we ure sinnes sore bi-murnen . and
forleten and beten . and milce bidden . o+der +tat we hauen so+de luue
to him seluen . and to $ure emcristene . swo us longe to him alse
diden hise apostles and teo hus to him ; alse he hem dide and
understonde mid on his riche . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1569

Qui cum patre et spiritu sancto uiuit et Regnat per omnia secula
seculorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1570

AMEN . CMTRINIT-MX1,115.1571

<P_117>

<heading>

XX . IN DIE PENTECOSTE . CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1574

<$$heading>

Apparuerunt apostolis dispertite lingue tamquam ignis seditque supra
singulos eorum spirituc sanctus . CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1576

+Do +te ure louerd ihesu crist fundede lichamliche fro eor+de to heuene
. he forbed his apostles . and here holi ferreden +tat hie n@ @eren
noht sorie . +teh he hem $forlete lichamliche CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1577

and seide Non turbetur cor uestrum neque formidet . Rogabo patrem et
alium paracletum dabit vobis . et cum uenerit ille ; docebit uobis
omnem ueritatem . CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1578

Ne beo giuer heorte noht i+dreued ne ofdred . CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1579

ich wile giu senden +te heuenliche frefringe wi+d-innen a lit dages .
+te giu shal frefrin and techen alle so+dfastnesse and bringen ti+dinge
of +ting +te beon to cumende . CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1580

and +te faire bihese leste he +tis dai . CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1581

for +tis dai is +te fiftuge+de dai . after estrene dai . alse +te
louerd seint lucas . seide on +te holie pistle . +te me ret to dai and
ech holie chirche . and +tus que+d . Dum complerentur dies $pentecoste
erant omnes pariter discipuli in eodem loco et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1582

On +te fiftu+de dai . after estrene dai weren alle +te apostles . and
here fereden gadered on one stede . sittinde and salmes singende . and
god heriende . in +te temple of ierusalem . CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1583

Et factus est repente sonus tanquam aduenientis spiritus vehementis et
repleuit totam donum ubi erant apostoli sedentes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1584

riht to-genes +te undrene alse +te holi songere sei+d on his loft songe
. +tus que+dinde . Dum hora cuntis tercia ; r. m. i. o. a. d. u.
n . CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1585

+To com a dine of heuene . ase +teh it were to kidende +tat +te holi
gost com uppen +te apostles and filde ful +tat hus +tere hie inne seten
. CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1586

Et apparuerit illis dispertite lingue tanquam ignis seditque supra
singulos eorum spiritus sanctus . CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1587

+Do openede +te holi gost him seluen to isende bi +tan +te hem +tuhte
shapen alse tunge fele twiselende . and on fires hewe
CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1588

and for +tat hie him swich segen seint ambrosius shewed +tus ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1589

and sei+d . Uerbis ut essent pro . et c. f. +tat is on englis he hem
makede fundie on worde . CMTRINIT-MX1,117.1590

For +teh it were ones londes speche on +te apostles mu+des +te +tere
speken ; ech man +te hem herden were of wiche londe swo he were . for
+tere weren men of eche londe +tat is under heuene li+de . <P_119> hit
+tuhte here ech sunderlepes +tat it was his londes speche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1591

Swo +te holie gost hem fulde of him seluen CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1592

and sette +te word on hem +te +tere speken . CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1593

and skilede on hem +tat hie herden . alse seint lucas sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1594

Repleti sunt omnes spiritu sancto et ceperunt loqui prout spiritus
sanctus dabat eloqui illis . CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1595

+Tus hie segen +te holi gost on tungene euene . CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1596

and +terefore weren fundie on speche . alse ich nu seide .
CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1597

ec hie him segen on fures hewe al ich er seide . CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1598

and weren +terof wallinde on so+dere luue godes and mannen . swo +tat
hie luueden gode more +tene hem seluen . and ech cristene man alse hem
seluen . CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1599

Ignis enim ut ait scriptura triplicem uim habet scilicet illuminandi .
calefaciendi . consumendi . quam spiritus sanctus effecit in apostolis
augendo fidei feruorem . caritati splendorem . et consumendo .
irremittendo . siqua fuit in eis peccati macula .
CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1600

Fir haue+d on him +tre mihtes CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1601

on to giuende hete . o+der to giuende liht . +tridde to weldende elet
to none +tinge . CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1602

+tese +tre mihte notede +te holi gost on +te apostles .
CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1603

and +terefor com uppen hem on fires hewe alse ich er seide .
CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1604

and alihte hem of brihtere and of festere bileue +te hie hedden er .
CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1605

and maked hem hattere on so+de luue to gode and mannen ,
CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1606

and welde here sinnes to none +tinge , CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1607

for gif anie hadden don he hem mid alle forgaf . CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1608

+Dus +te holie apostles were gadered on ane stede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1609

and +tus +te holi gost com uppen hem CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1610

and fulde hem of him seluen . CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1611

and freurede hem of sorege . CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1612

and tehte hem speken eches londes speche . CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1613

and lihte hem of rihte bileue CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1614

and makede hem hattere on so+de $luue to gode and to men .
CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1615

and clensede hem alle of +te hore of alle sinnes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,119.1616

Bidde we nu +te holigost +tat he haue milce of us and gife us hige .
and mihte . to forleten and bireusen and beten ure sinnes . and gedere
ure alre herte to clene +tonke alse he gaderede +te holie apostles . in
+te temple . and hure lichames in +tis holie minstre . +tat he cume
uppen us and wune in us . and freure us of alle sorege alse he hem dide
. and lihte on us rihte bileue . and make us wallende of so+de luue
and clene of alle sinnes . and giue us swo findige speche . +tat +te
fewe word +te we on ure bede seien be cu+de alle halegen ; +te wunie+d
on heuene <P_121> +tat hie +tingen us to +te +tremnesse . fader . and
sune . and holi gost . +tat he wisse and fulste fulien +ter apostlene
lore . and on here ferreden hauen eche lif and blisse mid him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1617

$Qvi viuit et regnat in vniuersa secula seculorum deus .
CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1618

<heading>

XXI . <em> SERMO IN PS. LIII. 1 . <$$em> CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1620

<$$heading>

Dominus de celo prospexit super filios hominum vt videat si $est
intelligens aut requirens deum . $Omnes declinauerunt simul inutiles
facti $sunt non $est qui faciat bonum <em> non est <$$em> usque ad unum
. CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1622

+De holi prophete dauid sei+d on ane stede on +te salm boc +te wordes
+te ich her nu seide . CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1623

+ter he spec+d of +te mildhertnesse +te ure louerd ihesu crist do+d men
. and of +te wi+derfulnesse +te men don togenes him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1624

Mild-heorte he is togenes heom on two wise , alse him self sei+d on +te
holi godspel . CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1625

Ueni uocare peccatores ad penitenciam et $recipere penitentes ad
iustificacionem . CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1626

Ich com to clepen +to forsingede to sinbote . and understonden +to
sinbetende on $rihtwisnesse . and to lesen +te +trales of +tralshipe .
and giuen hem freshipe . CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1627

and on alle wise he freure+d +to forsingede +te frefringe wilen
understonden CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1628

Ac togenes +tis manifold mildhertnesse . men bien swo wi+derfulle .
+tat swo he gerenluker clepe+d hem to him . swo hie wi+dere turne+d
froward him . alse ich er sede . CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1629

Dominus de celo prospexit super filios hominum ut et cetera . Omnes
declinaverunt simul . CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1630

Ure drihten +te is alre louerde louerd bihe of heuene to mannen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1631

and lokede gif here ani understoden o+der bi-sohten him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1632

and seh +tat alle hie turnden fro him hem seluen to unbihefe
CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1633

and of hem alle ne was bute on +tat dide anie gode dede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1634

Alse he loke+d nu fro heuene to us . and se+d +tat we ne understonden
ne bisechen him noht swo us nied were . CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1635

ac turnen fro his hese ; to ure lichames wille . bute hit beo ani
god_friht man . CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1636

Intelligens quis homo est ; qui seipsum agnoscit et deum credit .
CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1637

+De man is understondinde +te him seluen cnowe+d and gode leue+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,121.1638

Ille se ipsum cognoscit qui considerat in speculo mentis quantus sit
<P_123> expositus miseriis . Vtpote natus in merore . Uiuens in labore
Moriturus in dolore . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1639

+Te man cnowe+d him seluen +te +tenche+d of wu medeme +tinge he is
shapen . and wu arue+dliche he her fare+d . and wu reuliche he he+den
wit . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1640

hider he cume+d on wowe CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1641

and he+den wit on wowe . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1642

and here wune+d on wanrede CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1643

and +tole+d his unwille . hwile druie . and hwile wete . hwile chele
. wile hete . hwile hunger . wile +turst . hwile chele . hwile
unhele . hwile sorinesse and wile werinesse . and hwile wurmene cheu
and fele o+dre +te ich telle ne mai . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1644

and ne mai wi+d-uten helpe him seluen +ter-wi+d werien .
CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1645

+tus ahte ech of us him seluen to cnowen . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1646

Ille autem intelligit deum . qui credit eum trinum et unum omnipotentem
creatorem omnium . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1647

+Te man understant god . +te leue+d +tat +te heuenliche +tremnesse .
fader and sune . and holigost . is on almihti god . Shuppende . and
wealdende . and dihtende of alle shafte . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1648

and +tis leue shewe+d ech man +tanne crede singe+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1649

+te man biseche+d god +te be+d is gultes cnowe . and his sinnes
forlete+d . and sore bimurne+d . and bete+d bi his mihte .
CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1650

+tat do+d ech man +tenne he pater noster singe+d . bute his li+dere
liflode his bede lette . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1651

ac lit ben +tat +tus understonden and bishechen god .
CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1652

and +to ben gode CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1653

and +terefore mid him bileue+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1654

and alle o+dre don swo +te $prophete seid . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1655

Omnes declinauerunt et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1656

alle hie turnen fro gode to +te deuel bute on . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1657

Quatuor sunt genera hominum . alii enim non intelligunt deum .
requirunt tamen . et hii fatui . Alii intelligunt et non requirunt et
hii impii . Alii nec intelligunt nec requirunt . et hii mortui . Alii
et intelligunt et requirunt et hii boni et de is dictum est . Nullum
genus hominum facit bonum nisi unum . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1658

Fuwer kinnes men ben . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1659

+tat an ne understant god . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1660

and na+deles bisheche+d him . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1661

and +tat is unwiti mennisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1662

o+der is +tat leue+d god . and ne biseche+d him noht .
CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1663

+tat is +tat orelese mennisse +te ne haue+d ore of him seluen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1664

+De +dridde ne do+d no+der . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1665

ne understant ne biseche+d god . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1666

+tat mannisse is +tuertut forlore soule and lichame .
CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1667

+tat feor+de do+d . ei+der understant and biseche+d him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1668

+tat is +tat gode menisshe . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1669

and +tat he understant CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1670

and mid him athalt . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1671

and giue+d eche lif on blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,123.1672

+te ilke louerd +te ich offe speke . +Te +tus loke+d of heuene to men
mid his milde egen . and se+d +to +te wi+derie+d to-genes him . alse
don +to +te ne <P_125> understonden . o+der bisechen and cnowe+d wo ben
hersume his hese . He bise to us . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1673

and giue us hige and mihte him to understonde . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1674

and wisse us CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1675

and filste us him to bishechen mid admod +tonc . and mid e+dele worde
and edie . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1676

and ti+de us bene gif his wille beo . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1677

Qui uiuit et regnat deus per omnia secula seculorum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1678

Amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1679

<heading>

XXII . DE SANCTO IOHANNE BAPTISTA . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1681

<$$heading>

Ego uox clamantis in deserto parate uiam domini rectas facite semitas
eius . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1683

+Te louerd seint lucas giu mune+d on his godspel +te wunderlich
hider_kume . and +te erue+dliche herbiwist . and +te wunderliche
he+den_si+d . of ure louerd seint iohan baptiste .
CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1684

and +ter he spec+d of his hider_cume . he sei+d +tat ure drihten sende
his heg engel gabriel to on old man ; +tat was holi prophete . and ec
bisshup . and het zacharie . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1685

and sende him to seien +tat he sholde strene an holie child and clepen
hit iohan . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1686

and seide wich lif hit sholde leden . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1687

and on his burde michel folc blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1688

and bifore gode ben michel and mihti . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1689

+To understod +te holi man +tat he was of michel elde . and his
woreldes make was teames atold . and unberinde . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1690

and for +tese +tre +ting let hit unleflich . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1691

and ne lefde hit noht ; +tat +te engel him seide .
CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1692

and +tus qua+d . Vnde hoc sciam . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1693

hwu mai ich +tis wite CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1694

+to seide +te engel . Qvia non credidisti uerbis meis . ecce eris
tacens et non poteris loqui usque ad diem natiuitatis eius .
CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1695

For +tu art unlef mine worde . +tu shalt beo dumb forte +tat child beo
boren . and +terbi wite +tat ich so+d seie . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1696

+tus bicom +te holi man dumb ; CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1697

and on his spuse +tis holi child strende . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1698

On the sixte mone+d +tarafter was +tat holi maiden ure lafdi seinte
marie liht mid +te holi child ure louerd $ihesu crist
CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1699

and com to hire moge Seinte elizabet +te ich er embe was +te bar on hire
wombe Seinte Iohan baptiste . CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1700

and alse wat se +tat holi meide mid worde grette +te holie spuse ; +to
war+d so+d +tat +te engel hadde er bi +tis child seid .
CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1701

Spiritu sancto replebitur adhuc ex utero matris sue
CMTRINIT-MX1,125.1702

+tat child sholde on his <P_127> moder wombe ben fild of +te holi gost
alse it was . Et prophetalis spirituc filii illuminauit spiritum matris
et prophetauit uterque . hic gaudio illa uerbo . for +tat +te +tis
childes witige gost lihte +te moder gost ; of witienge . swo +tat hie
witegede bo+de of ure louerd ihesu crist@ @es to_cume . and of +te
moder ure lafdi seinte marie . +tat child on his blisse for hit floxede
. and pleide to-genes hire . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1703

and te moder on hire worde +tus seide . Vnde hoc michi . ut ueniat ;
mater domini mei ad me . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1704

We+den is me cumen +tat mi louerdes moder cume+d to me ?
CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1705

+Do +tis child was boren . and him was name geuen +to com +te fader his
speche . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1706

and witegede +te childes arue+dliche herbiwist . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1707

and +tus que+d Tu puer propheta altissimi vocaberis preibis enim ante
faciem domini parare vias ejus . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1708

+Tis child shal hoten godes prophete . and fare bifore godes neb . and
maken his weies . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1709

and hit swo war+d . for +tat alse wat se he was +togen on wintre . and
on wastme and hadde michel of wereld +tinge . +to nam he geme of mannes
liflode . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1710

and cnew +tat here dedes weren iuele . and here speche unnutte .
CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1711

and fleg here ferede . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1712

for he n@ @olde noht folgen here forbisne ne on speche ne on dede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1713

and +terfore ferde into weste wilderne alse Seinte ambrosii sei+d on his
loftsonge . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1714

Antra deserti teneris s. c. tur . fugiens p. n. l. s. m. u. f.
posses . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1715

On his guwe+de he fleh fro folke to weste . for +tat he ne wolde .
$noht mid lihte wordes filen his liflode . and for he was send into +te
weste to maken +tere godes weies ; CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1716

+terefore he makede his wunienge in +te wilderne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1717

and sta+delede his liflode on fode . and on shrude . swo +tat he $was
bicumelich to his wuninge and ec to his wike . alse hit sei+d on +te
loft songe . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1718

Prebuit hirtum tegimen camelus . a. s. tro. b. c. l. h. s. p.
m. locustis . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1719

Weste was his wunienge . and stark haire of oluente his wede . wilde
hunie and languste his mete . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1720

and water was his drinke . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1721

+Do sprong te word of his holi liflode wide into +te londe
CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1722

and bigan +tat folc sechen to his wunienge . for to sen his holi
liflode . and to here his wise lore and wenden +to for his michele
wisdom ; +tat hit crist self were . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1723

and he bigan +to to maken alse +te boc sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1724

Instruendo ad fidem . inuitando ad baptismum . vocando ad penitenciam
. CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1725

tehte hem rihte bileue . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1726

bed hem to fulcninge . CMTRINIT-MX1,127.1727

<P_129>

and clepede hem to shrifte . +tat is to reusende . and to forleten .
and to beten here sinnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1729

for +tat is shrift . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1730

+Do wolden +te bisshupes . and +te o+dre lerede +te wuneden in +te lond
; witen hwat he ware . for +tat hie wenden +tat hit were crist self .
CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1731

and senden here erendrakes to him +tus que+dinde . Tu quis es ?
CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1732

hwat art tu ? CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1733

$Et respondit . $Non sum ego Christus . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1734

Ne am@ @i noht crist ? CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1735

and hie seiden . Ar@ @tu helias . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1736

nai he seide . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1737

and hie seiden . art tu prophete ? CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1738

nai he seide . nan +tere prophete +te ge wenen . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1739

$Et dixerunt . Quis igitur es . Ut responsum demus eis qui miserunt
nos ? CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1740

Seiden hie wich andswere shule we giuen hem +te senden us to +te ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1741

and he andswerede . +tus que+dinde Ego uox clamantis in $deserto parate
uiam domini rectas facite semitas ejus . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1742

Ich am his steuene +te reme+d in +tis westerne . and +tus que+dinde .
Make+d +te louerdes weies . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1743

and rihte+d his pe+des . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1744

Et enim uox ordine nature antecedit uerbum . sic . iohannes ordine
temporum antecedit christum , Vnde dicitur hic dei uox ille uerbum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1745

liste+d nu wat tis westerne is . and wi ure drihten grede+d +ter onne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1746

Populus qui malo opere dereliquid deum factorem suum . et inutili uerbo
recessit a deo salutari suo . est descertus . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1747

al +tat folc +tat +turh unnutte speche and iuele speche . and
$iueledede . turne+d fro gode . and forlete+d his hersumnesse . is
cleped westren . for +tat +te he ne wune+d noht on hem ; ne he on him ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1748

for +ti is +tis westren for-grouwen . mid brimbles . and mid +tornes
and mid iuele wiedes . +tat is to seien . +tat folc is forgilt wi+d
god . on unnitte speche . and on iuele dede . and on idel +tonc .
CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1749

Clamat ergo dominus ad nos per predicatores tanquam surdos et longe
positos . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1750

and for-+ti grede+d ure drihten to us ; alse to deue men . and fer fro
him wunien . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1751

Deue we ben o+der +ticke_liste . +tanne we heren speke godes word .
and nime+d +ter to litel geme . o+der non . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1752

fer fro ure drihten we ben . +teh we gon to chirche . and giuen rihte
ti+dinge . and singen ure bede . and dele+d almes more for to hauen
eor+dliche winne +tene heuenliche wele . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1753

ac turne we to ure drihten on rihte bileue . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1754

and nehtleche him on clene liflode . CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1755

and maken us wei to him . on so+de luue to gode and to mannen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,129.1756

Est enim dilectio dei et proximi regia uia qua <P_131> cundum est ad
uitam . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1757

for +tat so+de luue lede+d alle rihtwise men to eche blisse ; +te luue+d
god more +tane him seluen . and ech cristene man alse him seluen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1758

ac tat is arue+d for+te ani eor+dlich man . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1759

and terfore do we alse seint iohan baptiste us minege+d +tus que+dinde .
Rectas facite semitas dei nostri . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1760

Make+d rihte godes pe+des . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1761

Semite dei quibus facile peruenitur ad eum sunt opera bona .
CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1762

Godes pa+des ben ure gode dedes . on elmes . and on o+dre +tinge +te
us shule leden to eche liue . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1763

Que si fecerimus pro celestibus declinabimus ad terram . Si autem pro
fauore populi . ad sinistram diuertemus . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1764

Gif we don ure gode dedes for to hauen +tis weorldes sel+de . o+der
mannes hereword to mede . +tenne make we godes weies wronge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1765

and ne ben noht toward heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1766

ac gif $we don . and que+den . and +denchen wel for +tat we god luuen
. and longe+d to him . and we +teron $halden to ure lifes ende .
+tenne beo we on rihte weie . +te lede+d us to eche life . alse dide
+te louerd Seint iohan baptiste . alse ich er sede . +De wunderliche
com into +tis wreche woreld and her-one arue+dliche wunede . and
her-offe at his ende wurliche wende . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1767

for he was bihaueded on herodes prisone . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1768

for he n@ @olde noht turnen ut of +te hege weie . ne of +te rihte
pa+des . +te he minegede mankin to makiende . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1769

and was +ter-one werchende . and farende . for_to +tat he $com to +de
ende +tat is eche lif . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1770

ad quam nos ducat . qui $uiuit . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1771

<heading>

XXIII . DE SANCTO IOHANNE BABTISTA . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1773

<$$heading>

Inter natos mulierum non surrexit maior iohanne baptista .
CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1775

Un-ligel man selde lige+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1776

and so+d-sagel man sei+d ofte so+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1777

and he +te neure ne lihgh ne lige ne wile . ne ne mai . +tat is ure
helende . he sei+d eure so+d CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1778

and +terefore is so+d +tat he seide bi +te louerd Seint iohan baptiste
+tus que+dinde . Inter natos Mulierum et cetera CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1779

of alle +te bernes . +te ben boren of wifes bosem . n@ @is non more
+tenne iohan +te fulcnere . CMTRINIT-MX1,131.1780

+De forme man +te com in +tis <P_133> midden-erd +tat was adam . ure
alre fader he was more . Quia inmortalis fuit . donec peccauit for
+tat he was undea+dlich forte he sinede . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1781

and eure beo mihte gif he him wite wolde . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1782

ac he ne was boren of wifes bosme . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1783

ne ne hadde fader ne moder . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1784

Set dominus fecit eum de uirgine terra . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1785

ac ure drihten him shop of eor+de +tat was unfiled .
CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1786

Eftsone ure helend +tat is sheppende and wealdende of alle shafte is
more +tene Seint iohan baptiste CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1787

ac he was strened of +te heuenliche fader . er +tanne +te heuene o+der
eor+de shapen were . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1788

and ne was of wifes bosme boren . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1789

and was of +te holi meydenes ure lefdi Seinte Marie .
CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1790

Ysaac . +tat +te lif_holi wimman sarra on hire elde kennede . and te
lif_holi man abraham . on his elde strende . alse ure drihten hadde er
+tan +tan iseid . +tat he sholde he ne was noht more ne for+de swo
michel a sume wise swo seint iohan baptiste Ne non o+der of wifes bosme
boren . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1791

and +tat is sene on +tre $+ting of him . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1792

on his hidercume . o+der $his $her_biwist . +te +tridde his he+densi+d
. CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1793

$Aduentus eius in mundum fuit mirabilis . Status eius in mundo
difficilis multimoda afflictione carnis . Exitus eius de mundo
triumphalis quia dum facinora uiriliter obstitit . et hostem uicit .
et mortem perdidit et uitam inuenit . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1794

his hidercume was ful of wundren . +te ure drihten wrohten ; to
wur+dende mid $seint iohan baptiste CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1795

+te forme wunder was ; +tat +to +te god fundede of heuene to eor+de to
fonden mennisshe . of +te holie meidenes inne+de ure lafdi Seinte Marie
. +Do spec +te heuenliche fader to +te sune heuenliche of seint iohan
and efnede him to engel +tus que+dinde . Ecce mitto angelum meum qui
preparabit uiam tuam ante faciem tuam . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1796

here ich sende min engel biforen +tine nebbe +te shal ruden +tine weie
to-fore +te . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1797

Et reuera fuit angelus non naturaliter sed officialiter .
CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1798

and he was iwis godes engel noht of kinde for +tat he ne was noht gost ;
ac on wike . CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1799

+tat o+der wunder was ; +tat he ches two lif_holi men him to fader .
and to moder +te weren bo+de teames ateald . and heo +te wimman was
barrage swo +tat heo ne mihte for unkinde hauen no child .
CMTRINIT-MX1,133.1800

+Tat +tridde wunder was . +tat god sende +te holi engel gabriel to +te
lif_holie prest zacharie . +to +te he gede in +te temple mid his rechel
fat . to rechelende +te alter . and sende him seggen +tat he sholde
+tis holi <P_135> child strene . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1801

+De holi man sah +te heg engel at@ @te alteres ende .
CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1802

and war+d of-grisen , and ofdred . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1803

and te engel qua+d to him ; CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1804

and sede Ne timeas zacharia . quoniam exaudita est oratio tua et
elizabet uxor tua pariet tibi filium et vocabis nomen eius Iohannem et
in nativitate eius multi gaudebunt . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1805

Ne beo +tu zacharie $noht of-grisen . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1806

+tu hauest longe iwist after strene CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1807

and god haue+d herd +tine bede ; and ti+ded te bene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1808

and elizabet +ti spuse shal hauen a cnauechild . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1809

and him shal to_name iohan . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1810

and hit shal beo +te to michel blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1811

and fele shule fagenien on his burde . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1812

Erit enim magnus coram domino . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1813

for he shal ben michel bifore gode . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1814

Et adiecit angelus explicare seriem magnitudinis iohannis contentam in
quatuor . scilicet . Virtute abstinencie . Donis gracie . Officii
dignitate . Et palma uictorie . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1815

+Te childes michelnesse sheude +te engel on fuwer +tingen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1816

On is wi+d-teinge of alle lichames lustes . and iuele lastes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1817

Et uinum et siceram non bibit et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1818

+Tat o+der is un-erned giue . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1819

+tat +tridde is heh wike . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1820

+tat feor+de is wlites ending CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1821

his michelnesse was unhiled on ten_fold wise and mo .
CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1822

an is +tat +te heuenliche fader heuenede him to engel .
CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1823

Vt ecce mitto angelum meum et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1824

O+der is +tat he sende +te heh engel to +te holi man +te him strene
sholde . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1825

Et uox tua pariet tibi filium . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1826

+Tat +tridde is +tat +te fader bicom dumb . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1827

for he ne lefde hit noht +tat +te engel him sede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1828

Et eris tacens usque ad natiuitatem eius . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1829

+te feor+de is . +tat his moder him bar si+den heo was teames atold .
and neure er ne was mid childe ; CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1830

for kinde hit hire werende . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1831

Et processit in diebus suis sterilis . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1832

+te fifte is . +tat +to +te he was on his moder wombe get unboren he
witegede of ure helendes to_cume . and of +te maidenes +te him bar get
on hire swete wombe . +tat is ure lafdi seinte marie .
CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1833

Et exultauit infans in utero meo . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1834

+te sixte is +tat elizabet was liht of +te holie gost +te was on +te
child +te hie mide hiede . swo +tat hie ec witegede of ure helendes
to_cume . CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1835

Et unde hoc michi ut ueniat mater domini mei ad me ?
CMTRINIT-MX1,135.1836

+te seue+de is +tat he giaf his fader mihte to speken +te hadde dumb
<P_137> ben ; si+de he +te engel mislefde . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1837

Et apertum est os zacharie et prophetauit . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1838

+Te egte+de is +tat ure drihten him bed fulcnen on watere to synbote .
and fulcning beden and ec seggen Super quem uideris spiritum
descendentem . et cetera . Hic est qui baptizat in spiritu sancto .
CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1839

wanne +tu sest gost cumen and wunien uppe mannen he shal fulcnen on +te
holie gost to sinnes forgiuenesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1840

+te nige+de is +tat +te heuenliche +tremnesse was mid him +to he
fulcnede ure helende . Pater in uoce . Filius in homine . Spiritus
sanctus in specie columbe . +Te fader on stefne . +te sune on mannes
efene . +te holi gost on culures hewe . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1841

+te tie+de is . +tat michele hereword +tat ure helend him gaf +tus
que+dinde . Inter natos mulierum . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1842

Of alle wifes children n@ @is non more +tanne Seint iohan babtiste .
CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1843

+Tis child him self on his liflode hadde his agen michelnesse on +tre
wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1844

scilicet . Abstinencia humilitate . Paciencia . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1845

On is wi+dteung . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1846

o+der is admodnesse . +te +tridde +toleburdnesse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1847

he hadde mihte te witen him of alle flesliche lustes . alse +te apostel
bit . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1848

Abstinete uos a carnalibus desideriis que militant aduersus animam .
CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1849

Wi+d-teod giu of +te flesliche lustes . +te fihte+d togenes +te soule .
CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1850

Wi+dteo +tine egen +tat hie ne biholden non iuel ne non un-nut ne
for+den idel . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1851

Wi+dteo +ti lichame fro orguil . and idel . and ouer mete wede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1852

Wi+dteo ec +tine golliche deden mid alle ; gif +tu spuse ne hauest .
CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1853

and gif +tu spuse hauest ; wi+dteo te on unluuede stede . and on
$unluued time . +tat is +tanne +tu fasten shalt . o+der halgen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1854

Ne beo +tu noht wuned to don hit on unluued wise ne wilful to wecchen
lust +tat to . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1855

Quoniam qui sic agit uehemens amator est et proprie uxoris adulter .
CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1856

For alle +to +te swo don ; don ewuebruche on here agene spuse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1857

he hadde ec admodnesse CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1858

+to al folc herde . hwu heh . and hwu holie he was . and hwu holi lif
he ladde and wenden +tat hit were self crist and seden hit . and he
wi+d-qua+d CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1859

and sede . Non sum ego christus . nec etiam dignus ut soluam corrigiam
calciamentj eius . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1860

ge wenen +tat ich beo crist . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1861

ac ich n@ @am noht ne for+den wur+de +tat ich un-cnutte his sho +tuong .
CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1862

Ne mihte he mid none worden ki+den betere ; +tat he admod was and him
seluen mece . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1863

Qvia in spiritu lenitatis peccatores corripuit . et ad penitenciam
uocauit . CMTRINIT-MX1,137.1864

Mid softnesse he castede <P_139> +te sinfulle CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1865

and minegede hem to sinbote . and to clene liflode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1866

Et semet ipsum prebuit exemplum . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1867

and giaf hem faire forbisne of him selfen +teh he sinful ne were alse
seint ambrosii sei+d $Antra deserti . t. s. a. c. turmas .
CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1868

On his guwe+de he understod +tat he was send into +tis midden erd . to
donde +trefolde wike . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1869

scilicet aduentum christi prenunciare . baptismum predicare .
baptizare . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1870

an is to ki+den cristes to_cume . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1871

o+der is bodien fulcninge CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1872

+tat +tridde is fulcnen . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1873

and me+dede +to his liflode swo +tat he was bicumelich to swiche wike .
Ne forte cum aliis predicaret reprobus ipse fieret . For +tat he ne
wolde noht mis leued +tenne he men lerde . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1874

Nam cuius uita despicitur restat ut eius predicacio contempnatur ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1875

for n@ @is +te lor+teau noht to luuene ; gif his liflode is iuel . and
ful . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1876

and for +ti he turnde ut of +te burh into wilderne . and fro mennes
wunienge to wilde deores . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1877

and ches +tere crundel to halle . and eor+dhole to bure bare eor+de to
bedde . and hard ston to bolstre . Stiue here to shurte and gret sac
to curtle . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1878

Moren and wilde uni was his mete . and noht bute water his drinke .
CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1879

On wecche . and on swinche . and on alle wise he wan wi+d his hagene
lichame . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1880

and +turh swiche liflode +tuhte swete his lore alle +to +te hit herden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1881

+Do ne mihte his holinesse ben no lengere for-hole .
CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1882

ac sprong his word wide into al +te worelde CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1883

and teh folc to him to heren his wise word . and to sende his
wunderliche liflode . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1884

and he minede alle men to forleten here sinnes and beten . and on
sinbote understonden fulcnenge . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1885

and fele +ter of him seluen fulcnede . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1886

and bi +to dages luuede herodes +te king his bro+der wif ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1887

and bi-nam hire him . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1888

and Seint Iohan hit wi+d_seide . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1889

and lettede hit bi his mihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1890

and te king stod eie of him . for his holinesse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1891

and bad him swike . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1892

and he ne dorste for godes eie forleten ; +tat he +te king +tat +teau ne
binome . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1893

+Do was +te king wro+d ; CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1894

and bad binden him and don him in to prisune bute he wolde his word
wi+dteon . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1895

+to cneu seint iohan . +tat gif he wolde +tolen +tat te king drige his
unriht he mihte liuen and ben him lief and wur+d . ac gif he wolde
folgen $rihtwisnesse he sholde +terfore his lif forleten
CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1896

and swo dide at@ @ten ende . for +tat a maiden bed te kinge his heued .
CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1897

and he hit bad of acken . and hire bitechen . CMTRINIT-MX1,139.1898

and he +tat e+deliche dea+d <P_141> admodliche +tolede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1899

and +ter mid bigat eche lif on blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1900

Nu we hauen seid +treo +ting +te we giu biheten . hwu wunderlich was
his hider-cume . and hwu wrecchede his her-biwist . and hwu siker his
he+densi+d . and wiche wise he was more +tenne ani o+der man of wifes
bosme boren . and a wiche wise he of +tis woreldes wowe wot ; in to
eche wele . CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1901

swo mote we alle . and +tere wunen mid him abuten ende .
CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1902

Eo prestante quem ore predicauit . et digito monstrauit . Qui . vivit
et Regnat per omnia secula seculorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1903

<heading>

XIV . DE SANCTA MARIA MAGDALENA . CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1905

<$$heading>

Mvlier que erat in ciuitate nomine maria iam penitens uenit ad domum
symonis ubi erat ihesuc . et procidens . lacrimis pedes eius rigauit .
et capillis suis tersit . et oscula affixit . et unguento unxit .
cuius odore domus impleta est . CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1907

+De lauerd Seint l . +te trenne+d +tat holi godspel +te men r+ad inne
holie chireche sei+d +tar on +tat ure drihten underfeng eadmodliche ane
sinfulle wimman and forgiaf hire hire sinnen . for two +tinge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1908

an is muchel le+d+de to hire sunne . o+der muchel luue to him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1909

+Das word munege+d us +tat we nime forbisne after +tes wimman . and
hatien and forleten . and beten ure sinnen . and luuen and fulien ure
drihten alse hie dide . CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1910

Luste+d nu +tanne CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1911

and undernime+d +treo +ting . CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1912

on his +tes wimmannes name . O+der wiche wise hie hine bisohte .
+tridde hwich andswere he hire giaf . CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1913

Nomen igitur est maria quod interpretatur stella maris .
CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1914

Hie is ihaten alse +tat holie maiden . ure helendes moder . englene
quen marie . +tat is on ure ledene se-steorre . and +te gerise+d wel
here ei+der . CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1915

Vtraque enim lucis sue radium . id est exemplar in mari . id est in
mundo diffundit . Illa pundicicie . Ista penitencie .
CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1916

Hur ei+der alum+d +te se +tat is +tis woreld of faire forbisne
CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1917

+te quen +gaf forbisne of mai+dhode +tat is of clennesse . +De o+der of
penitentence . +tat is of clensunge , +tat is +tat brin+d hori to clene
. CMTRINIT-MX1,141.1918

and muchele mo fare+d on +tisse s+a . +tat is on +tisse worelde .
<P_143> fuliende +te leome of penitence . +tat is forbisne of clennesse
. +tane don +te leome of mai+dhod . CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1919

Mundus nomine maris appellatur . tum propter procellas aduersitatum tum
propter affluenciam copie . tum propter reffluenciam inopie . tum quia
extra nauem in mari non est fiducia salutis . CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1920

Hali boc nemme+d +tes woreld s+a . for +tan +te mistliche gelimpe+d .
hwile of wele . and wile of wawe walke+d +tar-onne , alse do+d +te u+de
in +tar s+a . CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1921

and alse +te s+a ebbe+d and flow+d ; alse +tis woreld hwile gif+d wunne
. CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1922

and hwile hit eft binim+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1923

and alse man sone forfar+d in +te s+a bute he on shipe be ; alse fare+d
efrich man into helle of +tesse worelde bute he on chirche bie . +turh
rihte gielefe . and clene liflade . and so+de luue to gode . and to
eche cristene mane . CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1924

+Des wimman hadde ec on toname magdalene . CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1925

quod interpretatur turris . et significat elacionis altitudinem . ante
conuersionem . et contemplacionis post conuersionem .
CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1926

+Dat is on ure ledene tur . CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1927

and tacne+d hwile heinesse of oregel +te hie hadde +to hie sinne luuede
. and hwile heuenliche +tonc +te hie hadde +ti hie sunne forlet . and
bette alse ure drihten sede . CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1928

Maria . optimam . partem elegit que non auferetur ab ea .
CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1929

Marie haue+d icore +tat beste del +tat is heuenliche wunienge . +te hie
habbe shal abuten ende . CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1930

Nu +gie habbe+d iherd +tes wimmanes name and ec hire toname . and wat
here ei+der bitocne+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1931

+ge here+d ware heo com to ure helende . and heo him to loc brohte .
and a@ @wiche wise his milce bisohte . and hwu hie +tare ier@ @dede +to
heo hadde se swi+de heo selue forsineged . +tat seuen awergede gostes
ware on hire +geherbere+gede . CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1932

+Da iherde hie seggen +tat ure drihte on his larspelle sede . +tat alle
men sholden dea+d +tolien . and an domes dai eft arisen of dea+de and
+to +te hadden here sinnes forleten and bet ; o+der +tar-on biuonge are
hie here lif forleten . hie sholden faren to heuene . and mid ure
drihten eche lif habben and blisse . and +to swo ne duden hie sholden
+tolien mid deflen eche pine . on helle . +Da bi+dohte heo on hire
liflode CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1933

and +ge-cnew +tat hie was la+d gode . and ladlich amang manne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1934

and +taruore hire sinne hire bicome swi+de la+de CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1935

and heo +tohte +tat heo wolde hem forleten . and beten .
CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1936

+to com ti+ding +tat ure helende was cumen to symones huse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,143.1937

+ta +tohte hie +tat hie hine <P_145> +geseche wolde and him lac bringe .
and milce bidden . CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1938

and nam ane box +gemaked of marbelstone CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1939

and hine fulde mid derewur+de smerieles . CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1940

and cam +tar he was CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1941

and his holi fet +gesohte . CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1942

and sore hire sinne biwiep +tat hie his fet lauede mid hire hote teres .
CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1943

and wipede hes +ter after mid hire faire here CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1944

and mid hire mu+de custe . CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1945

and +tarafter smerede . CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1946

+ta war+d +tat hus al ful of +te swote swote bre+de .
CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1947

Mid swiche dede hie clensede heo seluen of ache synne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1948

Et respiciens dominus eiecit vii demonia . et dixit ei . Mulier
dimittuntur tibi peccata tua . CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1949

+Da biseh ure drihte mildeliche to hire penitence . and +geseh +tat hie
biterliche elche +tare limene on hire seluen +te hie hadde erur mide
iseneged . and hadde reu+de of hire . CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1950

and drof ut of hire .vij. deoflen +te ware on hire +geherbered .
CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1951

and +tus qua+d . Wimman +tine sunnen +te be+d forgiuene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1952

Swo beo us alle ure . CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1953

Eo dimittente . Qui viuit et Regnat per omnia secula seculorum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1954

Amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1955

<heading>

XXV . {COM:Lambeth_Homily_XVII} DE SANCTO IACOBO .
CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1957

<$$heading>

Evntes ibant et flebant mittentes semina sua . Venientes autem uenient
cum exultatione portantes manipulos suos . CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1959

+De holi prophete dauid +te was king of ierusalem fele hundred wintre er
ure drihten man bicome and were boren of +te holi maiden ure lafdi
seinte Marie . he hadde wuniende on him +te holi gost +te him dide
suterliche to understonden +tat ure drihten wolde man bicumen . and
ware . and wanne and of wam ben boren . and hware de+d +tolien . and
wi+dinne wiche firste +tar-after arisen of dea+de . and hwiche wise to
heuene stie . and eft to +te dome cumen . and wet man him sholden on
+tis woreld abuten wunien . and wich lif leden . and wiche him
hersumien . and wich mede +terto-genes understonden in heuenriche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1960

and speke+d of ech +tinge sunderlepes and in +te salmboc stundmele .
CMTRINIT-MX1,145.1961

and +te fewe word +te ich nu for+d-tegh he spec+d of +te holie mannen
+te folgeden ure helende $lichamliche on eor+de ; alse +te louerd Seint
iame was <P_147> dai hit is to dai . and o+dre holie apostles .
CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1962

and +tus que+d . Euntes ibant et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1963

Hie hiden wepende and sewende . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1964

and shule cumen mid blisse and mowen . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1965

he spec of +tat +te sholde wur+de alse +tehg hit wur+den were . For
+tat he wiste siker +tat hit wur+den solde . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1966

Set quo euntes ; in mortem . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1967

Ac wider +geden hie ; CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1968

fro wureld wele to lichamliche wowe . fro reste to swinche . fro hele
; to unhele . fro guwe+de to helde . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1969

and on +tis reuliche wei hie weren walkinde forte +tat hie comen to +te
lichamliche dea+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1970

Quas lacrimas fundentes ; tum compunctionis . tum passionis ; tum
peregrinacionis . tum contemplacionis . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1971

Swiche teares shedden hie on +tis reuliche wei ; erest of reu+de of here
agene sinnes . +to +te hie erest understoden +tat hie sineged hadden
CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1972

and +tat sore bi-wiepen . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1973

and forsoken +te wereld . and eor+dliche wele . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1974

and turnden mid alle to ure helende . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1975

and mid wosi+des betten here sinnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1976

and +terof milce beden . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1977

Talibus lacrimis lauit Maria Magdalena pedes domini .
CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1978

Mid swiche teres lauede ure lafdi Seinte Marie magdalene ure helendes
fet . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1979

and wer+d hire seluen laued . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1980

and was clene . of hire fule synnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1981

His etiam lacrimis lauit petrus maculam trine negacionis .
CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1982

Mid swiche teares lauede Seint peter +te hore of +te fule sinne . of
ure helendes andseche Qvando exiuit et fleuit amare +Do he him understod
hwu he syneged hedde . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1983

and hit him sore reu . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1984

and he hit mid bitere teares biwiep . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1985

and mid +tat wope wer+d clensed of +te synne . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1986

INterdum autem uidentes aliquos affligi fuderunt lacrimas compassionis .
CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1987

O+derwile wanne hie segen men wanred +tolien . o+der on sinne bifallen
o+der mid sorinesse bistonden . +ter-of hie hadden reu+de ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1988

and sore hit bi-wipen . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1989

Has lacrimal dominus fudit quando lazarum suscitauit .
CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1990

Swiche teares wep ure drihten seluen . +to +te he sah martha and marie
Magdalene +to two sustres wepen for here bro+dres dea+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1991

and he him bed risen of his birieles . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1992

and he swo dide . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1993

and hem was sta+ded wop . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1994

and turnden here wop to blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1995

Item dominus uidens ciuitatem fleuit super illam .
CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1996

At o+der time ure helende biheold ierusalemes bureh .
CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1997

and wiste alse he alle +ting wot . +tat it sholde sone +tar after ben
astruid . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1998

and swo was . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.1999

and +terfore of his holie egen ; hote teares . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.2000

and minede swo us alle . CMTRINIT-MX1,147.2001

and gaf <P_149> forbisne of him seluen +tat we sholden biwepen ure elch
o+dres sinne . and wosi+des . and forlete lahtres . and idele songes
. CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2002

Swich wop is fremful to wassende mide sinnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2003

Plerumque etiam tetido uite presentis affecti . fudere lacrimas
peregrinationis . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2004

and o+der hwile +te holie men shedden here teares for lif of +tis
worelde for +tat hem +tuhte +tat tis arme lif hem lastede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2005

Tales lacrimas fudit iob quando dicebat . Tedet anima mea uite mee .
CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2006

wuo is mi soule +tat ich bide here swo longe . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2007

Swiche teares shedde +te holie prophete . +to +te he +tese word sede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2008

Heu michi quia incolatus meus prolongatus est CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2009

wumme +tat ich shal wunien on uncu+de erde . and +tat min biwist is
teged here swo longe . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2010

Hoc autem dixit quia non habemus hic manentem ciuitatem . sed in celis
debet esse conuersacio nostra . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2011

+Det seide +te holi man for +tat we ben here alle on fleme .
CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2012

Ac ure erd is on heuene ; gif we +tar-after auele+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2013

Iustus autem cum languet desiderio patrie celestis quando fudit lacrimas
contemplacionis . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2014

+De riht-wise man +te mid his heorte and mid his egen bihalt into heuene
. and seo+d +te endelese blisse . +te alle godfruhte men ben to
clepede . and turne+d +tenne his luue +terto . him wile sone longe
+tar after . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2015

and +tenne him swi+de longe+d +tider . him seluen le+dien ne mai . he
sent his +toht ; and his to-hope mid his hote teares .
CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2016

Has lacrimas fudit sponsa sponso . quando dicebat . $Trahe me post te
. CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2017

Swiche teares wiep +te holie spuse uppen hire spus . +to +te hie seide
lauerd drah me after +te . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2018

for ich ne mai cumen to +te bute +tu me helpe . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2019

Vtrasque lacrimas . scilicet peregrinacionis . et contemplacionis .
fudit apostolus fortassem cum dicebat . Cvpio dissolui et esse cum
christo . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2020

lo+d is me +tis . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2021

Ei+der +tese teares shedde ich wene +te holie apostel +to +te he seide .
Cvpio dissolui . et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2022

Lo+d is me +tis eor+dliche lif . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2023

and me longe+d to criste . CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2024

He .iiij.=or= lacrime . sunt . iiij.=or= aque . de quibus lauari
iubermur . per ysayam dicenttem . Lauamini mundi estote .
CMTRINIT-MX1,149.2025

+Des fower <P_151> kinnes teares . +te ich haue here seid . ben +te
fower wateres +te we shulen us one wasshen . alse ure drihten us bad .
bi ysayas +te prophete +tus que+dinde . wasshe+d giu ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2026

and wunie+d clene . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2027

Lacrima autem $compunctionis ; amara ut aqua maris CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2028

+De wop +te man wepe+d for his agene sinne is swi+de biter alse
saltwater . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2029

and +tere-fore is nemmed se water . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2030

Lacrima compassionis est tempida sicut aqua niuis . que defluit ad
calorem solis . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2031

+De wop +te man wepe+d for his emcristenes wowe . cume+d of +te wlache
heorte . alse +te sunne hete +te snow . +tat he hit for-melte+d to
watere . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2032

Lacrima quidem peregrinacionis comparatur aqua fontis . quia sicut hec
ebullit de terra sic illa de cordis angustia . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2033

+Te teares +te man wepe+d . for +tat him wo be+d . +tat he wunie shal
on lo+de erde ; ben nemmed welle water . for +tat hie walle+d of +te
heorte rotes ; swo water do+d of welle . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2034

Lacrime uero contemplacionis comparantur aqua roris . quia sicut illa
nutu dei curritur ab imo in altum ; ita ille emanant propter alti
desiderium . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2035

+Te teares +te man wepe+d for longenge to heuene ben cleped rein water .
o+der deu water . for +tat alse +te sunne te+d water fram eor+de up to
+te wolcne ; and +ter-offe cume+d reines . swo +te holi gost te+d +te
mannes luue to heuene . and make+d +tat him longed swi+de +tider . and
for +tat longenge wasse+d his neb mid teares . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2036

+Dese fower kinne teares wiep ure louerd Seint Iame .
CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2037

and on +tese fower wateres wuesh him seluen of sinnes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2038

and siew +to on wowe ; +tat he shal eft on blisse mowen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2039

Que sunt semina ; Qui manipuli ; Uerba ueritatis . Opera caritatis .
CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2040

+te sed +tat he sew were so+de wordes . and mild_heorte dedes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2041

+te blostmes +te shal eft mowen ; ben . Lux perpetua . Salus eterna .
Letitia sempiterna . +tat is ilestende liht . and endelese hele . and
eche blisse mid angles in heueneriche . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2042

folge we nu+te +te louerd Seint iames faire forbisne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2043

and gon mid ure heorte . and mid ure fote ut of unbileue . in to rihte
bileue . and of gode in to betere . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2044

and swo e+dele word . and edie deden . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2045

and wepen +to fuwer kinne teares . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2046

and of +te fower wateres +te ich er embe spec ; wassen us clene of ure
sinnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2047

and hauen on us +tat his name bitocne+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2048

Iacobus interpretatur supplantator uiciorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,151.2049

Iacob on boc leden is icleped on englisse under-plantere of fule <P_153>
custumes . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2050

et merito . supplantauit enim uicia ; bene uiuendo . in se docendo
bene uiuere ; in aliis . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2051

and rihtliche he was cleped iacob ; CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2052

for he under-plantede fule custumes . of him selfen ; mid his clenliche
liflode . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2053

swo we agen alle to don . bo+de lerede . and lewede . and mid faire
lore understonden godes word . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2054

Quod nobis prestet . qui secula per omnia Regnat .
CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2055

amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2056

<heading>

XXVI . {COM:Lambeth_Homily_XIII} DE SANCTO LAURENTIO .
CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2058

<$$heading>

Qvi parce seminat parce et metet . et quia seminat in benedictionibus
d. <em> b. <$$em> et Metet . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2060

Ure louerd seinte poul hegest alre lor+tew after ure helende seluen
spec+d on +te holi boc . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2061

and mine+ge+d ei+der hodede . and lewede to godes wordes and to weldede
. CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2062

Specialiter quidem monens nos . ut ait gregorius ad sancte
predicationis officium . Generaliter uero hos . et illos ad salutarem
obedienciam mandatorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2063

Hodede he mine+ge+d wel to lerende $lewede hodede . and lewede feir and
clene lif to leden CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2064

and sei+d +tat ech man shal understonden mede of his er dede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2065

and efter +tat +te he me+dege+d nu his dede . shal eft ben me+deged his
mede . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2066

and +tus que+d . Qui parce seminat . parce . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2067

+te man +te litel sowe+d ; he shal litel mowen . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2068

and he +te sowe+d on blescinge he shal eft mowen on blescinge . +tat is
to seien +te man +te wel do+d ; he wel underfo+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2069

Sacra scriptura nomine semen is appellat . tria scilicet hominis
progenituram dei uerbum . opus bonum . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2070

holi boc nemne+d iwunelich +tre +ting to sed . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2071

on is mannes stren . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2072

+tat o+der is godes word . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2073

+te +tridde is wel dede CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2074

Ure helende clepede mannes streon sed . +to he spac wi+d +te holi man
abraham ; of his strene . and seide +tat swo michel mankin sholde
springen of him . +tat no man hit ne mihte tellen . nan more +tene men
mugen tellen +te sterres on heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2075

and +tus seide . Suspice celum et numera stellas si potes . sic erit
semen tuum . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2076

Bi-hold up to heuene qua+d he CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2077

and tel +te sterres +gif +tu miht ; CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2078

for swich shal ben +tin of_$spring CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2079

Set aduertendum est quod prudens sator obseruat . et glede aptitudinem
. et temporis oportunitatem . CMTRINIT-MX1,153.2080

Ac alse +te wise <P_155> tilie nime+d +geme of two +ting +tanne he sed
sowe+d . On is we+der +te eor+de beo bicumeliche to +te sede . +tat
o+der we+der hit beo riht time +ter to . Alse $ahte ech criste man to
don wapman . and wimman +tanne hie wilen tulien after strene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2081

hie o+gen to nime michel geme . +tat hie it on stede and on rihte time
CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2082

N@ @is nefre no stede to strene bicumeliche bute hie ben bispused
rihtliche to-+gedere . ne hure riht time +tenne men fasten shal ; o+der
halgen . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2083

Godes word is ec sed cleped on +te faire forbisne +te ure helende seide
to his apostles . +tus que+dinde Exiit qui seminat . et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2084

on tilie ferde ut CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2085

and sew . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2086

and sum of +te sed ful uppe +te ston . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2087

and dride +tere . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2088

and sum ful among +tornes . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2089

and forwar+d , CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2090

and sum fel bi +te wei ; CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2091

and was fortreden . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2092

and fugeles it freten . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2093

and sum ful on +te gode eor+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2094

and +tat com wel for+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2095

+Do beden +te holi apostles seien hem wat +te sowere bitocne+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2096

and he seide +tus . Semen est uerbum dei . Sator autem Christuc .
omnis autem qui audit eum manebit in eternum . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2097

Godes word is +tat sed . and crist seluen +te sowere .
CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2098

and he +te luueliche hliste+d godes lore he shal hauen eche lif on
blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2099

Set hoc semen aliquando $spargitur tum ore proprio . tum ore
ministrorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2100

Ac ure helend sawe+d his holie word hwile +turh his hagen mu+d hwile
+turh his apostles . and o+dre lor+deawes +te cunnen holie boc-lore .
CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2101

and +termide godes folc lere+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2102

A swiche wise spec+d +te heuenliche king wi+d ech man +te he to sende+d
his writ . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2103

In hac etiam sacione obserua agri competenciam et congruenciam .
CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2104

and +tanne folkes lor+teawes his sed sowe+d he oh to nime michel +geme
+tat he hit sowe on bicumliche eor+de . and on rihte time . +tere
mennes heortes hliste+d luueliche godes lore +tere me of gode spec+d .
and +tere me god wur+de+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2105

+to ben bicumeliche eor+de godes word on to sowende
CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2106

ac +to +te luue+d sinne and forleten n@ @elle+d . o+der bileued ne
haue+d . ne understonden godes word noht ben unbicumeliche eor+de to
+te sede of godes wordes . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2107

Ech sunedai . and o+der hegh dai is riht time to sowen +te holie sed ;
+tat is godes word . and in chirche +ter al chirche folc ohg to ben
gadered . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2108

Bonum opus etiam nomine semen is appelatur . tum quia seritur in futuro
metetur . tum quia more frugum multiplicabitur . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2109

Wel dede is cleped ec sed . for two +ting . CMTRINIT-MX1,155.2110

on is . +tat alse me sowe+d on an time . <P_157> and gadere+d +te
blostmes eft on o+der . Alse man do+d nu his wel dede . and on +tat
o+der woreld shal understonden eche lif ; and blisse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2111

O+der is +tat <em> alse of on sede cume+d fele-felde westme <$$em> alse
of on e+deliche dede man shal understonden fele-felde . and michele
mede CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2112

Multa quidem sunt genera bonorum operum Set hic agitur de uno eorum .
scilicet de largicione elemosinarum . unde $prophetam inducit dicentum
. Dispersit dedit pauperibus et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2113

Fele kinne weldede ben . CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2114

ac +te holie apostel mune+ge+d here to on of hem . +tat is almes-delen
. CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2115

and sei+d +tat me hit shal giuen hauenlese men . and noht al on .
CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2116

Ac alse +te holie salmwrihte dauid sei+d . dele hit swo +tat ech nedi
+te hit biseke+d haue sum +ting +ter-of CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2117

<em> swo he do+d <$$em> +gif he wis beo+d +te hit dele+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2118

alle wel dede be+d fremfulle to sinbote . ac non fremefuler +tanne
almes-deled . CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2119

Quia sicut aqua extinguit ignem ; ita elemosina extinguit peccatum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2120

for alse water quenche+d fur ; alse almes quenche+d sinne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2121

and +gif man selle+d +te almes ; +tenne for-lest heo hire name . and
hire mihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2122

Quantuor modis uenditur elemosina et tunc inde . aut populi fauor
emitur . aut pudoris molestia redimitur . aut recompensacio rei
temporalis adquiritur . aut debitum beneficii seculo inpenditur .
CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2123

On fuwer wise man sulle+d his almes . CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2124

on . is . +tenne he bih+d +ter mide here word . CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2125

Et hoc animi morbo laborat fere omnis homo . CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2126

and +tis custume haue+d mestwat alle men . For +tat welnehg ech man
+gife+d his almesse ei+der for godes luue . and for hauende hereword .
and for to ben wur+ded fer and ner ; +te +te he cnowen is .
CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2127

On o+der wise man sille+d his almes +tanne he it +gife+d swiche men +te
he wernen ne mai for he his neghebore beo+d . o+der elles frend . and
+termide lese+d him ut of shame +te he hauen sholde +gif he him ne +geue
. CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2128

On +te +tridde wise man selle+d his almesse . +tenne he +gife+d swiche
men . +te him do+d . o+der don haue+d . wike and cher . o+der don
shal . and +tenche+d +tis mannes wile boht mid +te almesse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,157.2129

On +te feor+de wise man sille+d his almes +tenne he +gife+d swiche men
+te he a+ghte mid rihte to helpe ; to feden . and to shruden . Alse
+te man do+d . +te +gife+d his almes fader . o+der moder . suster .
o+der bro+der . o+der o+dre swo sibbe ; +tat he aghte mid rihte to
helpen to feden . <P_159> and to shruden . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2130

and al +tat man do+d for sunderlepes to quemen gode . alle hie
quenche+d sinne . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2131

and +tinge+d +te sinbetinde to ure drihten . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2132

and al +tat man do+d on o+dre wise and for o+dre +tinge +tehg hie ben
don ec for godes luue . na+deles hie hit sellen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2133

and here understonden +ter-of mede and nefre eft non . alse ure helende
sei+d on +te godspelle . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2134

Amen dico uobis receperunt mercedem suam . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2135

To so+de ich giu sede +tat +to +te don here weldede for to hauen mede on
+tis liue ne shulen hie hauen no mede on +tat o+der woreld .
CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2136

Ac al +tat man do+d sunderlepes for godes luue . he shal hauen eche lif
on blisse . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2137

and his mede shal ben +tanne garked ; alse hit beo+d here aueled . alse
ure drihten sei+d on +te godspelle . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2138

Eadem mensura qua mensi fueritis remicietur uobis .
CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2139

Bi +tat ilke met +te +ge mete+d nu +giwer weldede ; shal ben meten
+giwer mede . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2140

+tis seide +te holie apostel . alse ich er seide .
CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2141

Qui parce seminat . parcet et metet . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2142

Ech man sal eft mowen bi +tan +te he nu sowe+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2143

and he +te sowe+d on blescinge . he shal eft mowen on blescinge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2144

and +tat is ech man +te luueliche $lhiste+d godes lore . and bi alle
here mihte almes delen . and auelen +tat men hem blescen . and for hem
bidden CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2145

and ure louerd iesu crist for here bene giue hem his blescinge . +tat
is echeliche erding . and blisse on heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2146

Quod nobis prestet qui secula per omnia Regnat . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2147

AMEN . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2148

<heading>

XXVII . <em> ASSUMPTIO S. MARIE VIRGINIS . <$$em>
CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2150

<$$heading>

MARia uirgo assumpta est ad ethereum thalamum . et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2152

On of +te holie writes +te ben red herinne to dai bringen us blisfulle
ti+dinges . of an edie meiden . +te was iferen bispused +te heuenliche
kinge . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2153

and sei+d +tat he hes fette hom . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2154

Luste+d nu wich maiden +tat is . and hwat he hatte . and hware he was
fet . and hwo hire ledde . and wu . and hwider .
CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2155

and cunnen +gif we mu+gen cumen after . for +tan +te we ben alle boden
+tider . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2156

Of +tis maiden spec+d +te holie boc ; CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2157

and sei+d . Hec est regina uirginum . Regina celorum . Domina
engelorum . Mater et filia regis regum omnium . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2158

+Dis maiden bar ure louerd ihesu crist ure alre fader ; of hire holie
lichame . CMTRINIT-MX1,159.2159

and n@ @is hire mai+dhod +tere fore noht <P_161> a-wemmed .
CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2160

hie is +te heuenliches kinges dohter and ec his moder . and alre
maidene maide . and heuene quen . and englene lafdi .
CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2161

hire is to name maria CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2162

quod est interpretatum stella maris CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2163

+Dat is on englis s+a sterre . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2164

+Dan +te safarinde men se+d +te sa sterre . hie wuten sone wuderward
hie sullen weie holden . for +tat +te storres liht is hem god lat+d+au
. CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2165

Mundus mari comparabitur quia fluctus erigit . naues obruit . Ita
mundus effluit ; dum opes confert . refluit ; dum aufert . turbine .
<em> id est <$$em> ultione diuina . vel fraude diabolica turbatur .
Discordiarum motus concitat . ecclesiarum pacem perturbat .
CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2166

+Dis woreld is cleped s+a . +te flowe+d and ebbe+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2167

swo do+d ec +tis woreld flowe+d . +tanne he woreld-wunne +giue+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2168

and ebbe+d ; +tanne hie hit eft binime+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2169

Storemes falle+d in +te s+a . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2170

and to-worpe+d hit . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2171

and godes wrake cume+d on +tis woreld to wrekende on sunfulle men here
gultes . and for+t+an on@ @rihtwise men +te hem neih wunien .
CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2172

and binime+d hem hwile oref . hwile o+der aihte . and hwile here hele
. and hwile here ogen lif . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2173

and hwile lat te deuel hem on fele wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2174

and hareme+d hem . and shende+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2175

and wecche+d among hem flite . and win . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2176

and fordraue+d so+d luue . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2177

and struie+d rihte bileue . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2178

And alse +te sa storre shat of hire +te liht . +te lihte+d sa_farinde
men . alse +tis edie maiden seinte marie . of hire holie licame
shede+d +tat so+de liht . +te lihte+d alle brihte +tinges on eor+de .
and ec on heuene . alse seint Iohannes sai+d on his godspel .
CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2179

Erat lux uera que . illuminat omnem hominem uenientem in hunc mundum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2180

He is +tat so+de liht . +te lihted alle men . +te on +tis woreld
cume+d . and aleomed ben . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2181

And for +tis leome is +tat holie maiden cleped sa sterre .
CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2182

Hie was fet of weste wunienge +tar he funden was . scilicet in terra
deserta in loco $horroris et uaste solitudinis . +Dat is to seien on
weste londe . and on grisliche stede . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2183

Weste is cleped +tat londe +tat is longe til+de atleien . and
wildernesse $gef {TEXT:ges} +tare manie rotes onne wacse+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2184

+Dis woreldes biwest is efned to wastene ; for +tat +te hit is ferren
atleien holie til+de . Hinc ex quo ueteres emigrauere coloni . Aure
se+d+den +te ealde tilie henne wenden . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2185

+De hwile +te hie here waren . hie wenden +te eor+de ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2186

and wurpen god sad +taronne . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2187

and hit wacxs . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2188

and wel +teagh . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2189

and brahte for+d blostmes fele and manie . CMTRINIT-MX1,161.2190

Ac se+den hie henen wenden ; atlai +tat lond <P_163> unwend .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2191

and bicam waste . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2192

and was roted oueral . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2193

and swo bicam wildernesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2194

Nu wunie+d +tar inne fueles . and wilde deor . and wurmes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2195

+Dis lond +te ich nu of speke . is +tat mennisse +te nu liue+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2196

+De olde tilien waren +te holie lor+dewes . prophetes . apostles .
popes archebissopes . bissopes . prestes . +te holie lif ladden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2197

+De tilien wenden +tis lond +tat up ; +tat was ar dun . +tanne hie mid
here wise word turneden mannes herte fram eor+deliche +tankes . to
heuenliche +tanke . fram unrihte to rihte . fram hordom to clennesse .
fram alle iuele lastes to luuien gode . and heren him .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2198

And after +tat sewen on +tis lond godes word for sede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2199

and hit morede on here heorte . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2200

and weacs . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2201

and wel +tea+gh . +tanne +tat folc godes word +gierneliche listede .
and fastliche hield . and ter after here lif ladden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2202

Ac nu is +tat lond til+de atlein . and ifuren was .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2203

for +to +t@ @it sholden tilien . +Do +te lor+dewes of holie chireche .
+te sewen +gerneluker +te defles sed ; +tan ure louerdes ihesu crist .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2204

and mid forbisne of here fule liflode . beden men te helle and naht to
heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2205

Godes sed ; is godes word . +te men tilien in chireche . on salmes .
and on songes . and on redinges and lorspelles . and on holde bedes ;
+te lerde men selde and gemelesliche sowen . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2206

+De defles sed ; is idel . and unnet . and iuele word . hoker . and
scorn . spel . and leo+d . cheast . and twispeche . and curs . and
leasinges . and sware . and alle swikele speches .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2207

And o+dre fele lerdemen speken ; alse lewede . alse ure drihten seide
+turh anes prophetes mu+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2208

Erit sicut populus sacerdos . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2209

Prest sal leden his lif alse lewede m+an . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2210

and swo hie do+d nu+de ; and sumdel werse . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2211

For +te lewede man wur+de+d his spuse mid clo+des more +tane mid him
seluen . and prest naht $swo $his {TEXT:sis} chireche +te is his spuse
; CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2212

ac his daie +te is his hore . awlenc+d hire mid clo+des . more +tan
him seluen . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2213

+De $chireche clo+des ben to_brokene ; and ealde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2214

and hise wiues shule ben hole ; and newe . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2215

His alter clo+d great and sole ; and hire chemise smal . and hwit .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2216

and te albe sol ; and hire smoc hwit . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2217

+te haued line sward ; and hire winpel wit . o+der maked geleu mid
saffran . CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2218

+De meshakele of medeme fustane . and hire mentel grene o+der burnet .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2219

+De corporeals sole ; and unshapliche . hire handclo+des . and hire
bord clo+des makede wite . and lustliche on to siene ,
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2220

+De caliz of tin ; and hire nap of mazere . and ring of golde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,163.2221

<P_165>

And is +te prest swo muchele forcu+dere . +tane +te lewede . Swo he
wur+de+d his hore more +tan his spuse . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2223

Prestes ben +to . +te apostel of spec+d . +tus que+dende . Quorum
deus uenter est . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2224

Here wombe is here crist . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2225

and alle iuele forbisne hie ippen of hem seluen . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2226

and te lewede men hem +gierneiche folegen . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2227

and te+d for+d geres after wilde deore . Sume after beore . sume after
wulue . sume after o+der deor . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2228

And alse +te fugeles fram o stede to o+der . and ne ben nafre
stedefaste . swo do+d +tis mannisse CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2229

flie+d fram iuele to werse . on speche . and on dede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2230

and bringe+d on here heorte oregel . and wra+de and onde . and hatinge
. and o+der iuele lastes . alse wuremes breden on wilderne +tat is
+tis woreld . +tis grisliche stede on to wunien .
CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2231

For here is hunger . and +turst . elde . unhale . flit . and win .
eche . and smertinge . sorinesse . werinesse . and o+dre wowe muchel
. CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2232

Of swilch mai grisen men +te ani god cunnen . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2233

Eft_sone on +tis biwiste is muchel weste of holie mihte .
CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2234

Al riht is leid ; and wogh arered alse +te wise que+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2235

Nusquam tuta fides non hospes ab hospite tutus . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2236

N@ @is nower non trew+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2237

for n@ @is +te gist siker of +te husebonde ; ne no+der of o+der . Non
socer a nuro Ne +te aldefader of $his o+dem . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2238

Fratrumque gratia rara est . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2239

selde leue+d +te bro+der +tat o+der . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2240

Filius ante diem ante diem patrinos inquirit annos .
CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2241

+De sune wusshe+d +te fader dea+d , ar his dai cume .
CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2242

$Imminet exicio uir coniugis . illa mariti . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2243

Wif wolde +tat hire louerd dead ware . and he +tat hie ware .
CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2244

Of +tesse waste and grisliche stede was +tis holi maide fet +te ich of
speke . +tat is ure lafdi seinte marie . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2245

and hire fette +te heuenliche king . alse +te prophete sei+d on his
stefne . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2246

Tenuisti manum dexteram meam . et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2247

+Du helde mi riht hond . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2248

and leddest me on +tine wille CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2249

and understode me mid wurdshipe . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2250

Ter ascendit . primo quidem passibus corporis ante templum ab imo
quindecim graduum . usque ad summum . Secundo in templo passibus
mentibus de uirtute in uirtutem . ubi uidetur deus deorum in syon .
Tercio corpore . et anima assumpta in celum . CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2251

+Treo si+des ste+gh +tis holie maiden . erest lichamliche +to hie was
+treo +gier heold . biforen +te temple on +te steire of fiftene stoples
. fro ne+tewarde to uuewarde . wi+dute mannes helpe .
CMTRINIT-MX1,165.2252

O+der si+des hie steh+g in +te temple gostliche . fram mihte to mihte
forte <P_167> +tat hie alre mihtene louerd biheold alse hie hit wolde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2253

+De +tridde si+de hie steh+g +tis dai +to engles hire beren mid soule
and mid lichame . in to +tan heuenliche bure ; +tar heo was wur+dliche
understonden . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2254

and salomon +te wise +te wes fele hundred wintre +ter bifore king in
ierusalem seh+g +tese wunderliche stienge . alse suterliche alse he
+tis dai were . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2255

and wundrede +ter offe ; CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2256

and seide . Que est ista que ascendit sicut aurora consurgens pulcra ut
luna electa ut sol . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2257

Hwat is +tis +te astih+g+d alse dai rieme . fair alse mone . icoren
alse sunne . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2258

Vre lafdi seinte Marie . alse wisliche alse hie +tis dai was houen in
to heuene . bere ure arende to ure louerd ihesu crist . +tat he +gife
us eche blisse on heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2259

Quod ipse prestare dignetur qui viuit et Regnat per omnia secula
seculorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2260

amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2261

<heading>

XXVIII . DE DEFUNCTIS CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2263

<$$heading>

Libera me domine de morte eterna in die illa tremenda , quando celi
movendi sunt et terra , dum veneris judicare seculum per ignem . $Dies
illa , dies ire . calamitatis et miseriae , dies magna et amara valde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2265

+De lif_holi man iob +te +te boc of spec+d . and {COM:chopped_"of"}
sai+d . Erat uir ille simplex et iustus . et timens deum . ac
recedens a malo . he was admod on worde . and rihtwis on dede . and
godfruht on +tonke . and lo+dles mid alle . and +terefore likede ure
drihten swo wel +tat he herede him ouer alle men ; and seide . Non est
sirilis in terra . N@ @is on eor+de non o+der his liche . +tis holi
man hadde +tre biwistes CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2266

+te forme was on michel woreld wele . alse +te boc sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2267

Perdidit omnem substanciam eius . filios . et filias . Caro quoque
eius graui uulnere uulnerata est . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2268

and ure drihten +te him swo michel luuede +gaf leue +te deuel to
binimende him his oref . and his ahte . and his children . alle .
and alle +te woreld winne +te he weald hadde . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2269

and +te deuel swo dide . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2270

and after +tan toc his o+gen lichame . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2271

and +ter one brohte swo michel sicnesse +tureh his +tre creftes . +tat
te lichame war+d bretful of wunden . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2272

and at eche wunde wul ut atter . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2273

+To ne mihte no man for stenche cumen him enden . CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2274

ne his wif n@ @olde . +te he hadde swo swi+de wur+ded .
CMTRINIT-MX1,167.2275

ac <P_169> mest manne him gremede mid scorne . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2276

+De +tridde biwist he hadde on swich wele . +te was bi twifold more ;
+tane +te forme alse +te boc sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2277

Reddidit deus iob omnia dupplicia et melior fuit eius finis principio .
CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2278

vre drihten +giald twifoldliche iob . +tat +te deuel him hadde binumen
. on guwe+de . and on alle +te winne +te he erur wield .
CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2279

and war+d blisfuller his ende ; +tene was his biginninge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2280

and on +te midleste biwist +te he +tolede +te gimere pine he makede ane
reuliche meninge . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2281

and +ter one minegede alle his wrecche si+des . +te he +tolede on +tis
wrecche worelde . o+der in +tat o+der sholde . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2282

and an hefde +to his egen to heuene . and his heorte to gode . and his
honden to his breste . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2283

and sore sihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2284

and his heorte biet . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2285

and bed godes milce +tus que+dinde . Libera me domine et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2286

Ared me louerd of eche dea+de . on +te grisliche dai . +te heuene and
eor+de shulen quakien . of-@ @dred . +tanne +tu cumest to demen al
mankin mid fire . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2287

+Tus +te holi man him bad . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2288

and +gaf alle men forbisne swo to bidden . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2289

and alswo ofte swo prest singe+d +tis bede at lich huse . he mine+ge+d
alle +do ; +te +ter ben . hem +tus to bidden . Libera me domine . de
morte . et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2290

Ales me louerd of eche dea+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2291

Tres siquidem mortes sunt scilicet una ut supra scripsi . Vna
momentanea . scilicet corporis quando ab eo recedit anima .
CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2292

+Dre dea+des be+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2293

on is e+delich +tat +tole+d +te lichame . +tan +te sowle turne+d fram
him . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2294

Of dea+de ben alle bileffulle men of-dradde . alse +te boc sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2295

Metuentes non metuenda . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2296

Hie habbe+d $drede of +tat hie no sholden . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2297

Altera diuturna scilicet anime quanda declinat a iusticia .
CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2298

+Tat o+der dea+d is $o+der hwile long . +tat +tole+d +te soule ; +tane
+te licame senege+d . and sundre+d hire fram $rihtwisnesse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2299

ac of +tis dea+de ben alle rihtwise men and godfrihte of-dradde ; and
non o+dre . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2300

Tercia corporis et anime simul . quando in ignem eternum mittentur a
diuina sentencia dicente . Ite maledicti et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2301

+De +tridde dea+d is eche and endeles . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2302

+tat +tole+d man on soule and on licame to_gadere . +tane he be+d eft
on domes dai a-risen of dea+de . bute his sunnes him ben ere forgieuene
. o+der bette hwane ure drihten +te is bo+de lif and dea+de . driue+d
him fram him . to pine . +tus que+dinde . Ite maledicti in ignem
eternum . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2303

Wite+d +gie awariede gostes in to eche fur . CMTRINIT-MX1,169.2304

Of +tis dea+d ben alle men <P_171> ofdradde ; +te on ure drihte bileue+d
. CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2305

And Iob witnede ure drihten . +tat of +tis dea+d him redde . on +te
carefuldai . +tan he cume+d almiddeneard to demen . +Danne shule bo+de
quakien of@ @dradde heuene and er+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2306

Unbileuede men ben cleped eor+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2307

and bileffulle men ben heouene nemnede . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2308

and hie shule ben unnea+d boregen . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2309

Tremebunt etiam angeli et archangeli . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2310

+Dar shulen engles and arehangles quakien of@ @dradde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2311

Non quia conscientia sua eos accuset . sed quoniam iudicem uidebunt
terribilem . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2312

Engles wur+den ofdradde . naht for here gultes +te none ne habbe+d .
ac for +tat hie shulen cnowen ure demendes wra+d+de . bi his grimeliche
lete . and bi his eifulle speche . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2313

+tan ure drihten cume+d to demen alle mankenne . no+der on heuene ne on
eor+de . ac bitwien two . on +te wolcne . Fur cumed biforen him alse
+te prophete seide . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2314

Ignis ante ipsum precedet . et inflammabit in circuitu inimicos eius .
CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2315

Fur berne+d +te eor+de and al +tat be+d +tar inne . o+der +tar uppe .
CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2316

and clense+d alle bileffule men of alle +te sunnes +te hie hadden
forleten . o+der bet . o+der bigunnen to beten .
CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2317

and make+d hem seuefealde brihtere +tane +te sunne alse +te boc sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2318

Fulgebunt iusti septies cplendidius quam sol . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2319

+De rihtwise shulle ben seuefeald brihtere +tane +te sunne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2320

and elles n@ @aren hie naht bicumeliche to wunien in heuene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2321

Ac +to unbileffule men +te bi here quica liue here sunnes ne forleten .
ne betten . ne fastliche bote ne biheten . hie bicume+d in +te fure
swo bloke . and swo eiseliche . and swo ateliche . +tat bi
hundred_fealde grisluker +tan ani niht +teoster . and ben +tanne
bicumeliche to wunien in helle mid alle deflen . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2322

+tanne wur+d alse +te boc sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2323

Deus manifeste ueniet . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2324

+Danne cume+d ure drihten openliche to bihealde alle +te +tare shulle
ben gaderede . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2325

Ignis in conspectu eius exardescet . et in eius . tempestas ualida .
CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2326

And giet +tanne +tat fur berne+d biforen him . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2327

and storem be+d muchel al abuten him . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2328

Aduocabit celum desursum et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2329

+Danne wule he clepien +te heuenliche men . +to ben +te lif holie .
and $+te {TEXT:to} eor+deliche men ; +to ben +te sunfulle . and demen
elch man after his erninge . CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2330

+Do +te hadden on +tesse liue alle here sunnes for-leten . and bet .
o+der bigunnen to beten . and beden milce ; alle he qua+d hem saclese ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,171.2331

and sent hem to heuene +tus que+dende . Venite benedicti patris <P_173>
mei et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2332

Cume+d ibledsede CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2333

and underfo+d eche lif and blisse on heuene . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2334

Ac alle +to +te n@ @abbe+d swo idon . he bit here unbette sennes on
+tonke . and on speche and on dede cumen biforen hem . and bistonden
hem fastliche . and bigraden hem shameliche . and biten hem
unradeliche . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2335

and hie swo don . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2336

and elch sinne +tare him seluen bisei+d . bute hit be here forgieue .
o+der mid bote iheled . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2337

+Danne stonde+d +to wreches alse +to . +te wo be+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2338

and loke+d up . and dun . and al abuten . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2339

and sen buuen hem godes wra+d+de . +te hem fram him driue+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2340

and be+d +tar of swi+de ofdradde . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2341

and no wunder n@ @is . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2342

Hie ise+d bine+den hem deflen +te hem gredeliche kepe+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2343

and be+d swi+de of_grisen ; CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2344

and ful ea+de mu+gen . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2345

Hie ise+d bisides hem swilche +te hem waren her cu+de .
CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2346

and bie+d swi+de of-shamede . of hem . and mid here owen sinnes +te
hem swo biclepie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2347

and ben sore ofgramede . and wi+d hem seluen alre sorest . for +tat
hie hadden swo fulliche suneged . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2348

+tis be+d on +te daie . +te +te boc offe spec+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2349

Dies illa dies ire . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2350

On +te dai cume+d godes wra+d+de uppen +te sinfulle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2351

and hie be+d unmihti to-genes deflen . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2352

and hie be+d bine+den hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2353

and +tolie+d fulle wowe in hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2354

and swilch hem shal leste al +te endelese dai . +tat is afre abuten
ende . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2355

and $gief {TEXT:gies} hie wunienge hwarefe+d . hie $turne+d fram iuele
to werse . and fram bitere to biterure . and fram +te dome to helle .
to +te ni+der wunienge . +tat is ful of alle wosi+des .
CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2356

for +tere hie shulen hauen shame . and grame . and +testernesse .
chele . and hunger . +turst . and stench . and wurmene cheu . and
wallende fir and alre wowe mest . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2357

Crist us +terwi+d shilde . gif his wille beo . and alle +te sinfulle
+te for+d sende farene . and +tat faren shulen . and +tat men moten
fore bidden . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2358

and giue us alle on heuene eche erdingstouwe . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2359

Qui viuit et Regnat per omnia secula seculorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2360

amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2361

<heading>

XXIX . DE SANCTO ANDREA . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2363

<$$heading>

AMbulans ihesuc iuxta mare . galilee uidit petrum et andream fratrem
eius mittentes rete in mare . et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2365

+De holi godspel of +tis dai spec+d of ure helende and two bro+dren .
CMTRINIT-MX1,173.2366

<P_175>

+tat on is Seint peter and +tat o+der Seint andreu .
CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2368

and sei+d +tat ure helende giede bi +te se . and segh +tos tweie
brodren in +te se on here shipe werpinde ut here fishnet in +te se .
CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2369

and he clepede to hem CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2370

and seide . Venite post me . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2371

Cume+d after me . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2372

and folge+d me . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2373

and hie ne abiden noht +tat o+der word , CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2374

ac diden alse +te boc sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2375

Ad unius iussionis uocem relictis retibus et naui . secuti sunt eum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2376

At te forme worde hie forleten here net and here ship .
CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2377

and come to ure helende CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2378

and him folgeden to here lifes ende . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2379

swo moten we alle don +te ben after hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2380

and bi hem clepede ure helende us him to folgen . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2381

and we muge +te e+dere gif we nime+d michele geme and wel understonden
+tat ure helende was on +te londe ; and +tese bre+dren weren on +te se ;
+to +te hem clepede to him . and gif we understonden ec wat bitocne+d
+tat lond . and hwat +te se . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2382

Vte we nu bidden ure drihten . +tat he wisse . and fulste me heuliche
to seggen wat it bitocne+d . and heu fremfulliche to understonden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2383

Mare semper est in motu . et significat ruinosam ciuitatem . id est
seculum . de qua dicit apostolus . Non habemus hic manentem ciuitatem
et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2384

+De se is eure wagiende . and +tere fore unstedefast .
CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2385

and bitocne+d +te abroidene bureh +tat is in swo warliche stede ; +tat
noht ne mai +ter inne bileue . +tat muge ani wile ileste . +tat is
+tis wrecche woreld . +tat eure is wagiende noht fro stede to stede ;
ac fro time to time . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2386

and +tat is on fele +tinge ful michel iseone . and on +te man . alre
mast CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2387

for me nime+d of him mest geme . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2388

Qui fugit uelut umbra et nunquam in eodem statu permanet .
CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2389

He is fleonde alse shadewe CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2390

and ne stont neure on one stede . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2391

Ac sige+d eure fro +guwe+de to helde . fro hele to unhele . fro
wenliche to ateliche . fro lieue to lo+de . fro wur+de to unwur+de .
fro blisse to sorinesse . fro lehtre to wope . fro wele to wowe . and
at@ @tan ende fro liue to dea+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2392

Qui numero cuncta trahit secum uertitque uolubile tempus .
CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2393

and alle woreld +ting turne+d mid time . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2394

and sige+d fro one time to o+der . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2395

Item Sicut tempestas mare incidens aquas turbat fluctus agitat naue
subuertem temptat . sic facit in seculo superbia et ira principium .
CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2396

Eft_sone bicume+d in +te se storm . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2397

and werpe+d +tat water upward CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2398

and arere+d shures fele . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2399

and driue+d hem biforen him . CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2400

and gif he ship finde+d ; he fonde+d to drenchen hit +gif he mai .
CMTRINIT-MX1,175.2401

Swo do+d in <P_177> +tis woreld +te oreguil and +te wra+d+de of kinges .
and of barones +te senden here sergantes to bringen iuele ti+dinges .
and +ter mide dreuen +tat lond +tat is to water nemned . and bringen on
+te folkes heorte grete stormes . of ni+d . and of onde . and of
hatienge . and on here mu+de curses and werginges . and wurre+d uppe
chirches . o+der wanie+d hire rihtes . o+der lette+d . o+der mid alle
binime+d +gif hie mugen . alse +te storm bisinke+d +te ship gif he mai
. CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2402

Singula quid referam non noui nomina quorum . More fluentis aque
currunt mortalia queque . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2403

Ne mai ich noht alle +ting tellen . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2404

ne ich ne can here alre name nemnen . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2405

Ac alle woreld +ting ben fleted alse water erninde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2406

Item mare effluit et refluit . Similiter et seculum effluit ; dum
fletus multiplicat refluit ; dum mortis manu metit .
CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2407

Eft_sone +te se flouwe+d +te hie caste+d ut +tat water of hire stede .
into +tat lond ; CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2408

and ebbe+d +tanne +tat water of hire stede $flowe+d in to +tat lond ;
and eft agen turne+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2409

Swo flowe+d +tis woreld +tenne men michel tuderi+d . and oref . and
deor . and fishshes . and fugeles . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2410

and here tuder swi+de wexe+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2411

and wel +tie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2412

and go+d wel on hond ; longe wile . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2413

and be+d michel blisse among mannen . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2414

and of +tis flod is iseid . Eleuauerunt domine , flumina uocem suam .
CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2415

+De water stormes an-hefden here stefne . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2416

for wat is folc bute fletende water . +te flitte+d fro +tis +tat was .
alse water storm fro stede to stede . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2417

and eft +tis $woreld ebbe+d . +tenne hit +tat tuderinde wi+d-teo+d and
cume+d co+de o+der qualm . and michel +terof felle+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2418

+Danne hauen wanspedie men on heorte wowe . and on mu+de woninge . and
here ech +te more wowe for o+dres woninge . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2419

and of swiche . ebbinge is iseid . Eleuauerunt flumina fluctus suos et
cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2420

+De water stremes on-heueden up here uncles . +tat is +tat folc +te
sore bimurne+d . and swi+de bimene+d swich unilimp .
CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2421

On o+der wise flowe+d and ebbe+d +tis woreld . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2422

To-genes sumere heo flowe+d +tanne alle moren quiken . and eor+de and
trewes growen . and blouwen . and blostmen bere+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2423

Eft to-+ganes wintre heo hebbe+d +tenne alle leues fallen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2424

and for swiche flode . and for swich ebbinge +te prophete nemme+d +tis
woreld se . +tus que+dinde . Mirabiles elationes maris . et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2425

Wunderliche ben +te s+a . ut_sondes . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2426

and wunderful is ure louerd on +teunesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,177.2427

Item . in <P_179> mari pisces maiores deuorant minores .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2428

Eft-sone +te more fishes in +te se eten +te lasse ;
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2429

and bi hem liuen . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2430

Swo don in +tis woreld +te riche +te ben louerdinges struien +te wrecche
men +te ben underlinges . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2431

and na+deles bi hem libben . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2432

and habbe+d of here swinche hundes . and hauekes . and hors . and
wepnes . and fogh . and grei . and estliche metes and drinkes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2433

and al +tat hie bi ben ; hie hauen of here mene swinche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2434

+De underlinges +tenchen o@ @+de dai hu hie mu+gen mest swinken .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2435

And spenen here flesh and here blod ; on iuele swinche ; mid foten and
mid honden . and mid alle here hund-limes . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2436

and unne+des hie winnen giet here louerdes rihttes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2437

and hem seluen eten +te werste +tat hie of eor+de tilien .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2438

and giet ne wile +te louerd ben paid mid his rihcte mol .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2439

ac mid swike-dome o+der mid streng+de . and binime+d his underlinge .
+tat he sholde bi@ @liuen . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2440

and +gif he net him to +giuene +tat beo+d streng+de . and refloc .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2441

and brec+d gri+d . +tar he hit healde sholde . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2442

and gief he him set a speche . and mid wo+ge-dome binime+d him his
biliue +tat he haue+d dere boht mid his ogene sowle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2443

Et sic ultricem domini prouocat iram . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2444

And +tus awec+d to-genes him seluen godes war+d+de ; +te sei+d to
louerde . Ne facias alii quod tibi non uis fieri .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2445

Ne do +tu non o+der man +ting . +te +te wolde of+tunche gief me hit
dude +te . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2446

To +te man he sei+d . Michi uindictam ; et ego retribuam .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2447

Ne wrec +tu +te mid wussinge . ne mid warienge . ac heald me +te
wrache . and ich him wile his iuel mid werse forgelde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2448

Item mare est amarum . similiter et seculum ab introitu usque ad exitum
. CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2449

Eft-sone +te s+a is biter . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2450

swo is ec +tis woreld fram ende to o+der . and alle eor+deliche men +te
+tar onne wunien . alse wise que+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2451

Nascimur in dolore . Viuimus in labore . Morimur in merore .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2452

On sore eche we hider cumen . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2453

On swunche we here wunien . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2454

In wowe we henne wite+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2455

Hliste+d nu for hwat . and o wilche wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2456

Serehful is ure burde for eues gulte to wan ure drihten sede . In
dolore paries filios . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2457

On sorege +tu shalt child kennen ; and beren . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2458

and swo hie dude . and alle o+der don . bute ure lafdi Seinte Marie .
CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2459

Que peperit sine dolore saluatorem . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2460

Hire ne dide no+der . ne oc . ne smeart . +to +te hie bar ure louerd
ihesu crist . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2461

+tonked wur+de him . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2462

Ac elch o+der wimman do+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,179.2463

ake+d . and smerte+d sore . +tan <P_181> hie be+d mid childe bistonden
. CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2464

and nime+d hire stundmele swo bittere +trowes +tat hie ne mai hire mu+d
holden . ac shrike+d . and reuliche biginne+d and is welneih dead .
for hie go+d welneih to hire liues ende . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2465

and fele here lif fulliche late+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2466

+Dat child on his burde +tole+d ec bittere +trowe .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2467

and cume+d of gemere hwile in to grimme wunienge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2468

and cu+d mid his wope . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2469

Ac hwanne hit be+d +tarto wuned ; hit wepe+d +te lasse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2470

for +tat wune be+d . +teih hit ne be naht swete .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2471

Ac wowe be+d wunsum . +teih hit ne bie naht lefsum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2472

On +tisse liue we be+d on balfulle swinche for adames gulte . to hwam
ure drihten seide . In sudore uultus tui uesceris pane tuo .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2473

On +tine nebbes swote . +tu shalt +tin bred noten .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2474

swo dude erest . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2475

and we alle don after . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2476

Ilch man of his wise ; note+d his swinhc swilch se he is to iteied .
Clerc on his wise . Cniht on his wise . Tilie on his wise . And
ilches craftes +teau ; swo he be+d to iteied . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2477

and to eche +tat iswinch ilches mannes hundlimen alle swinke+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2478

and hersume+d mest ; alle +to +tere wombe . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2479

+De fet up aweige+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2480

and heuie +tar onne bere+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2481

+De honde fo+d to alle +tinge +te hire be+d biheue .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2482

Eien loke+d . and eare luste+d and hwat hware beo +tat hire wel like+d
. CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2483

Mu+d fog+d to hire bileue . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2484

Te+d hine grinde+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2485

Tunge hine swolege+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2486

+Drote turne+d hine . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2487

and Mast alle +te hund limen hersumie+d +te onre wombe .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2488

and alle hem +tinche+d to litel gief hit hire wel lica+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2489

+Dus was adam +teu ; +to godes mu+d cursede eor+de .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2490

and for his ouerdede qua+d +tus to him . Quia comedisti ex prohibito ;
maledicta terra in opere tuo . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2491

For +tat +tu ete +tat ich +te forboden hadde ; waried wur+de <em> +te
eor+de <$$em> on +tine werke . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2492

On eor+de he wrohte +to +te he his wombe fulde . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2493

and on him dude +tat we on us do+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2494

For we one awlenc+d alle +te hundlimen . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2495

and welt +te sowle . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2496

and hire weldede swo mid iuele forgielde+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2497

and unwur+de+d ; ure drihten ; CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2498

wur+de+d +te deuel . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2499

Eftsones . on wowe we of +tisse liue wite+d . for adames gulte +te ure
drihten +tus to seide . Si ex ligno uetito comederis . morte morieris
. CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2500

gief $+tu etest of +te forbodene trewe . +tu shalt ade+de swelte .
CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2501

Enes he +tar-offe bot , CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2502

and wear+d +tar mide acheked . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2503

and +tureh +tat one snede wear+d al his ofspring acheked . +Dat him cam
to dea+de swo hit do+d us alle . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2504

+Dan +te sowle funde+d to faren ut of hire licame . hie tune+d to hire
fif gaten . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2505

and penne+d wel faste . CMTRINIT-MX1,181.2506

and <P_183> here wiken hem binime+d . +te hie ar noteden . Eien here
sene . and Earen $here luste . nose here sneuenge . and mu+d here
smel . To+den here grind . and tunge here speche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2507

and alle limen hie binimed mihte to fri+dende . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2508

Gief +te licame was $rihtwis on +tisse liue . wo be+d +te sowle +tanne
hie him shal forleten . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2509

and rewliche biginne+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2510

and +tus to him sei+d . Heu dilecta michi caro . quod te ponere cogor
. CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2511

Awi leof ware +tu me . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2512

nu ich shal +te forleten . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2513

+tu ware me lastful on alle +to +te ich wolde . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2514

we ware onmode godes wille to done . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2515

Hwu shal ich of-longed wi+d-ute +te libben . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2516

And gief +te licame be+d euel . lo+d is heo +te sowle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2517

and hire +tunche+d lang ; +tat hie on him bileue+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2518

and hie +tenche+d fastliche +tar-offe to witen . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2519

Hit +tinche+d hire let . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2520

for hire is lo+d +tar-inne . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2521

+Dane biginne+d hie rewliche . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2522

and to +te licame swilche wordes sei+d . Heu michi cur olidum . fueram
tibi iuncta cadauer . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2523

Aweilewei +tu fule hold +tat ich auere was to +te iteied .
CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2524

longe habbe ich on +te wuned . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2525

swo wo is me +te hwile . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2526

for al +tat me was leof ; hit was +te lo+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2527

+tu ware a sele gief ich was wro+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2528

To gode +tu ware slau and let . and to euele spac and hwat .
CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2529

Al +tat god het . +te $+tuhte andsete . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2530

+tat forbode +te +tuhte swete . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2531

Iuele wurmes mote +te chewe ; CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2532

swo $wo {TEXT:we} +te be +tat tu me $ne rewe . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2533

for +tine gulte i@ @shal nu to pine . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2534

rotie mote +tu to time . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2535

+Dus ware+d +te sowle +te licame . for +tat hit haue+d +tar after
ierned . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2536

Among +tat +te sowle wite+d . +te licame worpe+d hewe .
CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2537

+te frendmen him biwepe+d gef +tar anie ben . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2538

bigeme+d +te licame ; CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2539

and forgeme+d +te sowle . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2540

+tanne fon uncu+de $men to +te aihte +te arure his waren . alse +te boc
sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2541

Relinquent alienis diuicias suas . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2542

Hie bileue+d uncu+de $men +te aihte +te hie forleten habbe+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2543

+te man is uncu+d +te o+der ; +te n@ @ele naht him cnowen . ne helpen
him gief he neod haue+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2544

+tus do+d +te libbende frend to-genes +te liggende .
CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2545

Gief +te quike haue+d aihte +te were +te dedes +arrure . +te he him
bique+d . +to he him seluen habben ne mihte . +te quike hem do+d him
selue to note . and nohte deades sowle to note . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2546

Ac sei+d to hwam he wi+d speke+d , hwi sholde ich him luuien si+den he
was him seluen lo+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2547

hwi sholde ich him helpen ; CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2548

him self ne wolde ; +to he mihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2549

Hwi sholde ich dele for him ; +tat he ne mihte bileuen . +te hwile he
hise waren ; CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2550

he dude his wille +tar-offe . CMTRINIT-MX1,183.2551

Swo ich wile <P_185> mine nu hit is to me iturnd .
CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2552

and leren elch man to helpen him seluen +te hwile he mai .
CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2553

Nu ge habbe+d iherd +tat sorehful is ure hider_cume . and sorilich ure
henen_si+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2554

and hure $herwunenge is swi+de reulich . CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2555

Wule nu +tanne foleg seinte andreues faire forbisne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2556

and +tenchen he+den to fare to siker wunienge . +tar ure helende wune+d
. and haue+d us to cleped . CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2557

Scilicet terra promissionis . Ciuitas habitacionis . Conuersacio
celestis . CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2558

+Dat is +tat bihotene lond . +tar is on +te wunsume bureh . and on +te
heuenliche wunienge +tar alle englen inne wunien .
CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2559

+Dar haue+d elch patriarche . and prophete and apostles . and martirs
and confessors . and uirgines maked faier bode inne to wunien . swo
briht se sunne . CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2560

Elch bilefful man +te is +tider iboden . shal finden +tare his buttle .
swulc se he hit here make+d . mid his faire liflode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2561

and on +te fereden of ure helende seluen . and of alle halegen . shal
habben eche lif . and endelease blisse . and alle sel+de and fulle
muri+de . +te is swo muchel and swo faier . and swo swete . alse
Seint paulus sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2562

Quod oculus non uidit . et auris non audiuit et in cor hominis non
ascendit . CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2563

Swo muchel muri+de is in +te bureh of heuene +tat eie ne maig swo muchel
biholden . ne $ere lhisten ne herte +tenchen . CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2564

Ad quam nos ducat . qui uite premia donat . CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2565

<heading>

XXX . {COM:Lambeth_Homily_XVI} <em> ESTOTE FORTES IN BELLO . <$$em>
CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2567

<$$heading>

$Estote fortes in bello . et pugnate cum antiquo serpente .
CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2569

+Dos feawe word +te ich nu here for+d-teah seide ure drihten . on his
holie godspelle . at sume sele +to +te he wunede licameliche on eor+de
. among mannen and wandrede ine +te lond of ierusalem .
CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2570

and mid +tese wordes munegede +to +te he wi+d spac ; to griseliche fihte
. CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2571

and for +tat +te +tat fiht was and is arue+d to +tolien . he bihet hem
muchele mede . wi+d +tan +tat hie wolden hit admodeliche +tolien .
CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2572

and +tus qua+d . Estote fortes in bello . et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2573

Beo+d stronge on fihte . and fihte+d wi+d +te ealde neddre . and gef
$gie ben strengere +tane hie ; gie shulle fon to mede +tat endeles
kineriche . CMTRINIT-MX1,185.2574

Quia uero diuersa hominum genera sequebantur ut audirent eum . <P_187>
et ipse sermones suos direxit . tum ad discipulos tum ad populum . tum
ad hos et illos aperiendum est . et quibus . et de qua fortitudine .
et de quo bello . et de quo serpente . et de quo regno dixit .
CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2575

Manie mannisshe folgeden ure drihte . to herende his wise word for to
isen his wunderliche deden . and of him to habben heore bileue . and
sume to fechen at him here hele . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2576

and for +ti wilen segen eow hwilc mannisshe he +tus munegede .
CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2577

Sume leien on here sunnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2578

and ne wolden hem naht forleten . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2579

and on +tat wise mid here fo hielden . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2580

hem ne munegede he naht to +tisse fihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2581

Ac +to he munegede . +te hadden heore sinnes forleten and bette .
o+der bigunnen to beten . and hem +tarwi+d buregen and milce beden .
And nameliche +te twolue apostles . and among hem +te louerd saint N .
hwos dai hit is to dai . and for hwos luue we be+d here gadered .
CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2582

and +tus que+d . Estote fortes in bello . et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2583

beo+d strange on fihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2584

and fihte+d ealde neddre . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2585

and fo+d eche blisse to mede . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2586

Of +te streng+de +te ure drihten us to munege+d . spec+d wisdom boc
CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2587

and sei+d . Fortitudo simplicis uia domini . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2588

Godes wei is strong +te ofealde man . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2589

Ofeald o+der twifeald is ilch man . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2590

Of +te twifealde man spec+d +te louerd Seint Iame +tus que+dende . Uir
dupplex animo inconstans est in omnibus uiis suis .
CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2591

+De twifealde man is unstedefast on alle his spechen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2592

Twifold o+der manifold is +te man . +te n@ @is stedefast ne on dade .
ne on speche . ne on +tonke . ne $to-genes gode . ne to-genes man .
CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2593

and +tar-fore is forloren lif and sowle . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2594

Ac +te man is ofeald . +te haue+d edmod +tanc . and e+dele speche .
and edie dade . and is stedefast to-genes god and men . alse Iob was .
+te wan wi+d +te wurse . of hwam +te boc sei+d . Erat uir ille simplex
et rectus ac timens domini . et recedens a malo .
CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2595

He was ofeald man and $rihtwis . and Godfriht . and strong on +te
fihte +te ic offe speke . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2596

and +tat streng+de he hadde of godes weie . +te onne was .
CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2597

Via domini qua uenit ad nos et nos ad eum ; est misericordia et ueritas
. CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2598

Godes weie +te he come+d one to mannen . and men to him ; is
mild-hertnesse . and so+dfastnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2599

Mildhertnesse he kidde mannisse +to +te he sende his holi prophete to
freurende +to forsine+gede of +tis wrecche woreld , and bihet hem +tat
he cumen wolde . and lesen hem of eche wowe CMTRINIT-MX1,187.2600

So+dfastnesse he cudde him ; +to +te he him seluen <P_189> com and his
bihese lestede . and mid his o+gene dea+de al mankin alesde of eche
dea+de CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2601

+tonked wur+de him . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2602

+tat ilke wei ogh al mankin to holden +te +tenche+d to cumene to gode .
and ki+de+d him seluen mildhertnesse . and so+dfastnesse . and after
his mihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2603

+te man ki+d him seluen mildhertnesse +te bi+denche+d on his sinnen .
and understant +tat he haue+d +ter +turh forloren heuene wele . and
of-erned helle pine and +tat sore bimurne+d . and +to sinnes forlete+d
. and to shrifte cume+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2604

So+dfastnesse he ki+d ec him seluen +tenne he his sinnes alle swo
shewe+d alse hie don weren . and noht +ter-offe forleten . ne noht
+tat to non ne don . and +ter offe bote hihat . and bi his mihte
leste+d hit . and milce bit . and +tanen-for+dward wi+d sinne him
berege+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2605

Nu +ge hauen herd to wich streng+de ure drihten us to mune+ge+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2606

here+d nu to wiche fihte we o+gen +tis streng+de notien .
CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2607

+te holi man tobias sei+d wiche fiht +tat is +tus que+dinde . Milicia
est uita hominis super terram . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2608

Mannes liflode buuen eor+de is fardung . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2609

$And to-genes hwuch fo man agh fur+dien sei+d +te holi apostle . +ter
he sei+d . Non est nobis colluctacio aduersus carnem carnem et
sanguinem . sed aduersus rectores tenebrarum . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2610

We ne flite+d noht to-+genes flesh . and blod . ac to+genes awere+gede
gostes +te welde+d +testernesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2611

and on o+der stede wisluker $+ter of spec+d +tus que+dinde . Caro
concupiscit aduersus spiritum spirituc autem aduersus carnem . ut
quecunque uultis illa faciatis . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2612

+De lichame winne+d to+genes +te gost . and +te gost to+genes +te
lichame CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2613

and swo fliten and winnen bitwenen hem . +tat al +tat is on unlef and
unqueme . hit is +tat o+der iqueme . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2614

and on +tis fihte is ech man strong . +te awelt is lichame . and his
wille binime+d . and wlenc+d his soule . and hire wille drige+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2615

and on o+dre stede he sei+d . Abstinete uos a carnalibus desideriis que
militant aduersus animam . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2616

Wi+d-teo+d +giu +te fleshliche lustes +te flite+d to-+genes +te soule .
and fonde+d hire a fele wise ; mid swikele wrenchen . and feste
bisette+d . and sore for-wunde+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2617

and beo+d +te sme+dere him to biswikende . for +tan +te +tei neh+gie
wunien . alse +te boc sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2618

Nulla sevior pestis quam familaris hostis . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2619

N@ @is non werse fo ; +tene frakede fere . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2620

Ab inuisibili hoste difficile cauetur assultus . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2621

Arue+d it is wi+d +te fo to ber+gende . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2622

for me ne wot a wiche halfe he beo+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2623

and arue+d hit is +te dintes to kepende . CMTRINIT-MX1,189.2624

for <P_191> me ne wot hwanene he shal cumen . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2625

To swiche fihte bede+d ure dlihten us . and +tat we kiden +ter one ure
streng+de . and at ech fihte to-+genes +te alde neddre +te bipehte eue
; and adam ; and al here ofspring . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2626

Diabolus nominatur hic serpens propter tria . Inuidia tabescit . Sine
strepitu serpit . Quod pungit ueneno afficit . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2627

Neddre do+d +tre +ting lichamliche ; +te +te deuel dri+ge+d gostliche .
CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2628

hie haue+d ni+d . and onde . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2629

and smu+g+d di+geliche . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2630

and attre+d hwat heo prike+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2631

Swo haue+d +te deuel ni+d . and onde to men for +tan . hem is bi-hoten
+te hege sete on heuene . +te he fel of . +turgh is ore+gel
CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2632

+terefore he cume+d letten hem mid alle his widerfulle wrenches
CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2633

and ne wolde +tat mankin hadde +tat he hauen ne mai .
CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2634

ac wolde +tat man dead were +tehg him seluen +te werse were . alse +te
apostle sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2635

Per inuidiam mors intrauit in orbem terrarum . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2636

+Durch onde com dea+d in to +te worelde ; al umbegonge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2637

Eft-sone . neddre smuhg+d di+geliche . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2638

swo do+d +te werse . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2639

+tenne he auint mannes heorte emti of rihte bi-leue . and of so+dere
luue . he seche+d forte +tat he open fint . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2640

and di+geliche smuhg+d +ter inne . at te e+gen +gif it open ben to
bi-holden idel . o+der unnut . atte earen +gif it open ben to listen
unnut o+der idel . at te nose +gif it beo+d open to snuuende unluuede
bre+d . at te mu+d +gif hit open beo+d to spekende mis . o+der on ete
. o+der on drinke to mis don . at te shape +gif hie redie ben to
golliche deden . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2641

He sunt autem .v. porte mortis . per quas ingreditur autor mortis .
ut occidat . et efferat mortuos . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2642

at@ @tese fif gaten fare+d in dea+des wrihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2643

and +ter inne do+d ; alse +te loftsongere sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2644

Per mille meandros agitat quieta corda . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2645

Mid +tusendfeld wrenches he +te herte to-wende+d CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2646

and al te_seche+d +tat +tonc +te was er swo fieble .
CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2647

and wunde+d +te hertes mid hinderfulle wrenches . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2648

and mid te shene attre +turh_seche+d al +te soule .
CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2649

+Dus flite+d +te fiend wi+d alle men . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2650

and to fele +ter-of walt to his wille . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2651

and +to ben alle unwepnede . +te ne hauen mid hwan hie hem werien . Ne
ne wite wanne . ne a@ . @wiche halue ne a@ @wiche wise he hem wile
bisette +tanne +te he hem unwarliche his dintes giue+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2652

Ac alle +to +te godes wapne bere+d . and hem burege cunnen ; hie ben
boregen . CMTRINIT-MX1,191.2653

Bidde we nu ure helende +tat he us healde +tis win . +tat he geue us
+to wapnes mide us to weriene ; +te +te apostles offe speke+d . +tus
que+dende . Induite uos armatura dei . ut possitis <P_193> stare
aduersus insidias diaboli . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2654

Shrude+d eow mid godes wapne . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2655

and werie+d eow wi+d +te defles waitinge . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2656

Sumentes loricam fidei . Galeam spei . Clipeum caritatis . Gladium
spirituc sancti quod est uerbum dei . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2657

Habbe+d rihte bileue to brunie . and hope to helme . and so+de luue to
shelde . and godes word to swerde . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2658

His armis munitus uicit dauid goliam . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2659

Mid +tos wapnes dauid shrude him mid +te he ouercam goliam .
CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2660

Swo wille crist +tat we moten . and alle +tese wapnes here noten on
+tis fihte to-genes +te ealde neddre . +tat is alre manne fo . +tat we
him moten ouercumen . and habbe to mede eche blisse ; and +tat endelese
kineriche . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2661

Quod nobis prestet qui secula per omnia regnat . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2662

<heading>

XXXI . <em> ESTOTE PRUDENTES ET VIGIILATE IN ORATIONIBUS . <$$em>
CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2664

<$$heading>

Estote prudentes et uigilate in oracionibus . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2666

+De heuenliche keiherde sainte peter iseih +tat ure elderne hadden fele
fon . and we habbe+d alswo . +Te ben alto smiele on swikedom . and
hwatte us to biswikende . and wulled swo don bute we wur+den us warre .
and mugen mucheles +te e+dere . gef hie finde+d us slepende . +Dane no
man us ne were+d . ne us seluen ne mugen . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2667

ne god n@ @ele ich adrade ; bute we him +te gernere bidden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2668

and +tar-fore +te apostel on +tos feawe wordes +te ich here for+d tea+gh
; munege+d us to +trie +tinges . On is giepshipe +tat o+der is wakienge
. +te +tridde is bede . +tus que+dende . Estote prudentes . et
cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2669

Be+d giepe . and warre . and wakie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2670

and bidde+d +giu to gode . +tat he +giue +giu +gepshipe . and warshipe
+giu wi+d to werien . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2671

and +tese +treo +ting note+d ech man on two wise ; wel ; and wro+de .
CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2672

Man hit note+d wro+deliche . +te mid +gepshipe bicher+d his emcristen .
and hindre+d his a+gene soule . alswo do+d eches kinnes chapman ; on
eche chepinge . and talewise men +te speches driuen , and maken wrong
to rihte ; and riht to wronge . and alle +to ; +te unriht don . and
here emcristen bicharen . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2673

+te man hindre+d his agene soule ; CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2674

and dele+d him fro gode . CMTRINIT-MX1,193.2675

and fulste+d <P_195> him to +de deuel +te is gredi uppen woreld richeise
. and gredi him to pinende and +giep him to biwitiende .
CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2676

Swich +gepshipe forbede+d +te apostel . +tere he sei+d . Nolite esse
prudentes aput fi uosmetipsos . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2677

Ne beo +ge noht +gepe to-+gene +giu seluen . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2678

+De man is +giep to-+genes him seluen ; +tat is smegh o+der man to
bicharren . and to bi-swiken and his a+gene wille to fremen . Alse +te
fox +te mid his wrenches walt o+der deor ; and haue+d his wille +terof .
CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2679

+De man note+d wel his +giepshipe . +te birge+d him seluen wi+d his
a+gene soule unfreme . and erne+d after his soule freme .
CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2680

To swich +giepshipe mine+gede hure helende his apostles . and us bi hem
+tus que+dinde . Ecce ego mitto uos et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2681

+Do ure helende sende hie +te weren milde alse shep among +tat unbilefde
folc +te wolden dreuen hem and swo diden alse wulf do+d shep
CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2682

and seide +tus . Estote prudentes sicut serpentes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2683

Here ich +giu sende alse shep amang wulfes . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2684

beo+d +tenne +giepe . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2685

and seide hem wu +giepe . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2686

alse +te neddre . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2687

+tegh neddre beo iuel na+deles man nime+d of hire +geme of gode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2688

Est equidem genus serpentum quod cum timet periculum occultat caput sub
corpore . et corpus obicit periculo . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2689

anes kinnes neddres is +te mid hire lichame hele+d hire heued . +tane
he be+d of harme offered . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2690

for hire lif is on hire heued . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2691

swo dude Iob . +te n@ @es non abuuen eor+de him ilich on almesse . +to
+te deuel him fondede . and wolde him binimen his lif . +tat was ure
drihte leuest of alle liuiende +ting CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2692

and gief <em> he hadde <$$em> werred wi+d god alse +te deuel him to
eggede . +tanne hadde he forloren god +te is eche lif .
CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2693

Ac he notede +te naddre giapshipe . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2694

and dude his licame mid his helpe biforen his heued ; to-genes +te harm
+te +te deuel him dude . +to +te he brohte +te manifeald unlimpes uppen
him . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2695

Erest he strepte of him his shep . +te waren his woreld winne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2696

scilicet vii milia ouium . et iiij. milia camelorum et .l. iuga boum
. et quingenti asini . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2697

+tat waren seuen_+tusend shep . and +trie_+tusend oluontes . and
half_hundre giokes of ocsen . and fif_hundred assen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2698

alle +tos wennen huihten his wur+dshipe . alse faire wedes don +te
licame . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2699

Sicut legitur . Temporalia sunt quasi quedam corporis indumenta .
CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2700

Alse +te wise seide . Eor+deliche winne ben mannes wedes .
CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2701

Inde tulit ei . vij=tem= filios ; et iij. filias . et familiam multam
nimis . CMTRINIT-MX1,195.2702

After +tat <P_197> +te deuel hadde binumen him al his strene ; +tat
waren his seuen sunes and +trie dochtres . and al +tat muchele husshipe
; +te him sholde heren . +te hadde boden his streng+te to-genes his
licameslice fo . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2703

Cum percussit eum ulcere pessimo . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2704

Si+den-mest he wundede hem wel neih to de+de . Swo +tat he ne mihte
finden on al his licame hwar he his finger on sette bute uppen wunden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2705

And on alle +tese limpes . ne untrowede neure Iob to-genes ure drihten
. CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2706

ac +tonkede him of +tan wowe . alse dude ar of +te wele . +tus
que+dinde . Dominus dedit dominus abstulit sicut domino placuit ita
factum sit nomen domini benedictum . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2707

Ure louerd hit +gaf CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2708

ure louerd it binam . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2709

hit is wor+den alse ure louerd wolde CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2710

he+ged . and hered beo his holi name . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2711

Caput quod occultauit fides eius fuit . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2712

+tat heued +tat he helede . wi+d +te deules eginge . was his rihte
bileue . +tat he held faste . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2713

for alse mannes heued . is he+gest lime ; and latteu . swo wisse+d
rihte bi-leue +te soule ; CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2714

and lede+d hem riht to gode . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2715

Est et aliud genus serpentis . quod habet in capite gemmam ne exaudiat
incantantes . alteram auriculam ad lapidem applicat . Alteram
postremitatis sue obturat . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2716

O+der kinnes neddre is ut in o+der londe . +tat haue+d on hire heued
derewur+de +gimston . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2717

and te londes men hire bigale+d o+der wile . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2718

and swo lache+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2719

and do+d of liue ; for to hauen +te +gimston . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2720

ac wanne +te neddre hit under+git +tat hie sechen after hire . hie
warne+d hire wi+d hem alse +te salm wurhte sei+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2721

Sicut apsidis surde et obturantis . aures suas que non exaudiet uocem
incantantium . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2722

+te neddre seche+d a ston CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2723

and lei+d hire on eare +ter to . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2724

and hire o+der eare pilte+d hire tail +ter inne . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2725

and swo for-ditte+d ei+der . +tat hie ne muge heren here remenge . ne
here gal . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2726

and +tus atbreste+d hire fo . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2727

and berged hire liue . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2728

Nime we +geme of +tis faier forbisne . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2729

and fol+gen hire bi ure mihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2730

$Nos sumus quasi serpentes terre corpore adherentes Caput nostrum fides
nostra . $Gemma in capite deus in mente . Diabolus incantator .
suggestio incantacio petra christi diuinitas postremitas eius humanitas
. auricula intellectus noster . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2731

we bed alse +te neddre . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2732

hie smug+d strect bi +te eor+de CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2733

and we don alse . +tenne we +te eor+de blostmes . on corne and on ahte
biseche+d . and welde+d . and note+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,197.2734

+te neddre hire turne+d wile to <P_199> tresle . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2735

and we don alse +tanne we ure woreld winne swo faste bi-witen . +tenne
we ne mu+gen atemien to wur+den godes bord he+ge dages ne eche dai bi
ure haue helpe wrecche men . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2736

Neddre haue+d on hire heued derewur+de +gimston . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2737

and we hauen on ure bileue ure drihten . on wam we bileuen . +te is
alre lemene fader . and welle of alle mihtin . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2738

Man mid is gele . egged us and fonde+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2739

and for+d-te+d to idele +tonke . and unnutte speche . and iuele speche
. CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2740

and mid wi+ges bipeche+d . bute we +te warluker us bure+gen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2741

ac +tenne we ate+d +tat te iuele fonde+d us . alse ich er seide .
bu+ge we to +te stone +te +te apostel of spac +to he sede . Petra autem
erat christuc . +Tat is ure helend crist +tat is ston nemned . for his
stedefastnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2742

To him we legge+d ure riht eare +tene we understonde+d +tat he is so+d
god . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2743

and +tere-fore $nehleche+d us to him . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2744

and ditte+d swo +tat eare wi+d +te werses lore . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2745

Ure left eare we ditte+d mid ure after ende . +tenne we understonden
+tat he bi-com man for us . and noht for ure erninge . ac for his
admodnesse +tolede on his lichame de+d . and arerde us of de+de . and
eche lif us biget gif we it here oferni+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2746

and swo ditte+d +te eare . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2747

and $noht ne hercni+d here gal . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2748

Est et aliud genus serpentis quod cum senescit de fonte gurgitat ut
uirus euomat . per lapidis artum foramen transit et pellem deponit
sicque se nouum efficit . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2749

O+der kinnes neddre is . +tenne hie be+d old . +turh hire +gepshipe
wur+d eft +gung . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2750

Liste+d nu a@ @wiche wise . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2751

+tenne hie be+d of-+turst cume+d to sum welle . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2752

and drinke+d a draht swo michel +tat heo chine+d . and +tenne spewe+d
hire atter . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2753

and cume+d to ane +turlede ston . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2754

and criepe+d nedlinge +tureh nerewe hole . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2755

and bileue+d hire hude baften hire . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2756

$+tenne cume+d hire o+der hude . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2757

and hie be+d al newe . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2758

We ben alse +te nedre CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2759

hie haue+d longe liued ; and we longe leien in sinne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2760

Hie haue+d muchel atter on hire ; CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2761

and is lo+d mannen . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2762

and we hude+d li+dere sinnen on us . for hwan we be+d andsete gode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2763

Hire +turst swi+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2764

and seche+d +tanne welle CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2765

and drinke+d +tat hie to-chine+d . and hire atter aspewe+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2766

And +tane we bi+denche+d on ure sinnes . O+der hwile us luste leornie
hwu we mugen ure sinnes forleten . and beten . and cumen +tar man
lorspel sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2767

and lusten . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2768

and wur+d ure heorte +tanne swo sor for ure sinnes . +tat wel neih hie
to-chine+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2769

+Danne forsake we ure sinnes mid heorte . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2770

and for-hote+d mid mu+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,199.2771

and bi ure lor+dewes <P_201> wissinge cume+d to +te stone . +te haue+d
fif hole narewe . +tat is ure helende crist . +te +tolede his holie
fif wunden for us . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2772

+tanked wur+de him . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2773

and +tar-+turh arue+dliche crepe+d ; +tane we mid fif-folde pine ure
sinnes bete+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2774

+De neddre bileued hire hude baften hire . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2775

and cume+d newe fel . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2776

and hie wur+d jung . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2777

and we worpe+d ure hewe . +tane we forlete+d ure fule liflode . and
wur+de+d junge on clenesse swo we waren ar +tan we sinegeden . alse +te
boc sei+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2778

Veterem hominem exuimus . et nouum induimus . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2779

We habbe+d don of us +te ealde man . +te us horegede alle . and don on
+te newe +te clense+d alle . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2780

Swilch giepshipe habbe+d +tese +trie kenne neddre .
CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2781

and ure helende minegede his apostles hem to habben . and bi hem us .
alse seinte peter que+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2782

Estote prudentes et uigilate . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2783

Be+d warre CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2784

and wakie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2785

Alii quidem dormiunt . Alii autem uigilant . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2786

Sume men slape+d faste . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2787

and sume nappe+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2788

and sume mid alle wakie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2789

+De man slape+d faste . +te li+d on swilche sinnes +te him +tunche+d
swete . and wel like+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2790

Ac gef ure drihten hine fint +tus slepende . +tat is on sinne ; ne
wake+d he nafre $eft . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2791

Dormitans nunc oculos claudit . nunc aperit . Sed homo qui peccatum
gemit ; nec tum relinquit . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2792

Man +te nappe+d wile to_heue+d his e+gen CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2793

and +tenne se+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2794

and wile lei+d togadere CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2795

and +tenne noht ne se+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2796

Swo do+d +te sinfulle . +te his sinnes swi+de bimurne+d . and sore
bisiche+d . and +tenche+d hem to forleten . and +terto funde+d and
noht ne fol+ge+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2797

and +gif ure drihten hine swo fint he wile hine sende to helle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2798

+te man +te hise nemde sinnes forleten . and bi his shriftes wissinge
bet . o+der on bote bifongen . he wake+d mid alle .
CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2799

To swiche wecche us mine+ge+d ure drihten on +te godspelle . +ter he
sei+d . Omnibus dico uigilate . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2800

Alle bileffulle ich hote +tus waken CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2801

ac +te heuenliche louerd us het wakien on bede . and notien swiche bede
. swo us biheue bie . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2802

Alle holie beden ben godfruhte men biheue . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2803

Ac +te ben swo fele +tat hie ben arfe+d tellen . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2804

Na+deles +tu miht swo fele mid fewe biluken . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2805

and swo do+d ech man +tenne he sing+d is pater noster .
CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2806

Ure louerd seinte peter +te us mine+ge+d +tus to +gepshipe . and to
wecche and us to bidden . he +tinge us to ure drihten +tat he us +giue
swiche +gepshipe and mihte +tus to wakien . and us to bidden . and
+gife us bene tu+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2807

Qui uiuit et regnat per omnia secula seculorum . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2808

amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,201.2809

<P_203>

<heading>

XXXII . {COM:Lambeth_Homily_XV} SERMO IN MARCUM VIII. 34 .
CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2812

<$$heading>

QVi uult uenire post me abneget semet ipsum et tollat crucem suam . et
sequatur me . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2814

Sori mai +te man ben +te be+d on michele wowe . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2815

and me him more bihat . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2816

and mai and wile hit him lesten . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2817

Ac +te man mai ben bli+de +te me lede+d fram miche wowe to michele wele
. CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2818

and swich blisse me bihat us alle . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2819

Alle we ben on manifolde wowe on +tis worelde . for ure eldrene giltes
. and ec for ure agene sinnen . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2820

ac ure drihten us frefre+d mid his admodie worden CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2821

+tonke+d wur+de him . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2822

and la+de+d us ut of ure wunsume wowe . to his michele blisse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2823

and sei+d us on wiche wise . and bi wich weie we mu+gen +tider cumen .
+tus que+dinde . Qui uult uenire . et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2824

+Te man +te wile folge me forsake him seluen CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2825

and bere his rode CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2826

and cume after me . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2827

+to +te he fundede to faren of eor+de in to heuene . he seide +tos word
to alle +to +te +to weren . and si+den hauen ben . and +to +te nu ben
. and +to her after cumen . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2828

And alle he la+de+d ech a@ @sume wise to endelese blisse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2829

Ac feawe +ter-offe cume+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2830

and fele bileue+d . for +tat hem +tinc+d iuel to forleten +tat hie
swi+de luue+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2831

Alii quidem amant peccata sua . Alii parentes . Alii uero possessiones
. atque alii uoluptates . et uicia . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2832

Sume luue+d heore sinnen . and sume heore kin . and sume here
eor+dliche ahte . and sume here wille . and fleshliche lustes . and
li+dere lahtres . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2833

+to +te luuie+d here sinnen la+de+d ure drihten +tus que+dinde .
Penitenciam agite apropinquabit enim regnum celorum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2834

Swike+d of giure sinnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2835

and bede+d hem . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2836

and bere+ge+d +giu wi+d +to ; and wi+d o+dere CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2837

and bidde+d milce +te wile +te +ge mu+gen . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2838

domes dai nehleche+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2839

+to +te luuie+d here kin . he la+de+d +tus que+dinde . Omnis qui
relinquerit patrem et matrem fratrem et sororem aut ceteros propter
nomen meum centuplum accipiet et uitam eternam possidebit .
CMTRINIT-MX1,203.2840

Ech man +te for mine name forsake+d fader . o+der moder suster o+der
bro+der . o+der o+dre . and fol+ge+d me he shal fon +ter-to-+genes
hundredfeld mede . and <P_205> habben lif abuten ende .
CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2841

+To +te luue+d woreld winne he la+de+d +tus que+dinde , Qui non
$renunciauerit omnibus que p. non p. m. e. di .
CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2842

No man ne mai fol+ge me bute he forsake alle +te woreld winne +tat he
weld ahg . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2843

Duobus autem modis renunciatur possessio . scilicet desinendo habere .
et desinendo amare . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2844

On two wise man mai forsake woreld winne . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2845

on is fersien hit fro him swo +tat he it n@ @abbe .
CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2846

o+der is . lete swo litel +ter of ; +tat he it noht ne luuie .
CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2847

hit is e+deliche sinne +tat man ahte welde . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2848

ac it is michel sinne ; +tat man ahte luuie . for +tan no man ne mai
luuien god and ehte . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2849

+To +te luuie+d here wil . and here lustes . and lehtres . la+de+d
ure drihten . +tus que+dinde . Si quis uult post me uenire et cetera .
CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2850

Ech man +te wile cumen after me forsake him seluen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2851

and bere his rode . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2852

and fol+ge me . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2853

Hit is arfe+d to understonden bute me nime +te more +geme +ter-to hwu
man mai hine selue forsake . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2854

nime+d nu +geme +terto . and ich +giu wile seggen . bi godes fultume .
CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2855

Duo sunt in homine . alterum per naturam conditum . Alterum per culpam
illatum $. CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2856

Two +ting ben in +te manne . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2857

on his +tat clene and brehte and faire kinde +tat god haue+d +ter-on
broht +tureh his smehnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2858

+tat o+der is wilfulshipe . and lichamliche lustes . and li+dere
lahtres . +ti {COM:chopped_"through"} ne mai no man gode fol+gen ne to
him cumen bute forsake . and forlete +te fule on-cume . +te +te
ondfulle feond on him brohte . and hilede +tat clene ichinde . and
+ter-on bilef +te ure drihten shop and bere his rode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2859

Tres igitur cruces sunt de quibus hic agitur . due mentis . et una
corporis . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2860

+Tre rodes ben +tat ich nu of speke . two gostliche . and on
lichameliche CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2861

Crux corporis est afficcio carnis . quando corpus membratum punitur .
CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2862

+Te lichamliche rode is +te pine +te man +tole+d +tenne his lichame be+d
tospred . and to-tiht on +te rode . alse ure helendes holi lichame wes
. on +te holi rode . +to +te he +ter-one +trowede alse his wille was .
and hadde +tornene helm uppen his holi hafde . +te him swi+de prikede .
and on his honden irene nailes . and on his foten alse . and on his
side was mid spere istungen . and his holi lichame to-sprad and to-tuht
. and for ure gulten reuliche ato+gen . CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2863

Ac man mai fol+gen gode and to him cumen . +teh his lichame swich pine
ne +tolie ne swo ne beo to-spred ne to-tuht on lichamliche rode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,205.2864

and <P_207> +tere-fore ure drihten ne la+de+d us noht to beren swiche
rode . CMTRINIT-MX1,207.2865

ac la+de+d us to an o+der . +te +tis bitocne+d +tat is cleped . Carnis
maceracio . +Tat is lichames helsing . CMTRINIT-MX1,207.2866

Mannes lichame ihalsne+d iwis . +tenne me hine pined mid hunger . and
mid +turste . and mid wecche . and mid swinche . and mid stiue wedes
next +te liche and smerte smiten of smale longe +gerden . and mid
michele chele o+der wile . CMTRINIT-MX1,207.2867

+tos roden moten beren alle sinfulle men . +te wile milce habben of
here sinnes . CMTRINIT-MX1,207.2868

+tis rode is cleped on +te boc . Scala peccatorum . +tat is sinfulle
manne leddre . +te hi shulen one stien to heuene .
CMTRINIT-MX1,207.2869

Nu +gie hauen herd . wich is +te lichamliche rode .
CMTRINIT-MX1,207.2870

here+d nu wich is +te gostliche rode . CMTRINIT-MX1,207.2871

hie haue+d twei names . Cordis contricio et proximi compassio . +Tat
is herte sor for mannes o+gene sinne and reu+de for his emcristenes wowe
. CMTRINIT-MX1,207.2872

+te man +te wile +tis rode beren he mot cnowen +tet he haue+d ofte and
a@ @fele wise agilt mid his e+gen bihelden +tat he ne sholden . wile
idel . wile unnut . wile ifel . and alse mid nose sneued . and mid
eare list . and mid mu+de agilt speken +tat he ne sholde ofte . and
afele wise . and forlete +to gode word . on his bede +te he speken
sholde . and on ouerdede on ete . and on drinke +tenne he ne sholde .
CMTRINIT-MX1,207.2873

and gif he +tet +tenche+d , and on his herte sore bimurne+d . +Tenne
ake+d his heorte . and smerte+d . for his sinnes alse sholde his heued
+gif he hadde +ter-uppe +tornene helm . and +te +tornes swi+de prikeden
. CMTRINIT-MX1,207.2874

Eft-sone +gif he +tonke+d +tat he haue+d agilt mid his honden ofte and a
fele wise forlete almesdede . and don idel . and unut . and ifel .
and mid his foten gon +tenne he ne sholde . and +tider he ne $sholde .
and seldere +tene he sholde to his chirche . and to o+dre holie stowen
. and soriliche on his heorte bimurne+d . +tenne ake+d +te heorte and
smerte+d alse +te honden and te fet sholden +gif hie mid irene nailen
weren +turh_stungen . CMTRINIT-MX1,207.2875

Eft-sone +gif he understant +tat he habbe ofte agilt on golliche dedes .
on untime . o+der on unluuede stede . o+der mid unluued loke . o+der
on unluued wise . and mistliche +toht ofte and a manifeld wise . and
al +tat sore bimurne+d on his heorte . +tenne wile his heorte aken and
smerten . alse his side sholde <P_209> +gif me him mid spere stunge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2876

and +gif man him seluen pine+d alse ich seid habbe . and +gif he se+d
his emcristene +tolien wosi+d . and him +tat on his heorte sore reuwe+d
. and were+d his emcristene wi+d pine bi his mihte . he mai ben ure
helendes cniht . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2877

for he bere+d his rode . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2878

Nime we +geme CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2879

and bide we +tat he us filste to forsakende us seluen . and +te fule
on-cume +te ure fo on us brohte . and to beren ure rode . +tat is ure
lichames clensing and ure heorte reusinge . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2880

and swo after him cumen . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2881

and him fol+gen . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2882

and mid him bileue . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2883

Quod nobis prested qui uiuit et Regnat per omnia secula seculorum .
CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2884

amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2885

<heading>

XXXIII . <em> SERMO IN PS. CXIX. 110 . <$$em> CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2887

<$$heading>

Posuerunt peccatores laqueum michi et de mandatis tuis non erraui .
CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2889

+De sinfulle haue+d leid grune me to henten . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2890

and ich ne forlet +tine bode . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2891

Ure fo fare+d on hunte+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2892

and lei+d grune in a wilderne to henten +te deor +te wunie+d +ter-inne .
CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2893

Ute we ber+gen us . and bidden god +tat he us filste and shilde
+ter-wi+d +tat he us ne shrenche and seien mid +te prophete . custodi
me a laqueo q. s. michi . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2894

louerd shild me wi+d +tat grune +tat hie leid hauen me to henten .
CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2895

liste+d nu and ich +giu wile seggen . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2896

and under-nime+d hit on heorte . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2897

and habbe+d hit on minde +giu is ned michel . wi +te deuel is nemd
sinful . and hunte . and +tis woreld wilderne . and li+dere lahtres
grune . and +tes men deor . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2898

+te deuel is cleped sinful for he +turh his oregel fulliche sine+gede .
+to +te he sundrede him seluen fro gode . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2899

he is cleped mannes fo . for he fode +te forme man wi+d god .
CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2900

+tat was adam . and al his ofspring . +tat is al mankin .
CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2901

he is cleped hunte . for +tan +te he waite+d ure ech . and cunne+d te
bringen us on li+dere lahtres . +te be+d his grunen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2902

and +ter-one hente+d us alse hunte driue+d deor to grune . o+der to
nette . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2903

and swo hente+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2904

and of +tis hunte spec+d +te prophete . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2905

and sei+d . Anima nostra sieut passer erepta de laqueo uenantium .
CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2906

Ure soule is abroiden ; of +te hunte grune . CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2907

holi boc clepe+d +tis woreld wildren for +te fewe men +te wunie+d
$+derone +te ben temed . and wend to godes hond . his wille to don .
CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2908

ac alle mest hie be+d iwile+ge+d CMTRINIT-MX1,209.2909

and habbe+d geres after wilde <P_211> deore . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2910

and for is ech man efned to +te deore . +te he nime+d after geres .
sum fox . sum wulf . sum bere . sum leun . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2911

and ech man me nemne+d after +tan +te his geres beo+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2912

and alse +te michele deor hene+d +te little . and bi hem libbe+d on +te
wilderne . Swo hene+d . and astru+ge+d +te riche men +te wrecches .
CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2913

and na+deles libbe+d bi hem on +tis worelde . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2914

In hoc deserto sunt iiii=or= saltus quos bestie deserti frequentant
scilicet corea ceruisia . forum monasterium . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2915

on +tis wilderne ben fu+ger lages . +tat mest alle wilde deor to
seche+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2916

+tat on is ple+ge , +tat oder drinch . +te +tridde chepinge . +te
fer+de chireche . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2917

In primo saltu ponunt uenantes laqueum uanitatis . In secundo
impietatis . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2918

On +tis fuwer la+ges lei+d ure fo fuwer grunes us mide to henten .
CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2919

crist us shilde +terwi+d +gif his wille beo . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2920

At ple+ge he telde+d +te grune of idelnesse . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2921

for al hit is idel +tat me at ple+ge bihalt . and liste+d . and do+d
and unqueme gode . and unbiheue +te soule . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2922

and swinch +te lichame . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2923

+tih . and shonkes . and fet oppie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2924

wombe gosshie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2925

and shuldres wrenchie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2926

armes . and honden frikie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2927

herte bi+denche+d +tat hie seggen shal on songe . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2928

Tunge and te+d . and lippe word shuppie+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2929

Mu+d sent ut +te stefne . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2930

and ech man +te +terto cume+d pleie to toten . o+der to listen o+der to
bihelden . +gif he him wel like+d . he be+d biseid and hent on +te on
+te grune of idelnesse . +te +te werse +tere haue+d itelded .
CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2931

of +tis grune spec+d +te prophete CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2932

and sei+d . Non sedi cum concilio uanitatis et cum iniqua gerentibus
non $introibo . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2933

Ne held ich nefre wel mid hem +te gon to idelnesse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2934

Secundus saltus huius deserti est compotatorium . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2935

+tat o+der la+ge on +tis wilderne is drinch . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2936

+tere telde+d +te werse +te grune of unrihte . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2937

for +tere ne do+d no man riht . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2938

ac ech man do+d +tere unriht to_+genes gode and to_+genes his a+gene
soule . and to_+genes his emcristene . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2939

To-+genes gode he do+d unriht . +tat is his louerd . and halt his lif
and his hele . +te wile he hit haue+d . and do+d him al +tat he bi
be+d . and bid him +terof beten his nede and bere+gen him wi+d
ouer_dede CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2940

and na+deles ne wile don +tat god him het . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2941

ac do+d +tat god forbed . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2942

and do+d +tat +te deuel het . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2943

and swo unwur+de+d god . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2944

and wur+de+d +tene deuel . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2945

and agilt wi+d gode . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2946

and queme+d +te deuel . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2947

and forgilt heuene wele . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2948

and haue+d helle wowe . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2949

unriht he do+d ec to-+genes his soule unwille . CMTRINIT-MX1,211.2950

and awlenc+d <P_213> his lichame . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2951

and walt his soule . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2952

and hefie+d his lichame . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2953

and hene+d his soule . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2954

and +te lichame +te sholde ben +te soule hihtliche bure . make+d hire
to ateliche quarterne . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2955

and +ter inne neure twiste+d . mid ouerdede . and untimliche drinche .
+tat hire beo+d wo +tat hie sal +ter-inne wunien .
CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2956

and +tere-fore wilne+d ut . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2957

Unriht heo do+d ec to+genes his emcristene . +tenne he hine la+de+d to
drinken more . noht +te him beo wille . o+der queme . ac +tenne him
ned were . and bringe+d uppen him birden more +tene $he bere mu+ge .
and spille+d on him +tat he sholde spelien wrecche men . o+der ra+der
helden hit ut +tene men +termide {he_should} fordrenchen . and noht
sheden godes shafte ne spenen on uni+dor . +tat god shop mannen to
helpe . ne swo unwur+din godes handiwerc . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2958

+tis beo+d at drinche CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2959

and o+der unriht inoh . +tere be+d ollende word . and idele lehtres .
and winrede bruwes . and buwe+d wenliche . +te be+d bispeke ewebruche
and o+der unriht inoh . wicching . and swikedom . stale . and leo+d
. and lesing . and refloc . and alle +te lu+dere lastes +te man
hafe+d +tureh deules lore . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2960

of +tis grisliche grune spec+d +te prophete . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2961

and sei+d . Cum iniqua gerentibus non introibo . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2962

N@ @elle ich nefre gon +tider in ; +tere me swich unriht drige+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2963

+te lif_holi man +te wiste godes wille . swic drinch wi+d_que+d . and
+te lu+dere wune . and +te stede +ter me swo one drinke+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2964

Tercius saltus huius deserti est . forum ubi ponunt laqueum
malignitatis . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2965

+Te +tridde lage on +tis wilderne is cheping . +tere telde+d +te werse
+te grune of hindre +tat is of bipeching CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2966

for +tenne man bipeche+d o+der . he him make+d to ben bihinden . of
+tat he wene+d to ben biforen . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2967

+tat is ure alre wune +te bigge+d . and sille+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2968

+te sullere loue+d his +ting dere . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2969

and sei+d +tat it is wel wur+d . o+der betere . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2970

+De beger bet litel +tar fore CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2971

and sei+d +tat hit n@ @is noht wur+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2972

and lige+d bo+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2973

+te sullere lat sumdel of his lofe . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2974

and swere+d +tat he hit n@ @ele lasse selle . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2975

+te beggere ecne+d his bode CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2976

and swere+d +tat he n@ @ele more geuen . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2977

+tanne cume+d +te werse CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2978

and rune+d wi+d here ei+deres +tanc . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2979

and do+d +te sullere lasse to nimende +tanne he swore . and +tanne +te
bigger more to geuende +tanne he swore . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2980

And gif hit chepinge be . +te me shule meten o+der weien . +te sullere
do+d narewere +tane he sholde . and te biggere rumluker +tan he sholde
. CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2981

and +tesse wise biswike+d her ai+der o+der . CMTRINIT-MX1,213.2982

and be+d +tanne bisaid in +te grune of <P_215> hinder .
CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2983

On is leasing . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2984

o+der is mon-o+d . +te +tridde swikedom . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2985

and mid +tis grune hente+d +te werse alle +to +te $+tus {TEXT:sus}
bigge+d . and sulle+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2986

+tare fore sei+d +te prophete . Odiui ecclesiam malignantium .
CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2987

Me is andsete +te samninge of +te hinderfulle CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2988

for ich wot +tat +tat hie ben lo+de god . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2989

Quartus saltus huius deserti est monasterium ubi ponuntur laquei
impietatis . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2990

+De $feor+de lage of +tisse wilderne is chireche . +tare telde+d +de
werse +te grune of oregelnesse . and bisai+d +tar-one hwile hodede .
and hwile lewede . and hwile bo+de . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2991

+De hodede hente+d mid +tis grune . hwile ofeald . hwile twifeald
+tanne he make+d +tat +te hodede lat his chireche stonde wi+d-uten tide
. +tane hit time be+d to done +te tiden . and alse swo ofte swo he
speke+d in chireche +tat he ne sholde . o+der swike+d of +tat he sholde
. +tat is +te sinfule wel tachen . and minigen +to +te ben slowe to
chireche . and to weldede . +tat he be snel +tar-to . and lehtrie +to
+te on sinne li+d . to forleten . and mid milde worde to frefrien .
and eche he+ge dai fede mid godes worde +te hungrie soule +te haue+d to
witen . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2992

and alse fele +ting swo ich iteld habbe +tat he ine chirche speken
sholde . +gif he n@ @ele o+der ne can . o+der ne recche+d mid alse
fele_folde grunen +te werse hine bisei+d . and hente+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2993

and +gif he wlite+d mid stefne for to liken wimmannen . o+der lede+d
hem his {TEXT:life} e+gen for to sechen hire loke . +tenne be+d he laht
for@ @to leden to helle . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2994

+te lewede men hente+d +te werse ine chirche mid his grune on +tre wise
. +tanne prest spec+d inne chirche of chirche neode and mine+ge+d +tat
me niwe clo+des o+der elde bete . boc o+der belle calch o+der messe-ref
. o+der waferiht o+der o+dre clo+des . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2995

+tenne cume+d +te werse to +te mannes heorte . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2996

and wi+d his +tonc sunderune halt +tus que+dinde . wi sholdest +tu +tis
finden +te noht ne fost +terof . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2997

ac he foh+d al +tat +tere cume+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2998

he finde +tis nu . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.2999

Swo ne andswerede noht moyses ure drihten +to he bad him minster maken .
CMTRINIT-MX1,215.3000

and be hit al wel for+dede . +teh he noht +ter-offe fenge .
CMTRINIT-MX1,215.3001

alse dide saleman +te god sende his writ to . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.3002

swo hoh ech chirche socne don +tenne hie nede sen .
CMTRINIT-MX1,215.3003

+tenne +te prest +te mene+ge+d rihtliche te+dien . +tenne cume+d +te
werse to sume mannes heorte . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.3004

and mine+ge+d hine +tat he swo ne do . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.3005

and rune+d wi+d +te mannes +tonc CMTRINIT-MX1,215.3006

and +tus him misrede+d . CMTRINIT-MX1,215.3007

+gif +tu +te prest bitechest alle +tine te+dinge . n@ @ele he hit
<P_217> delen alse he don sholde . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3008

ac wile hit dere sellen and spenen on uni+dor . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3009

do +tu almes +ter-of . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3010

and del sum wrecche men . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3011

+tus he hine bi-peche+d +tat he chirche bireue+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3012

on +te helde la+ge het ure drihten +tat me ne sholde none man bitechen
bute he were teid to menden chirche . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3013

Vndecim generationes iusse sunt adnumero solis leuitis decimas soluere .
CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3014

+Tanne heh dai cume+d man hoh herien god mid rihte leue . and mid so+de
luue . and of +tan +te god him haue+d lend . loc to chirche bringen .
and wur+din +ter-mide godes bord ; alse his haue be+d .
CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3015

+tenne cume+d +te werse to sumes mannes heorte CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3016

and rune+d wi+d his heorte . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3017

and do+d hine his loc to wi+d_teonde . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3018

and +tus que+d +tis chirche is riche inoh . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3019

and fele men ben wrecches CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3020

+te n@ @es riche non nod . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3021

ac wrecches habben michele . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3022

wi+d-teo nu $here +ti loc CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3023

and del hit wrecches . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3024

Set ait in ewangelio . hec oportuit facere ; et illa non omittere .
CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3025

ei+der bihoue+d +tat man do +te wile loc to chirche bringe . and helpe
wrecche $men . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3026

and +ter-mide hine alese+d +gif he laht be+d . on +te orelese grune .
CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3027

+tenne mai he seggen mid te salm wirhte dauid . Oculi mei semper ad
domino et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3028

Eure beo mine e+gene opene to ure drihten . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3029

for ich triste +tat he n@ @ele neng bi mine wrihte .
CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3030

ac for his milde wille . of +tis werses grune mine fet breiden .
CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3031

swo do he ure alre +te liue+d and rixle+d CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3032

Amen . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3033

<heading>

XXXIV . <em> SERMO IN ISA. XI. I . <$$em> CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3035

<$$heading>

$Egredietur uirga de radice iesse , et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3037

An gerd sal spruten of iesse more . and an blosme stien of +tare more .
and uppe +tare blosme resten +te holie gost . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3038

On +tesse fewe litele wored lotied fele gode wored gif hie weren wel
ioponen . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3039

Ac ich ne mai ne ich ne can +tosse on_openi . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3040

Ac na+teles ich wille ew segge +tat ich +tronne understonde $+turh +te
mihte of +te holi gost . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3041

Egredietur . et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,217.3042

+Do +te $heuenliche fader fundede to <P_219> senden +tene heuenliche
sune ; he sende mani herendrake to cu+ten +tat he cume wolde
CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3043

And on of +to was ysaie +te prophete . on was leid to segen +tos wored
+tat ich nou sege . and nu +te beginne on_opini .
CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3044

+te was man wuniinde on +tese worlde mani hundred wintre are +te maiden
ware iken . o+ter istren . CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3045

and spac of hire CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3046

and seide wat of hire iwur+ten solde also suteliche swo it wur+te were .
CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3047

and heuenede hire cun to more . and hire $sulf to gerde . and hire
cunebern to blosme . CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3048

and seide . Egredietur uirga et cetera . CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3049

Hered nu CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3050

and understonded for woche +tinge he nemnede hire cun to more . and
hire $sulf to gerde and hire cune bern to blosme .
CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3051

Quem ad modum rami arboris prodeunt a stipite . et ille a radice . sic
domina nostra de posteris iesse et ipsi prodierunt de ipso iesse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3052

Alse +te huuemeste bou of +te treuwe springed of +te ne+temeste rote .
alse sprong ure lafedi of hire helderne . and hire helderne of iesse .
CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3053

and alse +te uuemeste bou is sib +te ne+temeste rote . Alse sprond word
+te laste man isib +te formeste +te was biforn us .
CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3054

And for +ti bed alle man ibro+tren and isustren . CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3055

and solden auerihc man loueien o+ter . CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3056

Acke nu is rewe+te . CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3057

for nu is euerihc man ifo +tare he solde fren be .
CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3058

Nunquam tuta fide et cetera . Filius autem diem . et cetera . Domina
nostra comparata est uirge propter .iiii=or=. que sepe inueniuntur
adiuncta uirge que est recta . plana . excisis longa .
CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3059

Vre leuedi is iuened to gerde for foure +tinges +te man find ilome on
gerde +tat he be riht and smal and long . and sme+te .
CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3060

Rectitudinem uirge habuit in perseueranciam uite .
CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3061

Gerde rihtnesse he heuede on hire liflode . CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3062

for he ne turnde naht on hire to doinde ne que+tende nan +ter +tinge +te
he leten solde . CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3063

et Sic medio tutissima ibat . CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3064

And he understod holie boc lore . CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3065

et cetera . Si plus scirem , plus dicerem . CMTRINIT-MX1,219.3066
