<BEGIN_aplumpt-1503-e1-h>

<P_167>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXXIII>

To the worshipful Sir Robart Plompton , kt. be thes delivered in hast .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,167.4

Sir , in my most hartiest wyse I recommennd me unto you , desiring to
heare of your prosperitie and welfaire , and of your good spede in your
matters ; certyfiing you that I , and my sone William , with all your
children , are in good health <paren> blessed be <font> Jesu <$$font>
<$$paren> with all your servants . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,167.5

Sir , ye , and I , and my sone , was content at your departing , that my
sone should take the farmes at Martingmas of his tenaunts , or els cast
them forth and prayse ther goods ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,167.6

and so my sone hath done with some of them . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,167.7

And here are the names of them that hath payd me ; Robart Wood , Peter
Cott , John Gloster , Robart Taler , William Bentham .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,167.8

Sir , it ys let us to understand that ther@ @'s other tenaunts , that
are cast forth , <P_168> hath bene at Cothorpe , and made one ragman to
compleane on my sone and you , that ye take ther goods from them .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.9

And that is not soe , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.10

for my sone hath sent for the neighbours of Knaresbrough , and Harrygate
, and Spofforth , to set pryse on ther comon and cattell after ther
consience ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.11

and my sone hath set to streys some in ther layes ,
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.12

for ther is some that will not apply to his mynd .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.13

And they purpose to get on discharg for my sone , that they may be set
in agayn , and he not to occupie ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.14

therfore I pray you to take good heed therupon .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.15

And they have set there names in the ragman that hath payd my sone ;
that they know not of , nor will not be conselled therto .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.16

Also , Sir Richard Goldsbrough hath taken an ox of William Bentham ,
that was dryven over the water with ther cattell of the towne of
Plompton that he caused to be put over , for the sayfgard of ther
cattell . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.17

And when he came for his ox , he answered him APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.18

and sayd ; Sir John Roclife had wrytten for certayne tenaunts to be so
taryed by him , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.19

and spirred {GLOSS:asked} him , whose tenaunt he was ,
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.20

and he shewed him whos he was . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.21

And he will not let him have them without a replevie ,
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.22

and I trow he will dye in the fold ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.23

for I sent William Skirgell and William Croft , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.24

and they can@ @not get him without a replevie .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.25

And therfore if ye can find any remedie , I pray you for ;
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.26

and also I pray you to send me some word , as sone as ye may , of your
good speed . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,168.27

No <P_169> more at this tyme , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,169.28

but I betake you to the keping of the Trenetie .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,169.29

From Plompton in hast , the xvi day Novembris .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,169.30

By your wife , Dame Agnes Plompton . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,169.31

{COM:16_Nov._1502}

<P_170>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXXV>

To the worshipfull Sir Robart Plompton , kt. be thes delivered in hast
. APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.35

Right worshipful Sir , in my most harty wise I recommend me unto you ,
desiring to witt your prosperytie and wellfayre ; letting you understand
that I and all your children is in good health <paren> blessed be <font>
Jesu <$$font> <$$paren> with all your servants . Lettyng you to
understand that my Lord Archbishop sent one servant of his unto my son
William , chardging him in the Kyngs name to sette in the tenaunts
agayne ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.36

and if he wold not , he wold send to the schereffe , and cause him to
poynt them in agayne . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.37

And so I sent one servant to the schereffe , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.38

and the schereffe shewed my servant that my Lord had wrytten unto him
for to poynt them on {COM:sic} agayne . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.39

But my sone kepes them forth as yet , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.40

and therfor I trow my lord Archbishop will compleane of my son and you ;
and sath , that he will indyte them that was at castyng out of tham .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.41

And , Sir , I pray you that you be not myscontent , that I sent not to
you , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.42

for indeed I make the labor that is possible for me to make ,
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.43

and as yet I can@ @not speed ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.44

but as shortly as I can , I shall spede the matter .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.45

No more at this tyme , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.46

but the Trenytie have you in his keeping . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.47

Scribled in hast , at Plompton , this sunday next after St. Kateryne
day . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.48

By your wiffe , dame Agnes Plompton . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,170.49

{COM:27_Nov._1502}

<P_171>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXXVI>

To the worshipfull Robart Plompton , knight , be thes byll delivered in
hast . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.53

Right worshipful Sir , in my most harte wyse I recommend me unto you ,
desiring to here of your welfare and good speed in your matters .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.54

I and all your children is in good health <paren> blessed be <font> Jesu
<$$font> <$$paren> . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.55

And , Sir , so it is , as God knowes , that I have mayd as great labor
as was possible for me to make , to content your mynd in all causes ;
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.56

and now I have mayd the usance of xx =li= , and sent you with Thomas
Bekerdike to content where ye know . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.57

And I pray you to send some wrytting to Thomas Meryng for the repayment
of the money and your discharg . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.58

Sir , it is so that my lord Archbishop hath indytt my sone William and
xvi of his servants , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.59

on tewsday was a senit . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.60

But Anthony Cliforth gave in the bill of dytement against my sone and
his servants , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.61

but the quest would not endyte them . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.62

But my lord Archbishop caused them ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.63

or els he bad them tell who wold not , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.64

and he should ponishe them , that all oder should take insample .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.65

And I can@ @not get the copie of the indytement ,
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.66

for my Lord hath it in his hands . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.67

No more at this tyme . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.68

The Lord preserve you . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.69

From Plompton in hast , this St. Thomas day . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.70

By your wife , dame Agnes Plompton . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,171.71

{COM:21_Dec._1502}

<P_184>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXLIX>

To the worshipfull Robart Plompton , knight , be this byll delivered in
hast . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,184.75

Right worshipfull Sir , in my most hartie wyse I recomend me unto you ,
evermore desiring to here of your prosperytie and wellfaire , and good
sped in your matters , shewyng you that I and all your children is in
good health <paren> blessed be <font> Jesu <$$font> <$$paren> and prays
you for your blessing . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,184.76

Sir , it is so now that I have made you th@ @ewsans of the money , that
ye sent to me for , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,184.77

and I have sent it you with John Walker at this tyme ; the which I shall
shew you how I mayd schift of , at your comminge .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,184.78

And I pray you that ye be not miscontent that I sent it no sooner ,
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,184.79

for I have made the hast that I could that was possible for me to do .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,184.80

And also , Sir , I will not lett Tho: Croft wife plow nor occupie her
fermeald , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,184.81

but saith she shall not occupy without yer life .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,184.82

And also I pray you to send me word how you speed in your matters againe
, as soon as ye may ; and also to send me word where ye will your horses
to come to you . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,184.83

<P_185>

No more at this time , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,185.85

but the Trinity keep you . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,185.86

From Plumpton in hast , the xix=th= day of March .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,185.87

By your wife , Dame Agnes Plompton . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,185.88

{COM:19_March_1503-4}

<P_186>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLI>

To the worshipfull Robart Plompton , knight , be these delivered in hast
. APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.92

Right worshipfull Sir , in my most hartiest wyse I recomend me unto you
, desiring to here of your prosperytie and welfare , and good spede in
your matters , the which I marvell greatly that I have no word from you
. APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.93

Sir , I marvell greatly that ye let the matter rest so long , and labors
no better for your selfe , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.94

and ye wold labor it deligently . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.95

But it is sayd that ye be lesse forward , and they underworketh falsly ;
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.96

and it is sene and known by them , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.97

for they thinke to drive it that they may take the Whitsonday ferme :
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.98

and so it is sayd all the country about . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.99

Sir , I besech you to remember your great cost and charges , and myne ,
and labor the matter that it myght have an end ,
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.100

for they have taken on <font> capias <$$font> and delivered for certayne
of your tenants . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.101

And so they have taken Edmund Ward at Knarsbrough and arrest him ; the
which is a great nossen {COM:nuisance?} in the country , that they shall
get such prosses , and ye dow none to them , but lett them have there
mynd fullfilled in every case . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.102

And the other tenaunts can@ @not pays {COM:sic} ther housses , but they
shal@ @be cagid ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.103

and also willing none of your servants shall not pas the dowers , but
they mon be trobled . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.104

And also they have stopped the country , that ther will no man deale
with any of your servants , nether to bye wod , no nor nothing els .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.105

Therfore , I pray you that ye will get some comandment to the Scherefe
that the prosses may be stoped . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.106

Also , Sir , I send you the copy of the letter that came from the
Undersherefe , and the copy of the causes , and the letter that come
from William Elison ; the which I had mynd in for loyssing of Edmund
Ward , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.107

for I have gotten him forth by the wayes of William Ellyson .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.108

And also , Sir , I am in good health , and all the children <paren>
blessed be <font> Jesu <$$font> <$$paren> , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.109

and all your children prayes you for your daly blessing .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.110

And all your servants is in good health , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,186.111

and prays delygently <P_187> for your good speed in your matters .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,187.112

And also it is sayd , that they have cagments for them that hath bought
the wood , that they dare not deale therwith .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,187.113

For without ye get some comaundement , I wott not how your house shal@
@be kept , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,187.114

for I know not wherof to levy one penyworth . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,187.115

No more at this tyme , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,187.116

but the Trenietie keepe you . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,187.117

From Plompton in hast , the xii day of Aprill .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,187.118

By your wyfe , Dame Agnes Plompton . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,187.119

{COM:12_April_1504}

<P_188>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLIII>

To the worshipfull Robart Plompton , kt. be thes byll delivered in hast
. APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.123

Right worshipfull , I in most hartee wyse recomennd me unto you ,
desiring to heare of your wellfaire and good speed in your matters ,
letting you understand that I am in good helth , with all your children
<paren> blessed be <font> Jesu <$$font> <$$paren> , and pray you of your
daly blessinge ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.124

and all your servants is in good health APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.125

and is right glad to here of your welfare . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.126

Sir , one the eving after the making of this letter , your servant
Edmund Robyson come home , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.127

and so I understond by your letter , that you wold understand if Sir
John Roclife servants have received any ferme in Yorkshire ,
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.128

but therof I can get no knowledg as yet . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.129

But they have sold oke wood at Nesfeld , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.130

and lettes them stand to the tyme of the yere ,
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.131

one oke that is worth xl =d= for xij =d= ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.132

and also they have sold aches at the same place :
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.133

and the okes are sold to William Clapame and Richard Clapame , and the
aches to the towards there about . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.134

And also at Idell , they have sold holyn to James Formes and to Thomas
Quentin and William Aches , APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.135

and herof I can geet no more certaintie as yet .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.136

And also there is no mo of your tenaunts to get as yet , nor your
servants nether , at this tyme ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.137

but the Trenitie have you in his blessed keepinge
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.138

Scrybbled in hast , the fryday next after St. Marke day .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.139

By your wyffe , Dame Agnes Plompton . APLUMPT-1503-E1-H,188.140

{COM:26_April_1504}

