<BEGIN_armin-1608-e2-h>

<P_8>

Jack Oates , sitting at cardes all alone , was dealing to himselfe at
vide ruffe ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.3

<paren> for that was the game he ioyed in <$$paren> ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.4

and as he spide a knaue - Ah , knaue , art there ? quoth he .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.5

When he spide a king - King , by your leaue , quoth he .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.6

If hee spied a queene - Queene Richard art come ? quoth he ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.7

and would kneele downe , and bid God blesse her majestie <paren> meaning
, indeede , the then queene , whom he heard Sir William Hollis , his
maister , so much to pray for <$$paren> . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.8

But heere is the jest : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.9

Jack , as I say , being at cardes all alone , spying a knaue , and
saying , Ah , knaue , art there ? a simple seruingman being in the hall
, waighting his maisters comming , walking by , and hearing him say so ,
thought he had called him knaue , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.10

tooke the matter in dudgeen , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.11

and miscalled the foole . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.12

Another seruingman , more foolish then both , took Jack's part , so that
in short time they two fell together by the eares ; who , being parted ,
Jack Oates giues them each one a hand , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.13

and so takes them into the buttry to drinke . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.14

The knight comes in : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.15

seeing the hall not yet quiet , askt the matter . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.16

Jack comes - ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.17

I@ @le tell thee , Willy , quoth hee . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.18

As I was a playing at cardes , one seeing I wonne all I playd for ,
would needes haue the knaue from mee , which , as very a knaue as hee
seeing , would needes beare him knaue for company ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.19

so bid them both welcome to thy house - ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.20

I haue bin to intreat the knaue , thy butler , to make them drinke .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.21

I , sayes Sir William ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.22

and you , like a knaue , made them fall out . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.23

I , answered Jack , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.24

and your drinke , Sir Knaue , made them friends . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.25

Sir William , laughing , departed . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.26

Newes came to Sir William that such a nobleman was comming to his house
: ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.27

great prouision was made for his welcome ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.28

and , amongst all , Jack Oates put on his new motly coate , cleane
muckender , and his new shooes . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.29

Much preparation was made , which were too long to tell ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.30

for , I@ @le assure ye , it was one of the greatest earles in England ,
vnfit to name here : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,8.31

but the <P_9> knight and his ladie met him at the gate to entertaine him
. ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.32

Sir William , with a low congy , saluted him ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.33

the good lady , as is the courtly custom , was kist of this noble man .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.34

Jack Oates , seeing him kisse his ladie , on the sodaine giues the earle
a sound box on the eare . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.35

Knaue <paren> quoth he <$$paren> kisse Sir Willie's wife ?
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.36

The good knight , amazed at this , caused him to be whipt .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.37

But the kinde noble man , knowing simplicitie the ground of his errour ,
would not suffer it , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.38

but , putting it vp , left him , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.39

and entred the house . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.40

Jack , seeing they were sad , and he had done amisse , had this wit in
simplicitie to shadow it : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.41

he comes after ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.42

and askt the earle wher his hand was ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.43

Here <paren> quoth he <$$paren> - ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.44

with that he shakes him by it , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.45

and sayes , I mistooke it before , knowing not your eare from your hand
, being so like one another . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.46

Jack thought hee had mended the matter ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.47

but now he was whipt indeede , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.48

and had his payment altogether . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.49

Thus fooles , thinking to be wise , become flat foolish :
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.50

but all is one , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.51

Jack neuer repented him . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.52

At a Christmas time , when great logs furnish the hall fire - when
brawne is in season , and , indeede , all reveling is regarded , this
gallant knight kept open house for all commers , where beefe , beere ,
and bread was no niggard . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.53

Amongst all the pleasures prouided , a noyse of minstrells and a
Lincolnshire bagpipe was prepared - the minstrels for the great chamber
, the bagpipe for the hall - the minstrells to serue vp the knights
meate , and the bagpipe for the common dauncing . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.54

Jack could not endure to bee in the common hall ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.55

for , indeede , the foole was a little proudly minded ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.56

and , therefore , was altogether in the great chamber , at my ladies or
Sir Williams elbow . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.57

One time , being very melancholy , the knight , to rouse him vp , saide
, Hence , foole ! ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.58

I@ @le haue another foole ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.59

thou shalt dwell no longer with me . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.60

Jack to this answered little ; though , indeede , ye could not anger him
worse . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.61

A gentleman at the boord answers , If it please you , sir , I@ @le bring
ye another foole soone . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.62

I pray ye do <paren> quoth the knight <$$paren> ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.63

and he shall be welcome . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.64

Jack fell a crying , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,9.65

and departed mad and angry down into the <P_10> great hall ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.66

and , being strong_armed <paren> as before I described him <$$paren> ,
caught the bagpipes from the piper , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.67

knockt them about his pate , that he laid the fellow for dead on the
ground , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.68

and , all broken , carries the pipes vp into the great chamber ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.69

and layes them on the fire . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.70

The knight , knowing by Jack that something was amisse , sendes downe to
see . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.71

Newes of this jest came ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.72

the knight , angry <paren> but to no purpose , for he loued the foole
aboue all , and that the household knew , else Jack had paid for it ,
for the common -peoples dauncing was spoiled <$$paren> sent downe Jack ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.73

and bad him out of his sight . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.74

Jack cries , Hang Sir Willy , hang Sir Willy , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.75

and departes . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.76

Sir William , not knowing how to amend the matter , caused the piper to
be carried to bed , who was very ill , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.77

and said , I would now giue a gold noble for a foole : indeede , to
anger him throughly , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.78

one of the minstrels whispers a gentleman in the eare ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.79

and said , If it pleased him , hee would ; whereat the gentleman laught
. ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.80

The knight demaunded the reason of his laughing . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.81

I pray you tell me <paren> quoth hee <$$paren> - ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.82

for laughing could neuer come in a better time - ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.83

the foole hath madded me . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.84

If it please you <paren> sayes the gentleman <$$paren> , here is a good
fellow will goe and attire him in one of his coates , and can in all
poynts behaue himselfe naturally , like such a one .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.85

It is good <paren> sayes the knight <$$paren> ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.86

and I pre@ @thee , good fellow , about it ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.87

and one goe call Jack Oates hether , that wee may hold him with talk in
the meane time . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.88

The simple minstrell , thinking to worke wonders , as one ouerjoyed at
the good opportunitie , threw his fiddle one way , his stick another ,
and his case the third way , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.89

and was in such a case of joy , that it was no boot to bid him make hast
: ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.90

but , proud of the knight fauor , away he flings , as if he went to tak
possession of some great lordship ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.91

but , what ere he got by it , I am sure his fiddle , with the fall ,
fell in pieces , which grieued his maister so , that , in loue and
pittie , he laughed till the water ran downe his cheekes .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,10.92

Beside , this good knight was like to <P_11> keepe a bad Christmas ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.93

for the bagpipes and the musicke went to wracke - ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.94

the one burnt , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.95

and the other broken . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.96

In comes Jack Oates , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.97

and <paren> being merry <$$paren> told the knight and the rest that a
country-wench in the hall had eaten garlicke , and there was seuenteene
men poysoned with kissing her : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.98

for it was his vse to jest thus . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.99

By and by comes in a messenger <paren> one of the knights men <$$paren>
to tell him that such a gentleman had sent his foole to dwell with him .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.100

Hee is welcome , sayes the knight , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.101

for I am weary of this foole : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.102

goe bid him come in - ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.103

Jack , bid him welcome . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.104

They all laught to see Jack's colour come and goe , like a wise man
ready to make a good end . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.105

What say you to this ? saies the knight . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.106

Not one word sayes Jack . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.107

They tinged with a knife at the bottome of a glasse , as toulling the
bell for the foole , who was speechlesse and would dye <paren> then
which nothing could more anger him <$$paren> ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.108

but now the thought of the new come foole so much moued him , that he
was as dead as a doore nayle - standing on tip-toe , looking toward the
door to behold ariuall , that he would put his nose out of joint .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.109

By and by enters my artificiall foole in his old cloaths , making wry
mouthes , dauncing , and looking a_squint : who , when Jack beheld ,
sodainely he flew at him , and so violently beate him , that all the
table rose , but could scarce get him off . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.110

Well , off he was at length : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.111

the knight caused the broken ones to be by themselues .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.112

My poore minstrell , with a fall , had his head broke to the skull
against the ground , his face scratcht ; that which was worst of all his
left eye put out , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.113

and withall so sore bruised , that he could neyther stand nor goe .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.114

The knight caused him to bee laide with the pyper , who was also hurt in
the like conflict , who lackt no good looking to , because they
miscarried in the knights seruice : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.115

but euer after Jack Oates could not endure to heare any talke of another
foole to be there , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.116

and the knight durst not make such a motion . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.117

The pyper and the minstrel , being in bed together , one cryed , O !
his backe and face ; the other , O ! his face and eye :
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.118

the one cryed O his pype ! the other , O his fiddle !
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,11.119

Good <P_12> mussicke or broken consorts , they agree well together ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.120

but when they were well , they were contented for their paines :
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.121

they had both money and the knights fauour . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.122

Here you haue heard the difference twixt a flat foole naturall , and a
flat foole artificiall ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.123

one that did his kinde , and the other who foolishly followed his owne
minde : on which two is written this Rime : {COM:verse_omitted}
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.124

Jack Oates could neuer abide the cooke , by reason that he would scald
him out of the kitchen . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.125

Upon a time he had a great charge from his Lady to make her a quince pie
of purpose for Sir Williams owne eating , which the cooke endeuored to
doe , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.126

and sent to Lincolne of purpose to the apothecaries for choyse quinces .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.127

Jack , being at this charge giuen , thought to be euen with the cooke ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.128

and waited the time when this Pie was made . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.129

It hapned so , the cooke could get no quinces : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.130

my lady <paren> for it was the knight's desire to haue one <$$paren>
sent about to Boston , and all the chiefe townes , but all in vaine -
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.131

the season serued not ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.132

but , rather then Sir William should be vnfurnished , sent to Lincolne
againe to buy vp many quinces , ready preserved at pothecaries , which
she had , though with great cost . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.133

The knight , asking his Lady for his pie , she told him with much adoe
she had preuailed , but with no little paines , in seeking quinces ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,12.134

for she <P_13> was faine to buy them ready preserued , and to make a
vertue of necessity that way . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.135

Sir William , seeing it was so , said it should bee as well eaten ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.136

and sent for his friends , gentlemen and others of no small account .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.137

There was other great cheare prouided to furnish vp this sumptuous feast
, ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.138

and as he inuited them , hee tolde them it was a quince pie , which he
would haue eaten . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.139

The day drew on , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.140

and the gentiles were come , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.141

and all was in a redinesse , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.142

and still Jack forgat not the pie , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.143

but stood faintly sicke , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.144

and refused his meate : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.145

the knight , sory that his best dish fayled him , made no small account
of his well_fare , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.146

askte him , Jack , sayes hee , where lyes thy paine ?
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.147

In my mouth , sayes hee <paren> meaning , indeede , his mouth hung for
the quince pie . <$$paren> ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.148

A barber was sent for from the market towne hard by , who searcht his
mouth , and could finde no cause of paine : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.149

but Sir William , thinking the foole wanted wit to tell his griefe
<paren> though not wit to play the thiefe <$$paren> had the barber
depart , asking Jacke what he would eate ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.150

he sayd , nothing . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.151

What he would drinke ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.152

he sayd , nothing ; which made Sir William doubt much of his health ,
refusing his liquour when it was usually his practice , and the knight
joyed in it too : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.153

askit him if he would lie downe ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.154

still answering no , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.155

but would stand by the kitchen fire . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.156

The knight , that never came there but he did some exployte , forgetting
that , led him by the hand <paren> so much he made of him <$$paren>
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.157

and bad the cooke see he wanted nothing . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.158

Jack , standing still , groan'd ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.159

and sayd , If he dyed , he would forgive all the world but the cooke .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.160

Hang , foole , <paren> sayes the cooke <$$paren> ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.161

I care not for thee : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.162

die to-morrow if thou wilt , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.163

and so followed his business . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.164

They knockt to the dresser , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.165

and the dinner went up . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.166

Jack had a sheepes eye in the oven : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.167

anone the second course came , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.168

the pie was drawne , set by , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.169

and among other backt meates was to be sent up ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.170

but , wanting sugar , stept aside to the spicerie to fetch it ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.171

and Jack , in the meantime , catcheth the pie ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.172

and claps it under his coate , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.173

and so runs through the hall into the yard , where was a broade moate :
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,13.174

and , as he ran , the <P_14> hot pie burned his belly .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.175

I , sayes Jack , are ye so hot , Sir Willies pie ?
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.176

I@ @le quence ye anone Sir Willies pie , sayes he ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.177

and straight , very subtilly , leapes into the moate up to the arm-pits
, ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.178

and there stood eating the pie . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.179

The cooke comes in , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.180

misses the pie , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.181

withal misses Jack , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.182

cryes out , The pie ! ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.183

Sir Williams pie was gone , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.184

the author of that feast was gone , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.185

and they all were undone . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.186

A hurly_burly went through the house , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.187

and one comes ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.188

and whispers the lady with the newes : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.189

she tels Sir William how Jack Oates had stolen the pie .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.190

Jack was searcht for , and anon found in the moate .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.191

It was told the knight where the foole was eating it .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.192

Gentlemen <paren> quoth he <$$paren> we are disfurnished of our feast ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.193

for Jack , my foole , is in my moate , up to the arme-pits , eating of
the pie . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.194

They laught , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.195

and ran to the windows to see the jest : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.196

then they might see Jack eate , the cooke call , the people hallow , but
to no purpose . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.197

Jack fed , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.198

and , feeding greedily , <paren> more to anger the cooke , than
disapoint Sir William <$$paren> ever as he burnt his mouth with hast ,
dipt the pie in the water to coole it . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.199

O ! sayes the cooke , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.200

it is Sir William's owne pie , sirra . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.201

O ! sayes Jack hang thee and Sir Willy too : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.202

I care not ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.203

it is mine now . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.204

Save Sir William some , sayes one ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.205

save my lady some , sayes another . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.206

By James , not a bit , sayes Jack ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.207

and eate up all , to the wonder of the beholders , who never knew him
eate so much before , but drink ten times more . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.208

At length out comes Jack dropping dry , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.209

and goes to get fire to dry him : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.210

the knight and the rest all laught a good {COM:sic} at the jest : not
knowing how to amend it , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.211

Sir William sends for the cooke , who came up with a sorrowful heart ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.212

and , lamentably complaining , said it was the knights fault for placing
him in the kitchen , where he never was but hee did like villany .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.213

The knight , not satisfied with the cookes answere , presently
discharges him of his service , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.214

and sent him to live elsewhere . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.215

Goe , sayes hee ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.216

trusse up your trinkets ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.217

and be gone . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.218

The cooke , seeing no remedy , departed . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.219

Jack , being dry , up he comes ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,14.220

and , knowing he had offended , <P_15> tels a jest <paren> for it was
his manner so to doe <$$paren> how a young man brake his codpiece point
, and let all be seene that God sent him , or such fooleries ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.221

but that was not enough ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.222

and to chide him was to make of things worse then 't was , and to no
purpose neither . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.223

Sir William demaunded why hee eate the pye ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.224

Because I had a stomacke , sayes Jack . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.225

Would nought else serve , sayes the knight , but my pye ?
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.226

No , Willy , sayes he , thou would not be angry then ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.227

and the cooke had not been turned away : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.228

but all is well - ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.229

thou art rich enough to buy more . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.230

The knight , perceiving the fooles envie , sent for the cooke ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.231

and bid him enjoy his place againe . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.232

So all parties were {COM:preceding_word_"were"_emended} well pleased but
the yong big-bellied woman , who , perchance , longed for this long
looked_for pie ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.233

but if she did , though long lookt_for comes at last , yet they shoote
short that ayme to hit this marke , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.234

for Jack Oates had eaten the pie ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.235

and served himselfe . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.236

This was a flat foole ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.237

yet , now and then , a blind man may hit a crow , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.238

and you know a fooles boult is soone shot : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.239

out it goes , happen how it will . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.240

Had Jack kept his owne counsell , the cooke had beene still out of
service , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.241

and he {COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} had been revenged ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.242

but now , being in his place againe , may live to cry quittance for the
quince pye . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,15.243

<P_42>

Will Sommers , in no little credit in the king's court , walking in the
parke at Greenwich , fell asleepe on the stile that leads into the walk
, ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.245

and many that would haue gone that way so much loued him , that they
were loth to disease him , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.246

but went another way ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.247

I , the better sort , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.248

for now_adaies beggars are gallants , while gentiles of right blood
seeme tame ruffians ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.249

but note the loue Will Sommers got . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.250

A poore woman , seeing him sleepe so dangerously , eyther to fal
backward , or to hurt his head leaning so against a post , fetcht him a
cushion and a rope ; the one for his head , and the other to bind him to
the post , from falling backward : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.251

and thus hee slept , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.252

and the woman stood by , attending as the groom of his chamber .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.253

It changed so , that upon great occasion , as you shall after heare ,
Will Sommers uncle came out of Shropshire to seeke him in the court ; a
plaine old man of threescore yeeres , with a buttoned cap , a lockram
falling band , course but cleane , a russet coat , a white belt of a
horse hide , right horse-coller white leather , a close , round breech
of russet sheeps wool , with a long stock of white kersey , a high shoe
with yelow buckles , all white with dust ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.254

for that day the good old man had come three_and_twenty miles on foot .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.255

This kinde old man , comming up in his countrys behalfe , and comming
into Greenwitch , asked the way to the court : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.256

euery one directs him ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.257

but one villaine page directs him by the court gate , to crosse in a
boat over to Blackwal , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.258

and told him that was the court . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.259

The silly old man willingly paid his penny before hand ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.260

and was going ouer ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.261

but some that ouer-heard their talk , hindered his journey
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,42.262

and laughed <P_43> at the jest , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.263

yet pitied his simplicitie , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.264

and sets him in the right way . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.265

When he came in and saw such a place , he was amazed ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.266

and stood gazing , which the gard and gentlewomen , in their windows ,
had much sport to see . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.267

At last one asked him what he was ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.268

The old man answeres , A poore Shropshire man ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.269

and demands if there were not a gentleman in the court dwelling , called
by the name of M. Will Sommers ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.270

for the country hearing him in fauour in the court , said hee was so at
least . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.271

The courtier answered , Here is such a one indeede .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.272

For fault of a worse , saies hee , I am his uncle ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.273

and wept with joy that hee should see him . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.274

Marry , sayes the man , I@ @le help you to him straight ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.275

for , I tell you , not any in the court durst but haue sought him ,
which this man did , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.276

and it was told him . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.277

Hee was walkt into the parke , while the king slept that hote day .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.278

Thether went they to seeke him . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.279

All this while my friend Will was in counsel with the post ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.280

and the cushion stood as arbitrator betwixte them , and the woman as a
witnesse what was said and done . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.281

At last came these two ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.282

and wakened him . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.283

William , seeing his head soft , What soft post is {SIC:in} this ?
quoth he . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.284

A post of mine own making , saies the woman . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.285

But she lost nothing by her good will ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.286

for ere shee left Will Sommers , shee got him to get her sons pardon of
the king , who was to bee hanged three days after for piracy :
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.287

but by Will Sommers means he deceived the hang-man .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.288

This and many good deedes he did to diuers . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.289

The foole , being wakened , lookes about him ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.290

when he had thanked the woman , asked what newes ?
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.291

sayes the man , Sir , here is your uncle come out of the country to see
you . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.292

God a mercy cousin ! sayes Will Sommers ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.293

I thank thee for thy labour , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.294

you can@ @not uncle me so . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.295

Yes , truly , sir , I am your own deare uncle , M. William ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.296

and with that wept . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.297

Are you my uncle ? sayes Will . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.298

I , sir , sayes hee . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.299

Are you my uncle ? sayes hee againe . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.300

I , sure , and verely too . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.301

But are you my uncle , indeed ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.302

By my vusse I am , sayes the old man . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.303

Then , uncle , by my vusse , welcome to court , sayes Will Sommers .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.304

But what make you heere , uncle ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,43.305

He ups and tels his comming <P_44> to him . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.306

Will takes him by the hand : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.307

Come , saies hee , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.308

thou shalt see Harry , onckle - the onely Harry in England ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.309

so he led him to the chamber of presence , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.310

and euer and anon cryes out , Aware , roome for me and my uncle !
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.311

and knaues bid him welcome . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.312

You are welcome , sir , said they : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.313

the old man thought himselfe no earthly man , they honoured him so much
. ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.314

But Will , ready to enter the presence , lookes on his uncle ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.315

and seeing him not fine enough to looke on the king : Come , uncle ,
sayes hee , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.316

we will haue your geere mended ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.317

leads him to his chamber , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.318

and attires him in his best fooles coate , simply , God wot , meaning
well to him ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.319

and the simple old man as simply put it on , cap and all .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.320

But they come ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.321

and up they came , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.322

and to the king they goe , who , being with the lord treasurer alone ,
merry , seeing them two , how Will had got another foole , knew there
was sport at hand . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.323

How now ! sayes the king , What news with you ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.324

O , Harry ! sayes he , this is my owne uncle ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.325

bid him welcome . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.326

Wel , said the king , he is welcome . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.327

Harry , sayes hee , heare me tell thee a tale , and I will make thee
rich , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.328

and my uncle shall be made rich by thee . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.329

Will tels the king how Terrils Frith was inclosed .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.330

Tirrels Frith ! sayes the king ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.331

what is that ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.332

Why , the heath where I was borne , called by the name of Tirrels Frith
: ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.333

now a gentleman of that name takes it all in , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.334

and makes people beleeue it is all his , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.335

for it took the name from him ; so that , Harry , the poore pine , and
their cattle are all undone without thy help . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.336

And what should I doe ? sayes the king . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.337

Marry , sayes Will , send to the Bishop of Hereford ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.338

hee is a great man with Terril : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.339

commaund him to set the Frith at liberty againe , who is now imprisoned
by his means . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.340

And how shall I be rich by that ? sayes the king .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.341

The poore will pray for thee , sayes Will ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.342

and thou shalt bee rich in heauen , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.343

for on earth thou art rich already . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.344

All this was done , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.345

and Wills uncle went home , who , while he liued , for that deed was
allowed bayly of the common , which place was worth twenty pound a yeere
. ARMIN-1608-E2-H,44.346

<P_45>

Howseuer , these three things it came in memory , and are for mirth
incerted into stage playes I know not , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.348

but that Will Sommers asked them of the king , it is certaine :
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.349

there are some will affirme it now living at Greenwich .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.350

The king being on a time extreame melancholy , and full of passion , all
that Will could doe will not make him merry . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.351

Ah ! sayes hee , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.352

this must haue , must haue a good showre to clense it ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.353

and with that goes behinde the arras . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.354

Harry , saies hee , I@ @le goe {SIC:foe} behind the arras , and study
three questions , and come againe ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.355

see , therefore , you lay aside this melancloly muse , and study to
answere me . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.356

I , quoth the king : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.357

they will be wise ones , no doubt . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.358

At last out comes William with his wit , as the foole of the play does ,
with an anticke looke to please the beholders . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.359

Harry , sayes hee , what is it , that the lesser it is , the more it is
to be feared ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.360

The king mused at it ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.361

but , to grace the jest better , he answered , he knew not .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.362

Will answered , it was a little bridge ouer a deepe riuer ; at which hee
smyled . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.363

What is the next , William ? sayes the king . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.364

Marry , this is the next : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.365

what is the cleanliest trade in the world ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.366

Marry , sayes the king , I think a comfit-maker , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.367

for hee deales with nothing but pure ware , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.368

and is attired cleane in white linen when hee sels it .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.369

No , Harry , sayes <em> he to <$$em> the king ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.370

you are wide . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.371

What say you , then ? quoth the king . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.372

Marry , sayes Will , I say a durtdauber . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.373

Out on it , says the king , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.374

that is the foulest , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.375

for hee is durty up to the elbows . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.376

I , sayes Will ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.377

but then he washes him cleane againe , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.378

and eats his meate cleanly enough . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.379

I promise thee , Will , saies the king , thou hast a pretty foolish wit
. ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.380

I , Harry , saies he , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.381

it will serue to make a wiser man than you a foole , me@ @thinks .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.382

At this the king laught , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.383

and demaunds the third question . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.384

Now , tell me , saies Will , if you can , what it is that , being borne
without life , head , lippe , or eye , yet doth runne roaring through
the world till it dye . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.385

This is a wonder , quoth the king , and no question ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.386

I know it not . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.387

Why , quoth Will , it is a fart . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.388

At this the king laught hartely , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.389

and was exceeding merry , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,45.390

and bids Will aske any reasinable <P_46> thing , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.391

and he would graunt it . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.392

Thanks , Harry , saies he ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.393

now against I want , I know where to find it , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.394

for yet I neede nothing , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.395

but one day I shall , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.396

for euery man sees his latter end , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.397

but knows not his beginning . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.398

The king understoode his meaning , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.399

and so pleasantly departed for that season , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.400

and Will laid him downe among the spaniels to sleepe .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.401

Of a time appointed the king dined at Windsor , in the chappel yard at
Cardinall Wolsey's , at the same time when he was building that
admirable worke of his tombe : at whose gate stoode a number of poore
people , to be serued with alms when dinner was done within ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.402

and , as Will passed by , they saluted him , taking him for a worthy
personage , which pleased him . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.403

In he comes , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.404

and finding the king at dinner , and the cardinall by attending , to
disgrace him that he neuer loued , Harry , sayes hee ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.405

lend me ten pound . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.406

What to doe ? saies the king . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.407

To pay three or foure of the cardinall's creditors , quoth hee , to whom
my word is past , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.408

and they are come now for the money . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.409

That thou shalt , Will , quoth hee . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.410

Creditors of mine ? saies the cardinall : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.411

I@ @le give your grace my head if any man can justly aske me a penny .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.412

No ! saies Will . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.413

Lend me ten pounds ; if I pay it not where thou owest it , I@ @le give
thee twenty for it . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.414

Doe so , saies the king . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.415

That I will , my liege , saies the cardinall , though I know I owe none
. ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.416

With that he lends Will ten pounds . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.417

Will goes to the gate , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.418

distributes it to the poore , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.419

and brought the empty bag . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.420

There is thy bag againe , saies hee : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.421

thy creditors are satisfied , and my word out of danger .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.422

Who received ? sayes the king ; the brewer or the baker ?
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.423

Neyther <paren> Harry <$$paren> , sayes Will Sommers .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.424

But , cardinall , answere me in one thing : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.425

to whom dost thou owe thy soule ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.426

To God , quoth hee . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.427

To whom thy wealth ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.428

To the poore , sayes hee . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.429

Take thy forfeit <paren> Harry <$$paren> sayes the foole ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.430

open confession , open penance : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.431

his head is thine , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.432

for to the poore at the gate I paid his debt , which hee yeelds is due :
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,46.433

or if thy stony heart will not yeeld it so , saue thy head by denying
thy <P_47> word , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.434

and lend it mee : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.435

thou knowest I am poore , and haue neyther wealth nor wit ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.436

and what thou lendest to the poore God will pay thee ten fold ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.437

he is my surety - ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.438

arrest him - ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.439

for , by my troth , hang mee when I pay thee . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.440

The king laught at the jest , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.441

and so did the cardinall for a shew , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.442

but it grieved him to jest away ten pound so : ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.443

yet worse tricks then this Will Sommers serued him after ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.444

for indeede hee could neuer abide him , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.445

and the forfeiture of his head had liked to haue beene payed , had hee
not poysoned himselfe . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.446

There was in the time of Will Sommers another artificiall foole , or
jester , in the court , whose subtiltie heapt up wealth by gifts giuen
him , for which Will Sommers could neuer abide him ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.447

but , indeede , lightly one foole can@ @not indure the sight of another
, as Jack Oates , the minstrell , in the fat foole's story ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.448

and one beggar is woe that another by the doore should goe .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.449

This jester was a big man , of a great voyce , long black locks , and a
verry big , round beard . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.450

On a time , of purpose , Will Sommers watcht to disgrace him , when he
was jugling and jesting before the king . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.451

Will Sommers brings up a messe of milke and a manchet :
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.452

Harry , saies hee , lend me a spoone . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.453

Foole , saies the jester , use thy hands , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.454

helpe hands , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.455

for I haue no lands , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.456

and meant , that saying would warrant his grose feeding .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.457

I , saies Will Sommers , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.458

beasts will doe so , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.459

and beasts will bid others doe as they doe themselves .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.460

Will , said the king , thou knowest I haue none .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.461

True Harry , saies hee , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.462

I know that , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.463

therefore I askt thee ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.464

and I would <paren> but for doing thee harme <$$paren> thou hadst no
tongue to grant that foole his next sute ; ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.465

but I must eate my creame some way . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.466

The king , the jester , and all gathers about him to see him eate it .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,47.467

Will begins thus to rime ouer his milk : {COM:verse_omitted} <P_48>
Meaning the foole , in whose beard and head the bread and milk was
thicke sowne , and his eyes almost put out . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,48.468

Will Sommers hee gets him gone for feare . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,48.469

This lusty jester , forgetting himself , in fury draws his dagger ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,48.470

and begins {SIC:begings} to protest . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,48.471

Nay ; saies the king , are ye so hote ? ARMIN-1608-E2-H,48.472

claps him fast , ARMIN-1608-E2-H,48.473

and , though hee draws his dagger here , makes him put it up in another
place . ARMIN-1608-E2-H,48.474

The poore abused jester was jested out of countenance ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,48.475

and lay in durance a great while , till Will Sommers was faine , after
he broke his head , to giue him a plaister , to get him out againe .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,48.476

But neuer after came my jugler in the court moore so neere the king ,
being such a dangerous man to draw in the presence of the king .
ARMIN-1608-E2-H,48.477

