<BEGIN_asch-1566-e1-h>

<P_1R>

{COM:p._182_in_helsinki}

<heading>

THE FIRST BOOKE FOR THE YOUTH . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1R.5

<$$heading>

After the childe hath learned perfitlie the eight partes of speach , let
him then learne the right ioyning togither of substantiues with
adiectiues , the nowne with the verbe , the relatiue with the antecedent
. ASCH-1566-E1-H,1R.7

And in learninge farther hys Syntaxis , by mine aduice , he shall not
vse the common order in common scholes , for making of latines : wherby
, the childe commonlie learneth , first , an euill choice of wordes ,
<paren> and right choice of wordes , saith <font> Caesar <$$font> , is
the foundation of eloquence <$$paren> than , a wrong placing of wordes :
and lastlie , an ill framing of the sentence , with a peruerse iudgement
, both of wordes and sentences . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1R.8

These faultes , taking once roote in yougthe , be neuer , or hardlie ,
pluckt away in age . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1R.9

Moreouer , there is no one thing , that hath more , either dulled the
wittes , or taken awaye the will of children from learning , then the
care they haue , to satisfie their masters , in making of latines .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,1R.10

For , the scholer , is commonlie beat for the making , whe~ the master
were more worthie to be beat for the mending , or rather , marring of
the same : The master many times , being as ignorant as the childe ,
what to saie properlie and fitlie to the matter . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1R.11

Two scholemasters haue set forth in print , either of them a booke , of
soch kinde of latines , <font> Horman <$$font> and <font> Whittington
<$$font> . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1R.12

A childe shall learne of the better of them , that , which an other daie
, if he be wise , and cum to iudgement , he must be faine to vnlearne
againe . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1R.13

{COM:p._183_in_helsinki}

There is a waie , touched in the first booke of <font> Cicero De Oratore
<$$font> , which , wiselie brought into scholes , truely taught <P_1V> ,
and co~stantly vsed , would not onely take wholly away this butcherlie
feare in making of latines , but would also , with ease and pleasure ,
and in short time , as I know by good experience , worke a true choice
and placing of wordes , a right ordering of sentences , an easie
vnderstandyng of the tonge , a readines to speake , a facultie to write
, a true iudgement , both of his owne , and other mens doinges , what
tonge so euer he doth vse . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.15

The waie is this . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.16

After the three Concordances learned , as I touched before , let the
master read vnto hym the Epistles of <font> Cicero <$$font> , gathered
togither and chosen out by <font> Sturmius <$$font> , for the capacitie
of children . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.17

First , let him teach the childe , cherefullie and plainlie , the cause
, and matter of the letter : ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.18

then , let him construe it into Englishe , so oft , as the childe may
easilie carie awaie the vnderstanding of it : ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.19

Lastlie , parse it ouer perfitlie . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.20

This done thus , let the childe , by and by , both construe and parse it
ouer againe : so , that it may appeare , that the childe douteth in
nothing , that his master taught him before . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.21

After this , the childe must take a paper booke , ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.22

and sitting in some place , where no man shall prompe him , by him self
, let him translate into Englishe his former lesson .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.23

Then shewing it to his master , let the master take from him his latin
booke , ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.24

and pausing an houre , at the least , than let the childe translate his
owne Englishe into latin againe , in an other paper booke .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.25

when the childe bringeth it , turned into latin , the master must
compare it with <font> Tullies <$$font> booke , and laie them both
togither : ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.26

and where the childe doth well , either in chosing , or true placing of
<font> Tullies <$$font> wordes , let the master praise him , and saie
here ye do well . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.27

For I assure you , there is no such whetstone , to sharpen a good witte
and encourage a will to learninge , as is praise . ASCH-1566-E1-H,1V.28

But if the childe misse , either in forgetting a worde , or in chaunging
a good with a worse , or misordering the sentence , I would not haue the
master , either froune , or chide with him , if the childe haue done his
diligence , and vsed no <P_2R> trewandship {COM:p._184_in_helsinki}
therein . ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.29

For I know by good experience , that a childe shall take more profit of
two fautes , ientlie warned of , then of foure thinges , rightly hitt .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.30

For than , the master shall haue good occasion to saie vnto him .
<font> N. Tullie <$$font> would haue vsed such a worde , not this :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.31

<font> Tullie <$$font> would haue placed this word here , not there :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.32

would haue vsed this case , this number , this person , this degree ,
this gender : ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.33

he would haue vsed this moode , this tens , this simple , rather than
this compound : this aduerbe here , not there : ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.34

he would haue ended the sentence with this verbe , not with that nowne
or participle . etc. . ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.35

In these fewe lines , I haue wrapped vp , the most tedious part of
Grammer : and also the ground of almost all the Rewles , that are so
busilie taught by the Master , and so hardlie learned by the Scholer ,
in all common Scholes : which after this sort , the master shall teach
without all error , and the scholer shall learne without great paine :
the master being led by so sure a guide , and the scholer being brought
into so plaine and easie a waie . ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.36

And therefore , we do not contemne Rewles , ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.37

but we gladlie teach Rewles : ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.38

and teach them , more plainlie , sensiblie , and orderlie , than they be
commonlie taught in common Scholes . ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.39

For whan the Master shall compare <font> Tullies <$$font> booke with his
Scholers translation , let the Master , at the first , lead and teach
his Scholer , to ioyne the Rewles of his Grammer booke , with the
examples of his present lesson , vntill the Scholer , by him selfe , be
hable to fetch out of his Grammer , euerie Rewle , for euerie Example :
So , as the Grammer booke be euer in the Scholers hand , and also vsed
of him , as a Dictionarie , for euerie present vse .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.40

This is a liuely and perfite waie of teaching of Rewles : where the
common waie , vsed in common Scholes , to read the Grammer alone by it
selfe , is tedious for the Master , hard for the Scholer , colde and
vncumfortable for them bothe . ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.41

Let your Scholer be neuer afraide , to aske you any dout ,
ASCH-1566-E1-H,2R.42

but vse discretlie the best allurements ye can , to encorage <P_2V> him
to the same : lest , his ouermoch fearinge of you , driue him to seeke
some misorderlie shifte : as , to seeke to be helped by some other booke
, or to be prompted by some other Scholer , and so goe aboute to begile
you moch , and him selfe more . ASCH-1566-E1-H,2V.43

{COM:p._185_in_helsinki}

With this waie , of good vnderstanding the mater , plaine construinge ,
diligent parsinge , dailie translatinge , cherefull admonishinge , and
heedefull amendinge of faultes : neuer leauinge behinde iuste praise for
well_doinge , I would haue the Scholer brought vp withall , till he had
red , & translated ouer y=e= first booke of Epistles chosen out by
<font> Sturmius <$$font> , with a good peece of a Comedie of <font>
Terence <$$font> also . ASCH-1566-E1-H,2V.45

All this while , by mine aduise , the childe shall vse to speake no
latine : ASCH-1566-E1-H,2V.46

For , as <font> Cicero <$$font> saith in like mater , with like wordes ,
loquendo , male loqui discunt . ASCH-1566-E1-H,2V.47

And , that excellent learned man , <font> G. Budaeus <$$font> , in his
Greeke Commentaries , sore complaineth , that whan he began to learne
the latin tonge , vse of speaking latin at the table , and elsewhere ,
vnaduisedlie , did bring him to soch an euill choice of wordes , to soch
a crooked framing of sentences , that no one thing did hurt or hinder
him more , all the daies of his life afterward , both for redinesse in
speaking , and also good iudgement in writinge . ASCH-1566-E1-H,2V.48

In very deede , if childre~ were brought vp , in soch a house , or soch
a Schole , where the latin tonge were properlie and perfitlie spoken ,
as <font> Tib. <$$font> and <font> Ca. Gracci <$$font> were brought vp
, in their mother <font> Cornelia@ @s <$$font> house , surelie , than
the dailie vse of speaking , were the best and readiest waie , to learne
the latin tong . ASCH-1566-E1-H,2V.49

But , now , commonlie , in the best Scholes in England , for wordes ,
right choice is smallie regarded , true proprietie whollie neglected ,
ASCH-1566-E1-H,2V.50

confusion is brought in , ASCH-1566-E1-H,2V.51

barbariousnesse is bred vp so in yong wittes , as afterward they be ,
not onelie marde for speaking , but also corrupted in iudgement : as
with moch adoe , or neuer at all , they be brought to right frame againe
. ASCH-1566-E1-H,2V.52

Yet all men couet to haue their children speake latin :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,2V.53

<P_3R>

and so do I verie earnestlie too . ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.55

We bothe , haue one purpose : ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.56

we agree in desire , ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.57

we wish one end : ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.58

but we differ somewhat in order and waie , that leadeth rightlie to that
end . ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.59

Other would haue them speake at all aduentures : ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.60

and , so they be speakinge , to speake , the Master careth not , the
Scholer knoweth not , what . ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.61

This is , to seeme , and not to bee : except it be , to be bolde without
shame , rashe without skill , full of wordes without witte .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.62

I wish to haue them speake so , as it may well appeare , that the braine
doth gouerne the tonge , and that reason leadeth
{COM:p._186_in_helsinki} forth the taulke . ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.63

<font> Socrates <$$font> doctrine is true in <font> Plato <$$font> , and
well marked , and truely vttered by <font> Horace <$$font> in <font>
Arte Poetica <$$font> , that , where so euer knowledge doth accompanie
the witte , there best vtterance doth alwaies awaite vpon the tonge :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.64

For , good vnderstanding must first be bred in the childe , which ,
being nurished with skill , and vse of writing <paren> as I will teach
more largelie hereafter <$$paren> is the onelie waie to bring him to
iudgement and readinesse in speakinge : ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.65

and that in farre shorter time <paren> if he followe constantlie the
trade of this litle lesson <$$paren> than he shall do , by common
teachinge of the co~mon scholes in England . ASCH-1566-E1-H,3R.66

<P_18R>

{COM:p._214_in_helsinki}

Learning teacheth more in one yeare than experience in twentie :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,18R.69

And learning teacheth safelie . when experience maketh mo miserable
then wise . ASCH-1566-E1-H,18R.70

He hasardeth sore , that <P_18V> waxeth wise by experience .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.71

An vnhappie Master he is , that is made cunning by manie shippewrakes :
A miserable merchant , {is_he} that is neither riche or wise , but after
som bankroutes . ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.72

It is costlie wisdom , that is bought by experience .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.73

We know by experience it selfe , that it is a meruelous paine , to finde
oute but a short waie , by long wandering . ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.74

And surelie , he that wold proue wise by experience , he maie be wittie
in deede , but euen like a swift runner , that runneth fast out of his
waie , and vpon the night , he knoweth not whither .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.75

And verilie they be fewest of number , that be happie or wise by
vnlearned experience . ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.76

And looke well vpon the former life of those fewe , whether your example
be old or yonge , who without learning haue gathered , by long
experience , a litle wisdom , and som happines : ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.77

and whan you do consider , what mischeife they haue committed , what
dangers they haue escaped <paren> and yet xx. for one , do perishe in
the aduenture <$$paren> ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.78

than thinke well with your selfe , whether ye wold , that your owne son
, should cum to wisdom and happines , by the waie of soch experience or
no . ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.79

It is a notable tale , that old Syr <font> Roger Chamloe <$$font> ,
sometime {COM:p._215_in_helsinki} cheife Iustice , wold tell of him
selfe . ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.80

when he was Auncient in Inne of Courte , Certaine yong Ientlemen were
brought before him , to be corrected for certaine misorders :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.81

And one of the lustiest saide : Syr , we be yong ientlemen ,
ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.82

and wisemen before vs , haue proued all facions , ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.83

and yet those haue done full well : ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.84

this they said , because it was well knowen , that Syr <font> Roger
<$$font> had bene a good feloe in his yougth . ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.85

But he aunswered them verie wiselie . ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.86

In deede saith he , in yougthe , I was , as you ar now :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.87

and I had twelue feloes like vnto my self , ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.88

but not one of them came to a good ende . ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.89

And therfore , folow not my example in yougth , ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.90

but folow my councell in aige , if euer ye thinke to cum to this place ,
or to thies yeares , that I am cum vnto , lesse ye meete either with
pouertie or Tiburn in the way . ASCH-1566-E1-H,18V.91

Thus , experience of all facions in yougthe , beinge , in profe ,
alwaise daungerous , in isshue , seldom lucklie , is a waie , <P_19R> in
deede , to ouermoch knowledge , yet vsed commonlie of soch men , which
be either caried by som curious affection of mynde , or driuen by som
hard necessitie of life , to hasard the triall of ouer manie perilous
aduentures . ASCH-1566-E1-H,19R.92

<font> Erasmus <$$font> the honor of learning of all oure time , saide
wiselie that experience is the common scholehouse of foles , and ill men
: ASCH-1566-E1-H,19R.93

Men , of witte and honestie , be otherwise instructed .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,19R.94

For there be , that kepe them out of fier , and yet was neuer burned :
That beware of water , and yet was neuer nie drowninge : That hate
harlottes , and was neuer at the stewes : That abhorre falshode , and
neuer brake promis themselues . ASCH-1566-E1-H,19R.95

But will ye see , a fit Similitude of this aduentured experience .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,19R.96

A Father , that doth let louse his son , to all experiences , is most
like a fond Hunter , that letteth slippe a whelpe to the hole herde .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,19R.97

Twentie to one , he shall fall vpon a rascall , and let go the faire
game . ASCH-1566-E1-H,19R.98

Men that hunt so , be either ignorant persones , preuie stealers , or
night walkers . ASCH-1566-E1-H,19R.99

Learning therefore , ye wise fathers , and good bringing vp , and not
blinde & dangerous experience , is the next and readiest waie , that
must leede your Children , first , to wisdom , and than to worthinesse ,
if euer ye purpose they shall cum there . ASCH-1566-E1-H,19R.100

And to saie all in shorte , though I lacke Authoritie to giue
{COM:p._216_in_helsinki} counsell , yet I lacke not good will to wisshe
, that the yougthe in England , speciallie Ientlemen , and namelie
nobilitie , shold be by good bringing vp , so grounded in iudgement of
learninge , so founded in loue of honestie , as , whan they shold be
called forthe to the execution of great affaires , in seruice of their
Prince and contrie , they might be hable , to vse and to order , all
experiences , were they good were they bad , and that , according to the
square , rule , and line , of wisdom learning and vertue .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,19R.101

And , I do not meene , by all this my taulke , that yong Ientlemen ,
should alwaies be poring on a booke , and by vsing good studies , shold
lease honest pleasure , and haunt no <P_19V> good pastime ,
ASCH-1566-E1-H,19V.102

I meene nothing lesse : ASCH-1566-E1-H,19V.103

For it is well knowne , that I both like and loue , and haue alwaies ,
and do yet still vse , all exercises and pastimes , that be fitte for my
nature and habilitie . ASCH-1566-E1-H,19V.104

And beside naturall disposition , in iudgement also , I was neuer ,
either Stoick in doctrine , or Anabaptist in Religion , to mislike a
merie , pleasant , and plaifull nature , if no outrage be committed ,
against lawe , mesure , and good order . ASCH-1566-E1-H,19V.105

Therefore , I wold wishe , that , beside some good time , fitlie
appointed , and constantlie kepte , to encrease by readinge , the
knowledge of the tonges and learning , yong ientlemen shold vse , and
delite in all Courtelie exercises , and Ientlemanlike pastimes .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,19V.106

And good cause whie : ASCH-1566-E1-H,19V.107

For the self_same noble Citie of Athenes , iustlie commended of me
before , did wiselie and vpon great consideration , appoint , the Muses
, <font> Apollo <$$font> , and <font> Pallas <$$font> , to be patrones
of learninge to their yougthe . ASCH-1566-E1-H,19V.108

For the Muses , besides learning , were also Ladies of dauncinge ,
mirthe and ministrelsie : ASCH-1566-E1-H,19V.109

<font> Apollo <$$font> , was god of shooting , and Author of cunning
playing vpo~ Instrumentes : ASCH-1566-E1-H,19V.110

<font> Pallas <$$font> also was Laidie mistres in warres . Wherbie was
nothing else ment , but that learninge shold be alwaise mingled , with
honest mirthe , and cumlie exercises : and that warre also shold be
gouerned by learning , and moderated by wisdom , as did well appeare in
those Capitaines of <font> Athenes <$$font> named by me before , and
also in <font> Scipio <$$font> & <font> Caesar <$$font> , the two
Diamondes of Rome . ASCH-1566-E1-H,19V.111

{COM:p._217_in_helsinki}

And <font> Pallas <$$font> , was no more feared , in weering <font>
AEgida <$$font> , tha~ she was praised , for chosing <font> Oliua
<$$font> : whereby shineth the glory of learning , which thus , was
Gouernour & Mistres , in the noble Citie of <font> Athenes <$$font> ,
both of warre and peace . ASCH-1566-E1-H,19V.113

Therefore , to ride cumlie : to run faire at the tilte or ring : to
plaie at all weapones : to shote faire in bow , or surelie in gon : to
vaut lustely : to runne : to leape : to wrestle : to swimme : To daunce
cumlie : to sing , and playe of instrumentes cunnyngly : to Hawke : to
hunte : to playe at tennes , & all pastimes generally , which be ioyned
with labor , vsed in <P_20R> open place , and on the day light ,
conteining either some fitte exercise for warre , or some pleasant
pastime for peace , be not onelie cumlie and decent , but also verie
necessarie , for a Courtlie Ientleman to vse . ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.114

But , of all kinde of pastimes , fitte for a Ientleman , I will , god@
@willing , in fitter place , more at large , declare fullie , in my
booke of the Cockpitte : which I do write , to satisfie som , I trust ,
with som reason , that be more curious , in marking other mens doinges ,
than {they_are} carefull in mendyng their owne faultes .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.115

And som also will nedes busie them selues in merueling , and adding
thereunto vnfrendlie taulke , why I , a man of good yeares , and of no
ill place , I thanke God and my Prince , do make choise to spend soch
tyme in writyng of trifles , as the schole of shoting , the Cockpitte ,
and this booke of the first Principles of Grammer , rather , than to
take some weightie matter in hand , either of Religion , or Ciuill
discipline . ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.116

Wise men I know , will well allow of my choise herein :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.117

and as for such , who haue not witte of them selues , but must learne of
others , to iudge right of mens doynges , let them read that wise Poet
<font> Horace <$$font> in his <font> Arte Poetica <$$font> , who willeth
wisemen to beware , of hie and loftie Titles . ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.118

For , great shippes , require costlie tackling , and also afterward
dangerous gouernment : ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.119

Small boates , be neither verie chargeable in makyng , nor verie oft in
great ieoperdie : ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.120

and yet they cary many tymes , as good and costlie ware , as greater
vessels do . ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.121

A meane Argument , may easelie beare , the light burden of a small faute
, and haue alwaise at hand , a ready excuse for {COM:p._218_in_helsinki}
ill handling : ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.122

And , some praise it is , if it so chaunce , to be better in deede ,
than a man dare venture to seeme . ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.123

A hye title , doth charge a man , with the heauie burden , of to great a
promise : ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.124

and therefore sayth <font> Horace <$$font> verie wittelie , that , that
Poete was a verie foole , that began hys booke , with a goodlie verse in
deede , but ouer proude a promise . ASCH-1566-E1-H,20R.125

<P_20V>

Fortunam Priami cantabo & nobile bellum , ASCH-1566-E1-H,20V.127

And after , as wiselie . Quanto rectius hic , qui nil molitur inepte .
etc. Meening <font> Homer <$$font> , who , within the compasse of a
smal Argument , of one harlot , and of one good wife , did vtter so moch
learning in all kinde of sciences , as , by the iudgement of <font>
Quintilian <$$font> , he deserueth so hie a praise , that no man yet
deserued to sit in the second degree beneth him .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,20V.128

And thus moch out of my way , concerning my purpose in spending penne ,
and paper , & tyme , vpo~ trifles , & namelie to aunswere some , that
haue neither witte nor learning , to do any thyng them selues , neither
will nor honestie , to say well of other . ASCH-1566-E1-H,20V.129

<P_53V>

{COM:p._278_in_helsinki}

Cambrige , at my first comming thither , but not at my going away ,
committed this fault in reading the preceptes of <font> Aristotle
<$$font> without the examples of other Authors : ASCH-1566-E1-H,53V.132

But herein , in my time thies men of worthie memorie , <font> M. Redman
, M. Cheke , M. Smith , M. Haddon , M. Watson <$$font> , put so to
their helping handes , as that vniuersitie , and all studentes there ,
as long as learning shall last , shall be bounde vnto them , if that
trade in studie be trewlie folowed , which those men left behinde them
there . ASCH-1566-E1-H,53V.133

By this small mention of Cambridge , I am caryed into three imaginations
: ASCH-1566-E1-H,53V.134

first , into a sweete remembrance of my tyme spent there :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,53V.135

than , into som carefull thoughts , for the greuous alteration that
folowed sone after : ASCH-1566-E1-H,53V.136

lastlie , into much ioy to heare tell , of the good recouerie and
earnest forwardnes <P_54R> in all good learning there agayne .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,54R.137

To vtter theis my thoughts somwhat more largelie , were somwhat beside
my matter , yet not very farre out of the way , bycause it shall wholy
tend to the good encoragement and right consideration of learning ,
which is my full purpose in writing this litle booke : whereby also
shall well appeare this sentence to be most trewe , that onely good men
, by their gouernment & example , make happie times , in euery degree
and state . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54R.138

Doctor <font> Nico. Medcalfe <$$font> , that honorable father , was
Master of <font> S. Iohnes <$$font> Colledge , when I came thether : A
man meanelie learned himselfe , but not meanely {COM:p._279_in_helsinki}
affectioned to set forward learning in others . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54R.139

He found that Colledge spending scarse two_hundred markes by yeare :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,54R.140

he left it spending a_thousand markes and more . Which he procured ,
not with his mony , but by his wisdome ; not chargeablie bought by him ,
but liberallie geuen by others by his meane , for the zeale & honor they
bare to learning . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54R.141

And that which is worthy of memorie , all thies giuers were almost
Northenmen : who being liberallie rewarded in the seruice of their
Prince , bestowed it as liberallie for the good of their Contrie .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,54R.142

Som men thought therefore , that <font> D. Medcalfe <$$font> was
parciall to Northrenmen , ASCH-1566-E1-H,54R.143

but sure I am of this , that Northrenme~ were parciall , in doing more
good , and geuing more la~des to y=e= forderance of learning , than any
other contrie me~ , in those dayes , did : which deede should haue bene
, rather an example of goodnes , for other to folowe , than matter of
malice , for any to enuie , as some there were that did .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,54R.144

Trewly , <font> D. Medcalfe <$$font> was parciall to none : but
indifferent to all : a master for the whole , a father to euery one , in
that Colledge . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54R.145

There was none so poore , if he had , either wil to goodnes , or wit to
learning , that could lacke being there , or should depart from thence
for any need . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54R.146

I am witnes my selfe , that mony many times was brought into yong mens
studies by strangers whom they knew not . In which doing , this worthy
<font> Nicolaus <$$font> folowed the steppes of good olde <font> S.
<P_54V> Nicolaus <$$font> , that learned Bishop .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.147

He was a Papist in deede , ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.148

but would to God , amonges all vs Protesta~ts I might once see but one ,
that would winne like praise , in doing like good , for the aduauncement
of learning and vertue . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.149

And yet , though he were a Papist , if any yong man , geuen to new
learning <paren> as they termed it <$$paren> went beyond his fellowes ,
in witte , labor , and towardnes , euen the same , neyther lacked , open
praise to encorage him , nor priuate exhibition to mainteyne hym , as
worthy Syr <font> I. Cheke <$$font> , if he were aliue would beare good
witnes ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.150

and so can many mo . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.151

I my selfe one of the meanest of a great number , in that Colledge ,
because there appeared in me som small shew of towardnes and diligence ,
lacked not his fauor to forder me in learning . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.152

And being a boy , new Bacheler of arte , I chanced amonges my companions
to speake against the Pope : which matter was {COM:p._280_in_helsinki}
than in euery mans mouth , bycause <font> D. Haines <$$font> and <font>
D. Skippe <$$font> were cum from the Court , to debate the same matter
, by preaching and disputation in the vniuersitie .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.153

This hapned the same tyme , when I stoode to be felow there :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.154

my taulke came to <font> D. Medcalfes <$$font> eare :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.155

I was called before him and the Seniores : ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.156

and after greuous rebuke , and some punishment , open warning was geuen
to all the felowes , none to be so hardie to geue me his voice at that
election . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.157

And yet for all those open threates , the good father himselfe priuilie
procured , that I should euen than by chosen felow .
ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.158

But , the election being done , he made countinance of great
discontentation thereat . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.159

This good mans goodnes , and fatherlie discretion , vsed towardes me
that one day , shall neuer out of my remembrance all the dayes of my
life . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.160

And for the same cause , haue I put it here , in this small record of
learning . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.161

For next Gods prouidence , surely that day , was by that good fathers
meanes , Dies natalis , to me , for the whole foundation of the poore
learning I haue , and of all the furderance , that hetherto else where I
haue obteyned . ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.162

This his goodnes stood not still in one or two , ASCH-1566-E1-H,54V.163

but flowed <P_55R> aboundantlie ouer all that Colledge ,
ASCH-1566-E1-H,55R.164

and brake out also to norishe good wittes in euery part of that
vniuersitie : whereby , at his departing thence , he left soch a
companie of fellowes and scholers in <font> S. Iohnes <$$font> Colledge
, as can scarse be found now in some whole vniuersitie : which , either
for diuinitie , on the one side or other , or for Ciuill seruice to
their Prince and contrie , haue bene , and are yet to this day , notable
ornaments to this whole Realme : ASCH-1566-E1-H,55R.165

Yea <font> S. Iohnes <$$font> did the~ so florish , as Trinitie college
, that Princely house now , at the first erectio~ , was but Colonia
deducta out of <font> S. Ihones <$$font> , not onelie for their Master
, fellowes , and scholers , but also , which is more , for their whole ,
both order of learning , and discipline of maners :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,55R.166

& yet to this day , it neuer tooke Master but such as was bred vp before
in <font> S. Iohnes <$$font> : doing the dewtie of a good Colonia to
her Metropolis , as the auncient Cities in Greice and some yet in Italie
, at this day , are accustomed to do . ASCH-1566-E1-H,55R.167

<font> S. Iohnes <$$font> stoode in this state , vntill those heuie
tymes , and that greuous change that chanced . An. 1553 . whan mo
perfite scholers were dispersed from thence in one moneth , than many
yeares can reare vp againe . ASCH-1566-E1-H,55R.168

For , whan <font> Aper de Sylua <$$font> had passed the seas , and
fastned his foote {COM:p._281_in_helsinki} againe in England , not onely
the two faire groues of learning in England were eyther cut vp , by the
roote , or troden downe to the ground ASCH-1566-E1-H,55R.169

and wholie went to wracke , ASCH-1566-E1-H,55R.170

but the yong spring there , and euerie where else , was pitifullie nipt
and ouertroden by very beastes , ASCH-1566-E1-H,55R.171

and also the fairest standers of all , were rooted vp , and cast into
the fire , to the great weakning euen at this day of Christes Chirch in
England , both for Religion and learning . ASCH-1566-E1-H,55R.172

And what good could chance than to the vniuersities , whan som of the
greatest , though not of the wisest nor best learned , nor best men
neither of that side , did labor to perswade , that ignorance was better
than knowledge , which they ment , not for the laitie onelie , but also
for the greatest rable of their spiritualtie , what other pretense
openlie so euer <P_55V> they made : ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.173

and therefore did som of them at Cambrige <paren> whom I will not name
openlie , <$$paren> cause hedge priestes fette oute of the contrie , to
be made fellowes in the vniuersitie : saying , in their talke priuilie ,
and declaring by their deedes openlie , that he was , felow good enough
for their tyme , if he could were a gowne and a tipet cumlie , and haue
hys crowne shorne faire and roundlie , and could turne his Portesse and
pie readilie : whiche I speake not to reproue any order either of
apparell , or other dewtie , that may be well and indifferentlie vsed ,
but to note the miserie of that time , whan the benefites prouided for
learning were so fowlie misused ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.174

And what was the frute of this seade ? ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.175

Verely , iudgement in doctrine was wholy altered : order in discipline
very sore changed : ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.176

the loue of good learning , began sodenly to wax cold :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.177

the knowledge of the tonges <paren> in spite of some that therein had
florished <$$paren> was manifestly contemned : and so , y=e= way of
right studie purposely peruerted : the choice of good authors of mallice
confownded . ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.178

Olde sophistrie <paren> I say not well <$$paren> not olde , but that new
rotten sophistrie began to beard and sholder logicke in her owne tong :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.179

yea , I know , that heades were cast together , and counsell deuised ,
that <font> Duns <$$font> , with all the rable of barbarous
questionistes , should haue dispossessed of their place and rowmes ,
<font> Aristotle , Plato , Tullie <$$font> , and <font> Demosthenes
<$$font> , when {COM:sic} good <font> M. Redman <$$font> , and those
two
{COM:text_contains_duplicate_material,_p._136,_bottom:_"worthylace_and_rowmes_..._those_two"}
worthy starres of that vniuersitie , <font> M. Cheke <$$font> , and
<font> M. Smith <$$font> , with their scholers , had brought to
florishe as notable in Cambrige , as {COM:p._282_in_helsinki} euer they
did in Grece and in Italie : ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.180

and for the doctrine of those fowre , the fowre pillers of learning ,
Cambrige than geuing place to no vniuersitie , neither in France ,
Spaine , Germanie , nor Italie . ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.181

Also in outward behauiour , than began simplicitie in apparell , to be
layd aside : Courtlie galantnes to be taken vp : ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.182

frugalitie in diet was priuately misliked : Towne going to good cheare
openly vsed : ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.183

honest pastimes , ioyned with labor , left of in the fieldes :
ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.184

vnthrifty and idle games , haunted corners , ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.185

and occupied the nightes : ASCH-1566-E1-H,55V.186

contention in youth , no where for <P_56R> learning : factions in the
elders euery where for trifles . All which miseries at length , by Gods
prouidence , had their end 16. <font> Nouemb. <$$font> 1558 . Since
which tyme , the yong spring hath shot vp so faire , as now there be in
Cambrige againe , many goodly plantes <paren> as did well appeare at the
Queenes Maiesties late being there <$$paren> which are like to grow to
mightie great timber , to the honor of learning , and great good of
their contrie , if they may stand their tyme , as the best plantes there
were wont to do : and if som old dotterell trees , with standing ouer
nie them , and dropping vpon them , do not either hinder , or crooke
their growing , wherein my feare is y=e= lesse , seing so worthie a
Iustice of an Oyre hath the present ouersight of that whole chace , who
was himselfe somtym , in the fairest spring that euer was there of
learning , one of the forwardest yong plantes , in all that worthy
College of <font> S. Ihones <$$font> : who now by grace is growne to
soch greatnesse , as , in the temperate and quiet shade of his wisdome ,
next the prouide~ce of God , and goodnes of one , in theis our daies ,
Religio for sinceritie , literae for order and aduauncement , Respub.
for happie and quiet gouernment , haue to great rejoysing of all good
men , speciallie reposed them selues . ASCH-1566-E1-H,56R.187

