<BEGIN_aungier-1674-e3-h>

<P_24,P>

<heading:edcomment:XXII_FRANCIS_LORD_AUNGIER_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

Lond AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,24,P.4

June 5 1675 AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,24,P.5

My Lord , The scene being much altered in ye difference between both
Houses since my last , I presume to give yr Ex=cy= this short narrative
of it . AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,24,P.6

On Tuesday last the House of Commons ordered their Sergeant to take into
Custodye Sir Jo: Churchill , Mr Serg=t= Pemberton , Mr Serg=t= Pecke and
Mr Charles Porter , as persons who had infringed the Previledges of ye
House by appearing at the Lords' Barre in a case wherein Mr. Dalmahoy
<paren> a member of ye House <$$paren> was concerned .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,24,P.7

And to the intent that they might be ye easier had , Mr Speaker invited
them to dinner AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,24,P.8

and after they had made good cheere gave them very good advice to
obviate and prevent any further disputes between both Houses , wch they
then seemed to complye withe , AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,24,P.9

But our Serg=t= letting them have their liberty upon parroll they were
the next day sent for by ye Lords and att their barre interrogated in
all particulars concerning their committment , AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,24,P.10

and had thereafter given them the protection of ye House .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,24,P.11

The same day ye Lords sent a message to us bye my Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas and my Lo: Chiefe Baron for a present Conference upon
matters of high importance wherein his Ma=ties= honour and ye safety of
ye Kingdom was concerned , AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,24,P.12

and the Houses agreeing to ye present Conference the inclosed paper was
read with a very audible voice by my Lord Privy Seale .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,24,P.13

On Thursday the House sent their Sergeant to ye tower for neglect
<P_25,P> of his duty in suffering his prisoners to escape
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.14

and ordered Mr Secretary in their name to beseech his Ma=tie= that wee
might have another Sergeant appointed to attend them ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.15

and accordingly my Lord Chamberlaine appoynted one Topham a very stout
fellow to attend ye House . AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.16

Yesterday morning as Mr Speaker was coming through Westminster Hall to
ye House he mett Mr Serg=t= Pemberton whom he commanded his officers
then attending to apprehend and secure in ye Speaker's Chamber , of wch
he gave ye House an acc=t= as soone as they sate ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.17

and receaved the thanks of ye House for his zeale and care in thus
asserting their previledges , AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.18

and the House being then alsoe informed that Sir John Churchill Mr
Serg=t= Peeke and Mr. Charley Porter were belowe in ye Hall , they
commanded instantly their Serg=t= to carry his men with him downe into
ye Hall and to apprehend ye sayd persons though they were pleading at ye
Barres of any of ye Courtes , and to goe well attended that he might not
receave an affront from ye Black-Rodde whom they understood was in ye
Court of Requests armed with an order from ye House of Lords to rescue
the Prisoners . AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.19

This order of the House of Commons was very briskly executed the said
persons being taken from ye severall Barrs of ye Chancery , King's bench
and Common Pleas , and brought safe into ye Speakers Chamber without
opposition . AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.20

But ye House of Lords being informed of these proceedings they
immediately order their Black Rodde to fetch out ye sayd prisoners
wherever they should find them committed ; AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.21

they likewise order their black Rod to apprehend ye Sergeant of ye House
of Commons , AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.22

and addresse to his Ma=tie= by word of ye white-staves that another
Sergeant might be appoynted to attend ye House of Com=ns= .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.23

The House of Com=ns= after a long debate vote the said persons to be
sent to ye Tower AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.24

and Sir John Robinson Ser=t= of ye Tower being then in ye House had
directions not to sett them at liberty without an order from ye House .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.25

By this time it was twoe of ye clock AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,25,P.26

and ye House of Lords <P_26,P> had adjourned for an hour or two whose
example in yt particular ye House of Commons thought fitt to follow ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.27

And while ye Speaker was at dinner the Sergeant hired three coaches at
Westminster Hall Gate pretending to carrye his prisoners through ye
Citty to ye tower , being then informed that ye black rod lay in waite
for him in a house neare ye Pallace Yard gate ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.28

But he went discreetlyer to worke , AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.29

for he carryed his prisoners through Sir John Cotton's house
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.30

and tooke bote at his garden stairs AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.31

and by water delivered them safe into Sir John Robinson's hands , to
whom in three minutes the black-rod came to demand the Prisoners ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.32

but the Lieut. positively refused to deliver them .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.33

As soone as the House mett they agreed upon the enclosed Reasons in
answere to ye Paper delivered ye day before by ye Lords at a Conference
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.34

and sent up a message for a Conference on ye subject matter of ye late
Conference , to wch ye Lords replyed that they would send up an answere
by messengers of their owne . AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.35

But their black rodd being returned from ye tower and giving them an
acct that ye Lieu=t= of ye tower refused to deliver ye Prisoners , they
voted a second addresse to his Ma=tie= by ye white-staves that ye
Lieu=tnt= of ye tower should be removed and a new one appoynted in his
stead ; to wch his Ma=tie= then answered that he would consider of it
and give them an answere this day by 5 in ye afternoone .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.36

When the House of Commons met this morning , they found their Sergent
was changed , AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.37

and while they were debating on it with some warmth Mr Secretary
Coventry came in AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.38

and from his Ma=tie= told us that it was his Ma=ties= pleasure wee
should immediately adjourne till 4 of ye clock in ye afternoon , when it
was his pleasure we should attend him in ye bankquetting House , and
that his Ma=tie= had sent the same message to ye Lords .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.39

Accordingly we mett when his Mat=ie= made us ye enclosed gracious speech
after wch the Speaker returning to ye House we voted ye enclosed votes
and adjourned ye debate of our Sergeant till Munday morning .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.40

The Lords after mett AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.41

and the white-staves reporting to their lordships that his Mat=ie= had
considered of their addresse concerning ye removal of ye Lieu=t= of ye
tower , but sawe no reason for it . Upon wch their Lord=sps= adjourned
till Munday . AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,26,P.42

My paper only now <P_27,P> allowes mee roome to beg your Exc=eyes=
pardon for this tedious narrative wch is ye true state of matters of
fact betweene both Houses . AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,27,P.43

I am my Lord Yr Excy=s= most humble servant Fran Aungier
AUNGIER-1674-E3-H,27,P.44

