<BEGIN_bacon-1605-e2-h>

<P_1,17R>

Now I proceede to those errours and vanities , which haue interueyned
amongst the studies themselues of the learned ; which is that which is
principall and proper to the present argument , wherein my purpose is
not to make a iustification of the errors , but by a censure and
separation of the errors , to make a iustificatio~ of that which is good
& sound ; and to deliuer that from the aspersion of the other .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17R.3

For we see , that it is the manner of men , to scandalize and depraue
that which retaineth the state , and vertue , by taking aduantage vpon
that which is corrupt and degenerate ; as the Heathens in the primitiue
Church vsed to blemish and taynt the Christians with the faults and
corruptions of Heretiques : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17R.4

But neuerthelesse , I haue no meaning at this time to make any exact
animaduersion of the errors and impediments in matters of learning ,
which are more secret and remote from vulgar opinion ; but <P_1,17V>
onely to speake vnto such as doe fall vnder , or neere vnto , a popular
obseruation . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17V.5

There be therfore chiefely three vanities in Studies , whereby learning
hath been most traduced : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17V.6

For those things we do esteeme vaine , which are either false or
friuolous , those which either haue no truth , or no vse :
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17V.7

& those persons we esteem vain , which are either credulous or curious ,
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17V.8

& curiositie is either in mater or words ; so that in reason , as wel as
in experence , there fal out to be these 3. diste~pers <paren> as I may
tearm the~ <$$paren> of learning ; BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17V.9

The first fantastical learning : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17V.10

The second contentious learning , BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17V.11

& the last delicate learning , vaine Imaginations , vaine Altercations ,
& vain affectatio~s : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17V.12

& with the last I wil begin , BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17V.13

<font> Martin Luther <$$font> conducted <paren> no doubt <$$paren> by an
higher prouidence , but in discourse of reason , finding what a Prouince
he had vndertaken against the Bishop of <font> Rome <$$font> , and the
degenerate traditions of the Church , and finding his owne solitude ,
being no waies ayded by the opinions of his owne time , was enforced to
awake all Antiquitie , and to call former times to his succors , to make
a partie against the present time : so that the ancient Authors , both
in Diuinitie and in Humanitie , which had long time slept in Libraries ,
began generally to be read and reuolued . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17V.14

This by consequence , did draw on a necessitie of a more exquisite
trauaile in the languages originall , wherin those Authors did write :
For the better vndersta~ding of those Authors , and the better aduantage
of pressing and applying their words : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,17V.15

And thereof grew <P_1,18R> againe , a delight in their manner of Stile
and Phrase , and an admiration of that kinde of writing ; which was much
furthered & precipitated by the enmity & opposition , that the
propounders of those <paren> primitiue , but seeming new opinions
<$$paren> had against the Schoole-men : who were generally of the
contrarie part : and whose Writings were altogether in a differing Stile
and fourme , taking libertie to coyne , and frame new tearms of Art , to
expresse their own sence , and to auoide circuite of speech , without
regard to the purenesse , pleasantnesse , and <paren> as I may call it
<$$paren> lawfulnesse of the Phrase or word : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18R.16

And againe , because the great labour that then was with the people
<paren> of whome the Pharisees were wont to say : Execrabilis ista turba
quae non nouit legem <$$paren> for the winning and perswading of them ,
there grewe of necessitie in cheefe price , and request , eloquence and
varietie of discourse , as the fittest and forciblest accesse into the
capasitie of the vulgar sort : so that these foure causes concurring ,
the admiration of ancient Authors the hate of the Schoole-men , the
exact studie of Languages : and the efficacie of Preaching did bring in
an affectionate studie of eloquence , and copie of speech , which then
began to flourish . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18R.17

This grew speedily to an excesse : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18R.18

for men began to hunt more after wordes , than matter , and more after
the choisenesse of the Phrase , and the round and cleane composition of
the sentence , and the sweet falling of the clauses , and the varying
and illustration of their workes with tropes and figures : <P_1,18V>
then after the weight of matter , worth of subiect , soundnesse of
argument , life of inuention , or depth of iudgement .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18V.19

Then grew the flowing , and watrie vaine of <font> Osorius <$$font> the
Portugall Bishop , to be in price : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18V.20

then did <font> Sturmius <$$font> spend such infinite , and curious
paines vpon <font> Cicero <$$font> the Orator , and <font> Hermogenes
<$$font> the Rhetorican , besides his owne Bookes of Periods , and
imitation , and the like : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18V.21

Then did <font> Car <$$font> of <font> Cambridge <$$font> , and <font>
Ascham <$$font> with their Lectures and Writings , almost diefie <font>
Cicero <$$font> and <font> Demosthenes <$$font> , and allure , all young
men that were studious vnto that delicate and pollished kinde of
learning . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18V.22

Then did <font> Erasmus <$$font> take occasion to make the scoffing
Eccho ; Decem annos consumpsi in legendo Cicerone :
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18V.23

and the Eccho answered in Greeke , Oue ; Asine .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18V.24

Then grew the learning of the Schoole-men to be vtterly despised as
barbarous . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18V.25

In summe , the whole inclination and bent of those times , was rather
towards copie , than weight . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18V.26

Here therefore , the first distemper of learning , when men studie words
, and not matter : whereof though I haue represented an example of late
times : yet it hath beene , and will be Secundum maius & minus in all
time . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18V.27

And how is it possible , but this should haue an operation to discredite
learning , euen with vulgar capacities , when they see learned mens
workes like the first Letter of a Patent , or limmed Booke : which
though it hath large flourishes , yet it is but a Letter .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18V.28

It seemes to me that <font> Pigmalions <$$font> frenzie is a good
embleme or portraiture of this vanitie : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,18V.29

<P_1,19R>

for wordes are but the Images of matter , BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19R.31

and except they haue life of reason and inuention : to fall in loue with
them , is all one , as to fall in loue with a Picture .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19R.32

But yet notwithstanding , it is a thing not hastily to be condemned , to
cloath and adorne the the obscuritie , euen of Philosophie it selfe ,
with sensible and plausible elocution . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19R.33

For hereof we haue great examples in <font> Xenophon , Cicero , Seneca ,
Plutarch <$$font> , and of <font> Plato <$$font> also in some degree ,
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19R.34

and hereof likewise there is great vse : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19R.35

For surely , to the seuere inquisition of truth , and the deepe
progresse into Philosophie , it is some hindrance ; because it is too
early satisfactorie to the minde of man , and quencheth the desire of
further search , before we come to a iust periode .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19R.36

But then if a man be to haue any vse of such knowledge in ciuile
occasions , of conference , counsell , perswasion , discourse , or the
like : Then shall he finde it prepared to his hands in those Authors ,
which write in that manner . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19R.37

But the excesse of this is to iustly contemptible , that {COM:sic} as
<font> Hercules <$$font> , when hee saw the Image of <font> Adonis ,
Venus Migmon <$$font> in a Temple , sayd in disdaine , Nil sacri es .
So there is none of <font> Hercules <$$font> followers in learning ,
that is , the more seuere , and laborious sort of Enquirers into truth ,
but will despise those delicacies and affectations , as indeede capable
of no diuinesse . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19R.38

And thus much of the first disease or distemper of learning .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19R.39

The second which followeth is in nature worse then than the former :
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19R.40

for as substance of matter is <P_1,19V> better than beautie of words :
so contrariwise vaine matter is worse , than vaine words : wherein it
seemeth the reprehension of Saint <font> Paule <$$font> , was not onely
proper for those times , but prophetical for the times following , and
not only respectiue to Diuinitie , but extensiue to all knowledge .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19V.41

Deuita prophanas vocum nouitates & oppositiones falsi nominis scientiae
. BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19V.42

For he assigneth two Markes and Badges of suspected and falsified
Science ; BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19V.43

The one , the noueltie and strangenesse of tearmes ;
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19V.44

the other , the strictnesse of positions , which of necessitie doth
induce oppositions , and so questions and altercations .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19V.45

Surely , like as many substances in nature which are solide , do
putrifie and corrupt into wormes : So it is the propertie of good and
sound knowledge to putrifie and dissolue into a number of subtile idle ,
vnholesome , and <paren> as I may tearme them <$$paren> vermiculate
questions ; which haue indeede a kinde of quicknesse , and life of
spirite , but no soundnesse of matter , or goodnesse of qualitie .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,19V.46

This kinde of degenerate learning did chiefely raigne amongst the
Schoole men , who hauing sharpe and stronge wits , and aboundance of
leasure , and smal varietie of reading ; but their wits being shut vp in
the Cels of a few Authors <paren> chiefely <font> Aristotle <$$font>
their Dictator <$$paren> as their persons were shut vp in the Cells of
Monasteries and Colledges , and knowing little Historie , either of
Nature or time , did out of no great quantitie of matter , and infinite
agitation of wit , spin out vnto vs those laborious webbes of Learning
which are extant in their <P_1,20R> Bookes . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20R.47

For the wit and minde of man , if it worke vpon matter , which is the
conte~plation of the creatures of God worketh according to the stuffe ,
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20R.48

and is limited thereby ; BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20R.49

but if it worke vpon it selfe , as the Spider worketh his webbe , then
it is endlesse , BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20R.50

and {SIC:and_and} brings forth indeed Copwebs of learning , admirable
for the finesse of thread and worke , but of no substance or profite .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20R.51

This same vnprofitable subtilitie or curiositie is of two sorts : either
in the subiect it selfe that they handle , when it is a fruitlesse
speculation or controuersie ; <paren> whereof there are no small number
both in Diuinity & Philosophie <$$paren> or in the maner or method of
handling of a knowledge ; which amongst them was this ; vpon euerie
particular position or assertion to frame obiections , and to those
obiections , solutions : which solutions were for the most part not
confutations , but distinctions : whereas indeed the strength of all
Sciences , is as the strength of the old mans faggot in the bond .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20R.52

For the harmonie of a science supporting each part the other , is and
ought to be the true and briefe confutation and suppression of all the
smaller sort of obiections : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20R.53

but on the other side , if you take out euerie Axiome , as the stickes
of the faggot one by one , you may quarrell with them , and bend them
and breake them at your pleasure : so that as was sayd of <font> Seneca
<$$font> : Verborum minutijs rerum frangit pondera :
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20R.54

So a man may truely say of the Schoole men Quaestionum minutijs
Scientiarum frangunt sodilitatem . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20R.55

For were it not better <P_1,20V> for a man in a faire roome , to set vp
one great light , or braunching candlesticke of lights , than to goe
about with a small watch candle into euerie corner ?
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20V.56

and such is their methode , that rests not so much vppon euidence of
truth prooued by arguments , authorities , similitudes , examples ; as
vpon particular confutations and solutions of euerie scruple ,
cauillation & obiection : breeding for the most part one questio~ as
fast as it solueth another ; eue~ as in the former resemblance , when
you carry the light into one corner , you darken the rest : so that the
Fable and fiction of <font> Scylla <$$font> seemeth to be a liuely Image
of this kinde of Philosophie or knowledge , which was transformed into a
comely Virgine for the vpper parts ; but then , Candida succinctam ,
latrantibus inguina monstris : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20V.57

So the Generalities of the Schoolemen are for a while good and
proportionable ; BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20V.58

but then when you descend into their distinctions and decisions , in
stead of a fruitfull wombe , for the vse and benefite of mans life ;
they end in monstrous altercations and barking questions . So as it is
not possible but this qualitie of knowledge must fall vnder popular
contempt , the people being apt to contemne truth vpo~ occasion of
Controuersies & altercations , and to thinke they are all out of their
way which neuer meete , BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20V.59

and when they see such digladiation about subtilties , and matter of no
vse nor moment , they easily fall vpon that iudgement of <font>
Dionysius <$$font> of <font> Siracusa <$$font> , Verba ista sunt senum
otiosorum . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,20V.60

Notwithstanding certaine it is , that if those <P_1,21R> Schoole men to
their great thirst of truth , and vnwearied trauaile of wit , had ioyned
varietie and vniuersalitie of reading and contemplation , they had
prooued excellent Lights , to the great aduancement of all learning and
knowledge : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21R.61

but as they are , they are great vndertakers indeed , and fierce with
darke keeping . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21R.62

But as in the inquirie of the diuine truth , their pride enclined to
leaue the Oracle of Gods word , and to vanish in the mixture of their
owne inuentions : so in the inquisition of Nature , they euer left the
Oracle of Gods works , BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21R.63

and adored the deceiuing and deformed Images , which the vnequall
mirrour of their owne minds , or a few receiued Authors or principles ,
did represent vnto them . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21R.64

And thus much for the second disease of learning .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21R.65

For the third vice or disease of Learning , which concerneth deceit or
vntruth , it is of all the rest the fowlest ; as that which doth destroy
the essentiall fourme of knowledge ; which is nothing but a
representation of truth ; BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21R.66

for the truth of being , and the truth of knowing are one , differing no
more than the direct beame , and the beame reflected .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21R.67

This vice therefore brauncheth it selfe into two sorts ; delight in
deceiuing , and aptnesse to be deceiued , imposture and Credulitie :
which although they appeare to be of a diuers nature , the one seeming
to proceede of cunning , and the other of simplicitie ; yet certainely ,
they doe for the most part concurre : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21R.68

for as the verse noteth . <P_1,21V> Percontatorem fugito , nam Garrulus
idem est : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21V.69

An inquisitiue man is a pratler : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21V.70

so vpon the like reason , a credulous man is a deceiuer : as we see it
in fame , that hee that will easily beleeue rumors , will as easily
augment rumors , and adde somewhat to them of his owne , which <font>
Tacitus <$$font> wisely noteth , when he sayth : Fingunt simul creduntq;
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21V.71

so great an affinitie hath fiction and beleefe .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21V.72

This facilitie of credite , and accepting or admitting thinges weakely
authorized or warranted , is of two kindes , according to the subiect :
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21V.73

For it is either a beleefe of Historie , <paren> as the Lawyers speake ,
matter of fact : <$$paren> or else of matter of art and opinion ;
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21V.74

As to the former , wee see the experience and inconuenience of this
errour in ecclesiasticall Historie , which hath too easily receiued and
registred reports and narrations of Miracles wrought by Martyrs ,
Hermits , or Monkes of the desert , and other holy men ; and there
Reliques , Shrines , Chappels , and Images : which though they had a
passage for time , by the ignorance of the people , the superstitious
simplicitie of some , and the politique tolleration of others , holding
them but as diuine poesies : yet after a periode of time , when the mist
began to cleare vp , they grew to be esteemed , but as old wiues fables
, impostures of the Cleargie illusions of spirits , and badges of
Antichrist , to the great scandall and detriment of Religion .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,21V.75

So in naturall Historie , wee see there hath not <P_1,22R> beene that
choise and iudgement vsed , as ought to haue beene , as may appeare in
the writings of <font> Plinius , Cardanus , Albertus <$$font> , and
diuers of the Arabians , being fraught with much fabulous matter , a
great part , not onely vntryed , but notoriously vntrue , to the great
derogation of the credite of naturall Philosophie , with the graue and
sober kinde of wits ; wherein the wisedome and integritie of <font>
Aristotle <$$font> is worthy to be obserued , that hauing made so
diligent and exquisite a Historie of liuing creatures , hath mingled it
sparingly with any vaine or fayned matter , and yet on th@ @other sake ,
hath cast all prodigious Narrations , which he thought worthy the
recording into one Booke : excellently discerning that matter of
manifest truth , such wherevpon obseruation and rule was to bee built ,
was not to bee mingled or weakened with matter of doubtfull credite :
and yet againe that rarities and reports , that seeme vncredible , are
not to be suppressed or denyed to the memorie of men .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22R.76

And as for the facilitie of credite which is yeelded to Arts & opinions
, it is likewise of two kinds , either when too much beleefe is
attributed to the Arts themselues , or to certaine Authors in any Art .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22R.77

The Sciences themselues which haue had better intelligence and
confederacie with the imagination of man , than with his reason , are
three in number ; Astrologie , Naturall Magicke , and <font> Alcumy
<$$font> : of which Sciences neuerthelesse the ends or pretences are
noble . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22R.78

For Astrologie pretendeth to discouer that <P_1,22V> correspondence or
concatenation , which is betweene the superiour Globe and the inferiour
. BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22V.79

Naturall Magicke pretendeth to cal & reduce natural Philosophie from
variety of speculations to the magnitude of works ;
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22V.80

And <font> Alcumy <$$font> pretendeth to make separation of all the
vnlike parts of bodies , which in mixtures of nature are incorporate .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22V.81

But the deriuations and prosecutions to these ends , both in the
theories , and in the practises are full of Errour and vanitie ; which
the great Professors themselues haue sought to vaile ouer and conceale
by enigmaticall writings , and referring themselues to auricular
traditions , and such other deuises , to saue the credite of Impostures
; BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22V.82

and yet surely to <font> Alcumy <$$font> this right is due , that it may
be compared to the Husband man whereof <font> AEsope <$$font> makes the
Fable ; that when he died , told his Sonnes , that he had left vnto them
gold , buried vnder ground in his Vineyard ; BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22V.83

and they digged ouer all the ground , BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22V.84

and gold they found none , BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22V.85

but by reason of their stirring and digging the mold about , the rootes
of their Vines , they had a great Vintage the yeare following :
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22V.86

so assuredly the search and stirre to make gold hath brought to light a
great number of good and fruitfull inuentions and experiments , as well
for the disclosing of Nature ; as for the vse of mans life .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,22V.87

And as for the ouermuch credite that hath {SIC:hatb} beene giuen vnto
Authors in Sciences , in making them Dictators , that their wordes
should stand , and not Counsels to giue aduise ; the dammage is infinite
that <P_1,23R> Sciences haue receiued thereby , as the principall cause
that hath kept them lowe , at a stay without groweth or aduancement .
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23R.88

For hence it hath comen , that in arts Mechanicall , the first deuiser
coms shortest , BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23R.89

and time addeth and perfecteth : BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23R.90

but in Sciences the first Author goeth furthest ,
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23R.91

and time leeseth {COM:sic} and corrupteth . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23R.92

So we see , Artillerie , sayling , printing , and the like , were
grossely managed at the first and by time accommodated and refined :
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23R.93

but contrarywise the Philosophies and Sciences of <font> Aristotle ,
Plato , Democritus , Hypocrates , Euclides , Archimedes <$$font> , of
most vigor at the first , and by time degenerate and imbased , whereof
the reason is no other , but that in the former many wits and industries
haue {SIC:haue_haue} contributed in one ; and in the later many wits and
industries haue ben spent about the wit of some one ; whom many times
they haue rather depraued than illustrated . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23R.94

For as water will not ascend higher , than the leuell of the first
spring head , from whence it descendeth : so knowledge deriued from
<font> Aristotle <$$font> , and exempted from libertie of examination ,
will not rise againe higher , than the knowledge of <font> Aristotle
<$$font> . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23R.95

And therfore although the position be good : Oportet discentem credere :
yet it must bee coupled with this , Oportet edoctum iudicare :
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23R.96

for Disciples doe owe vnto Maisters onely a temporarie beleefe , and a
suspension of their owne iudgement , till they be fully instructed and
not an absolute resignation , or perpetuall captiuitie :
BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23R.97

and therefore to conclude this point , I will say no more , but ; so let
great Authors <P_1,23V> haue theire due , as time which is the Author of
Authors be not depriued of his due , which is furder and furder to
discouer truth . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23V.98

Thus haue I gone ouer these three diseasses of learning , besides the
which there are some other rather peccant humors , then fourmed diseases
, which neuertheles are not so secret and intrinsike , but that they
fall vnder a popular obseruation and traducement ; and therefore are not
to be passed ouer . BACON-1605-E2-H,1,23V.99

<P_2,2R>

The Works or Acts of merit towards learning are conversant about three
obiects , the Places of learning ; the Bookes of learning ; and the
Persons of the learned . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,2R.101

For as water , whether it be the dewe of heauen , or the springs of the
earth , doth scatter and leese it selfe in the ground , except it be
collected into some Receptacle , where it may by vnion , comfort and
sustaine it selfe : And for that cause the Industry of Man hath made &
framed Spring heads , Conduits , Cesternes , and Pooles , which men haue
accustomed likewise to beautifie and adorne with accomplishments of
Magnificence and State , as wel as of vse and necessitie : So this
excellent liquor of knowledge , whether it descend from diuine
inspiration , or spring from humane sense , would soone perishe and
vanishe to oblyuion , if it were not preserued in Bookes , Traditions ,
Conferences , and <P_2,2V> Places appoynted , as Vniuersities ,
Colledges , and Schooles , for the receipt & comforting of the same .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,2V.102

The works which concerne the Seates and Places of learning , are foure ;
Foundations , and Buyldings , Endowments with Reuenewes , Endowme~ts
with Franchizes and Priuiledges , Institutions and Ordinances for
gouernment , all tending to quietnesse and priuatenesse of life , and
discharge of cares and troubles , much like the Stations , which <font>
Virgil <$$font> prescribeth for the hyuing of Bees .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,2V.103

Principio sedes Apibus , statioq; petenda : Quo neq; sit ventis aditus ,
&c. BACON-1605-E2-H,2,2V.104

The workes touching Bookes are two : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,2V.105

First Libraries , which are as the Shrynes , where all the Reliques of
the ancient Saints , full of true vertue , and that without delusion or
imposture , are preserued , and reposed ; BACON-1605-E2-H,2,2V.106

Secondly , Newe Editions of Authors , with more correct impressions ,
more faithfull translations , more profitable glosses , more diligent
annotations , and the like . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,2V.107

The workes pertaining to the persons of learned men <paren> besides the
aduancement and countenancing of them in generall <$$paren> are two :
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,2V.108

The reward and designation of Readers in Sciences already extant and
inuented : and the reward and designation of Writers and Enquirers ,
concerning any partes of Learning , not sufficiently laboured and
prosecuted . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,2V.109

These are summarilie the workes and actes , wherein the merites of manie
excellent Princes , and other worthie Personages haue beene conuersant .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,2V.110

<P_2,3R>

As for any particular commemorations , I call to minde what <font>
Cicero <$$font> saide , when hee gaue generall thanks .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3R.112

Difficile {SIC:difffcile} non aliquem ; ingratum quenquam praeterire :
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3R.113

Let vs rather according to the Scriptures , looke vnto that parte of the
Race , which is before vs ; then looke backe to that which is alreadie
attained . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3R.114

First therfore amongst so many great Foundations of Colledges in <font>
Europe <$$font> , I finde strange that they are all dedicated to
Professions , and none left free to Artes and Sciences at large .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3R.115

For if men iudge that learning should bee referred to action , they
iudge well : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3R.116

but in this they fall into the Error described in the ancient Fable ; in
which the other parts of the body did suppose the stomache had beene
ydle , because it neyther performed the office of Motion , as the lymmes
doe , nor of Sence , as the head doth : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3R.117

But yet notwithstanding it is the Stomache that digesteth and
distributeth to all the rest : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3R.118

So if any man thinke Philosophie and Vniuersalitie to be idle Studies ;
hee doth not consider that all Professions are from thence serued , and
supplyed . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3R.119

And this I take to bee a great cause that hath hindered the progression
of learning , because these Fundamental knowledges haue bene studied but
in passage . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3R.120

For if you will haue a tree beare more fruite then it hath vsed to do ;
it is not any thing you can do to the boughes , BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3R.121

but it is the styrring of the earth , and putting newe moulde about the
rootes , that must worke it . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3R.122

Neyther is it to bee forgotten , that this dedicating <P_2,3V> of
Foundations and Dotations to professory Learning , hath not onely had a
Maligne aspect , and influence vpon the growth of Scyences , but hath
also beene preiudiciall to States and gouernments .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3V.123

For hence it proceedeth that Princes find a solitude , in regard of able
men to serue them in causes of estate , because there is no education
collegiate , which is free ; wher such as were so disposed , mought giue
themselues to Histories , moderne languages , bookes of pollicie and
ciuile discourse , and other the like inablements vnto seruice of estate
. BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3V.124

And because founders of Colledges doe plant , and founders of Lectures
doe water : it followeth wel in order to speake of the defect , which is
in Publique Lectures : Namely , in the smalnesse and meanesse of the
salary or reward which in most places is assigned vnto them : whether
they be Lectures of Arts , or of Professions . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3V.125

For it is necessary to the progression of Scyences , that Readers be of
the most able and sufficient men ; as those which are ordained for
generating , and propagating of Scyences , and not for transitorie vse .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3V.126

This can@ @not be , except their condition , & endowme~t be such , as
may co~tent the ablest man , to appropriate his whole labour , and
continue his whole age in that function and attendance , and therefore
must haue a proportion answerable to that mediocritie or competencie of
aduancement , which may be expected from a Profession , or the Practize
of a Profession : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,3V.127

So as , if you wil haue Scyences flourish , you must obserue <font>
Dauids <$$font> <P_2,4R> military lawe , which was , <font> That those
which staied with the Carriage , should haue equall part with those
which were in the Action <$$font> : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4R.128

else will the carriages be ill attended : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4R.129

So Readers in Scyences are indeede the Gardyans of the stores and
prouisions of Scyences , whence men in actiue courses are furnished ,
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4R.130

and therefore ought to haue equall entertainment with them ;
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4R.131

otherwise if the fathers in Scyences be of the weakest sort , or be ill
maintained . Et Patrum invalidi reserent ieiunia nati .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4R.132

Another defect I note , wherin I shall neede some Alchimist to helpe me
, who call vpon men to sell their Bookes , and to build Fornaces ,
quitting and forsaking <font> Minerva <$$font> , and the <font> Muses
<$$font> , as barreyne virgines , and relying vpon <font> Vulcan
<$$font> . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4R.133

But certaine it is , that vnto the deepe , fruitefull , and operatiue
studie of many Scyences , specially Naturall Phylosophy and Physicke ,
Bookes be not onely the Instrumentals ; wherein also the beneficence of
men hath not beene altogether wanting : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4R.134

for we see , Spheares , Globes , Astrolabes , Mappes , and the like ,
haue bene prouided , as appurtenances to Astronomy & Cosmography , as
well as bookes : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4R.135

We see likewise , that some places instituted for Physicke , haue
annexed the commoditie of Gardeins for Simples of all sorts , and do
likewise command the vse of dead Bodies for Anatomyes .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4R.136

But these doe respect but a few things . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4R.137

In generall , there will hardly be any Mayne proficience in the
disclosing of nature , except there be some allowance for expences about
experime~ts ; <P_2,4V> whether they be experiments appertaining to
<font> Vulcanus <$$font> or <font> Dedalus <$$font> . Furnace or Engyne
, or any other kind ; BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4V.138

And therefore as Secretaries , and Spyalls of Princes and States bring
in Bills for Intelligence ; so you must allowe the Spyalls and
Intelligencers of Nature , to bring in their Billes ,
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4V.139

or else you shall be ill aduertised . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4V.140

And if <font> Alexander <$$font> made such a liberall assignation to
<font> Aristotle <$$font> of treasure for the allowance of Hunters ,
Fowlers , Fishers and the like , that he mought compile an Historie of
Nature , much better do they deserue it that trauailes in Arts of nature
. BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4V.141

Another defect which I note , is an intermission or neglect in those
which are Gouernours in Vniuersities , of Consultation , & in Princes or
superior persons , of Visitation : To enter into account and
consideration , whether the Readings , exercises , and other customes
appertayning vnto learning , aunciently begunne , and since continued ,
be well instituted or no , and thereupon to ground an amendement , or
reformation in that which shall be found inconuenient .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4V.142

For it is one of your Maiesties owne most wise and Princely Maximes ,
<font> that in all vsages , and Presidents , the Times be considered
wherein they first beganne , which if they were weake , or ignorant , it
derogateth from the Authoritie of the Vsage , and leaueth it for suspect
<$$font> . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4V.143

And therefore in_as_much , as most of the vsages , and orders of the
Vniuersities were deriued fro~ more obscure times , it is the more
requisite , they be reexamined . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,4V.144

In this kind I will giue an <P_2,5R> instance or two for exa~ple sake ,
of things that are the most obvious & familiar :
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5R.145

The one is a matter , which though it bee ancient and generall , yet I
hold to be an errour , which is , that Schollers in Vniuersities come
too soone , & too vnripe to Logicke & Rhetoricke ; Arts fitter for
Graduates then children , and Nouices : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5R.146

For these two rightly taken , are the grauest of Sciences , beeing the
Arts of Arts , the one for Iudgement , the other for Ornament :
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5R.147

And they be the Rules & Directions , how to set forth & dispose matter :
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5R.148

& therfore for mindes emptie & vnfraught with matter , & which haue not
gathered that which <font> Cicero <$$font> calleth <font> Sylua <$$font>
and <font> Supeliex <$$font> , stuffe and varietie to beginne with those
Artes <paren> as if one should learne to weigh , or to measure , or to
painte the Winde <$$paren> doth worke but this effect : that the
wisedome of those Arts , which is great , & vniuersal , is almost made
contemptible , & is degenerate into childish Sophystrie , & ridiculous
affectation . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5R.149

And further , the vntimely learning of them hath drawen on by
consequence , the superficiall and vnprofitable teaching & writing of
them , as fitteth indeed to the capacity of childre~ :
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5R.150

Another , is a lacke I finde in the exercises vsed in the Vniuersities ,
which do make to great a diuorce betweene Inuention & Memory :
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5R.151

for their speeches are either premeditate in Verbis conceptis , where
nothing is left to Inuention , or meerly <font> Extemporall <$$font> ,
where little is left to Memory : wheras in life & action , there is
least vse of either of these , but rather of intermixtures of
premeditation , & Inuention : Notes & Memorie . <P_2,5V> So as the
exercise fitteth not the practize , nor the Image , the life ;
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5V.152

and it is euer a true rule in exercises , that they bee framed as nere
as may be to the life of practise , BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5V.153

for otherwise they do peruert the Motions , and faculties of the Minde ,
and not prepare them . The truth whereof is not obscure , when
Schollars come to the practises of professions , or other actions of
ciuill life , which when they set into , this want is soone found by
themselues , and sooner by others . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5V.154

But this part touching the amendment of the Institutions and orders of
Vniuersities . I will conclude with the clause of <font> Caesars
<$$font> letter to <font> Oppius <$$font> and <font> Balbus <$$font> ,
Hoc quem ad modum fieri possit , nonnulla mihi in me~tem veniunt , &
multa reperiri possunt : de ijs rebus rogo vos , vt cogitationem
suscipiatis . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5V.155

Another defect which I note , ascendeth a little higher then the
precedent . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5V.156

For as the proficience of learning consisteth much in the orders and
institutions of Vniuersities , in the same States & kingdoms : So it
would bee yet more aduanced , if there were more Intellige~ce Mutual
betweene the Vniuersities of <font> Europe <$$font> , then now there is
. BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5V.157

We see , there be many Orders and Foundatio~s , which though they be
deuided vnder seuerall soueraignties , & territories , yet they take
themselues to haue a kind of contract , fraternitie , & correspondence ,
one with the other , insomuch as they haue Prouincials and Generals .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,5V.158

And surely as Nature createth Brotherhood in Families , & Arts
Mechanicall contract Brotherhoods in communalties , and the Anoyntment
of God superinduceth <P_2,6R> a Brotherhood in Kings & Bishops : So in
like manner there can@ @not but bee a fraternitie in learning and
illumination , relating to that Paternitie , which is attributed to God
, who is called the Father of illuminations or lights .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,6R.159

The last defect which <font> I <$$font> wil note , is , that there hath
not been , or very rarely been , any Publique Designation of Writers or
Enquirers , concerning such parts of knowledge , as may appeare not to
haue bin alreadie sufficiently laboured or vndertaken , vnto which point
it is an Induceme~t ; to enter into a view and examination , what parts
of learning haue bin prosecuted , and what omitted ;
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,6R.160

For the opinion of plentie is amongst the causes of want ;
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,6R.161

and the great quantitie of Bookes maketh a shewe rather of superfluitie
then lacke , which surcharge neuerthelesse is not to be remedied by
making no more bookes , but by making more good books , which as the
Serpe~t of <font> Moses <$$font> , mought deuour the Serpe~ts of the
Incha~tors . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,6R.162

The remouing of all the defects formerly enumerate , except the last ,
and of the actiue part also of the last <paren> which is the designation
of Writers <$$paren> are <font> Opera Basilica <$$font> ; towards which
the endeuors of a priuate man may be , but as an Image in a crosse way ;
that may point at the way , but can@ @not goe it .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,6R.163

But the inducing part of the latter <paren> which is the suruay of
Learning <$$paren> , may bee set forwarde by priuate trauaile ;
Wherefore I will now attempt to make a generall and faithfull
perambulation of learning , with an inquiry what parts therof lye fresh
and <P_2,6V> wast , and not improued & conuerted by the Industrie of man
; to the end that such a plotte made and recorded to memorie , may both
minister light to anie publique designation : and also serue to excite
voluntary endeuours ; wherin neuerthelesse my purpose is at this time ,
to note onely omissions and deficiences ; and not to make any
redargution of Errors , or incomplete prosecutions :
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,6V.164

For it is one thing to set forth what ground lyeth vnmanured ; and
another thing to correct ill husbandry in that which is manured . In
the handling & vndertaking of which worke , I am not ignorant , what it
is , that I doe now mooue and attempt , nor insensible of mine own
weakenes , to susteine my purpose : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,6V.165

But my hope is , that if my extreame loue to learning carrie me too
farre , I may obtaine the excuse of affection ; for that <font> It is
not granted to man to loue , and to bee wise <$$font> .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,6V.166

But I know well I can vse no other libertie of Iudgement , then I must
leaue to others , BACON-1605-E2-H,2,6V.167

& I for my part shall be indifferentlie glad eyther to performe my selfe
, or accept from another , that dutie of humanitie : Nam qui erranti
comiter monstrat viam : &c. BACON-1605-E2-H,2,6V.168

I doe foresee likewise , that of those things , which I shall enter &
Register , as Deficiences and Omissions : Many will conceiue and censure
, that some of them are alreadie done & extant : others to bee but
curiosities , and things of no great vse : and others to bee of too
great difficultie , and almost impossibilitie to bee compassed and
effected : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,6V.169

But for the twoo first , I referre my selfe to <P_2,7R> the particulars
. BACON-1605-E2-H,2,7R.170

For the last , touching impossibilitie , I take it , those things are to
bee held possible , which may be done by some person , though not by
euerie one : and which may be done by many , though not by any one : and
which may be done in succession of ages , though not within the
houre-glasse of one mans life : and which may be done by publique
designation , though not by priuate endeuour . BACON-1605-E2-H,2,7R.171

But notwithsta~ding , if any Man will take to himselfe rather that of
Salomon , Dicit piger , Leo est in via , then that of Virgil , Possunt ,
quia posse videntur : I shall be content that my labours bee esteemed ,
but as the better sorte of wishes : BACON-1605-E2-H,2,7R.172

for as it asketh some knowledge to demaund a question , not impertinent
; so it requireth some sense , to make a wish not absurd .
BACON-1605-E2-H,2,7R.173

