<BEGIN_bedyll-1537-e1-h>

<P_1.2,76>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXVIII_THOMAS_BEDYLL_TO_LORD_CROMWELL,_RESPECTING_THE_MONKS_OF_THE_CHARTER_HOUSE_AT_LONDON,_A.D._1537>

My very good Lord , after my moost hertie commendations it shall please
yo=r= Lordship to understand that the monks of the Charterhouse here at
London , whiche wer committed to Newgate for thair traitorus behavor
long tyme continued against the Kings Grace , be almoost dispeched by th
'and of God ; as it may apper to you by this byll inclosed . Wherof
considering <P_1.2,77> thair behavor and the hole mater , I am not sory
, but wold that al suche as love not the Kings Highnes and his wordly
honor wer in like caas . BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,77.4

My Lord <paren> as ye may <$$paren> I desir you in the wey of charite ,
and none other wise , to be good lord to the Prior of the said
Charterhouse , which is as honest a man as ever was in that habite
<paren> or els I am much deceyved <$$paren> , and is one whiche never
offended the Kings grace by disobedience of his Lawes , but hath labored
very sore continually for the reformation of his brethern , and now at
the last , at myn exhortation and instigation , constantly moved and
finally persuaded his brethern to surrender thair house , lands , and
goods , into the Kings hands , and to trust only to his mercy and grace
. BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,77.5

I beseche you , my Lord that the said Prior may be so entreated by your
help , that he be not sory , and repent that he hath fered and folowed
your sore words and my gentil exhortation made unto him to surrender his
said house ; and think that he myght have kept the same , if yo=r=
Lordshyp and I had not led him to the said surrender .
BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,77.6

But suerly <paren> I beleve <$$paren> that I knowe the man so well that
how soever he be order he wol@ @be contented without grudge .
BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,77.7

He is a man of suche charite as I have not seen the like .
BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,77.8

As towching the house of the Charterhouse I pray Good if it shall please
the King to alter it , that it may be turned into a better use <paren>
seing it is in the face of the world <$$paren> and <P_1.2,78> muche
communication wol run thereof throughout this realme ;
BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,78.9

for London is the common countrey of al England , from which is derived
to al parts of this realme al good and yll occurrent here .
BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,78.10

From London BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,78.11

the xiiij=th=. day of Juny . BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,78.12

By yo=r= Lordships at commaundement Thomas Bedyll
BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,78.13

<font> Ther be departed . <$$font> Brother William Greenewode . Dane
John Davye . Brother Robert Salt . Brother Water Peereson . Dane
Thomas Greene . BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,78.14

<font> Ther be even at the poynt of dethe . <$$font> Brother Thomas
Scryven . Brother Thomas Reedyng . BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,78.15

<font> Ther be sycke . <$$font> Dane Thomas Jonson . Brother William
Hore . BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,78.16

<font> One is hole . <$$font> Dane Bird . BEDYLL-1537-E1-H,1.2,78.17

