<BEGIN_behn-1668-e3-h>

<P_155>

<font> Oroonoko <$$font> coming from the wars <paren> which were now
ended <$$paren> after he had made his court to his grandfather , he
thought in honour he ought to make a visit to <font> Imoinda <$$font> ,
the daughter of his foster-father , the dead general ; and to make some
excuses to her , because his preservation was the occasion of her
father's death ; and to present her with those slaves that had been
taken in this last battle , as the trophies of her father's victories .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,155.3

When he came , attended by all the young soldiers of any merit , he was
infinitely surpriz'd at the beauty of this fair Queen of Night , whose
face and person was so exceeding all he had ever beheld ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,155.4

that lovely modesty with which she receiv'd him , that softness in her
look and sighs , upon the melancholy occasion of this honour that was
done by so great a man as <font> Oroonoko <$$font> , and a prince of
whom she had heard such admirable things ; the awfulness wherewith she
receiv'd him , and the sweetness of her words and behaviour while he
stay'd , gain'd a perfect conquest over his fierce heart ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,155.5

and made him feel , the victor cou'd be subdu'd . So that having made
his first compliments , and presented her an_hundred_and_fifty slaves in
fetters , he told her with his eyes , that he was not insensible of her
charms ; while <font> Imoinda <$$font> , who wish'd <P_156> for nothing
more than so glorious a conquest , was pleas'd to believe , she
understood that silent language of new-born love ; and , from that
moment , put on all her additions to beauty . BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.6

The prince return'd to court with quite another humour than before ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.7

and though he did not speak much of the fair <font> Imoinda <$$font> ,
he had the pleasure to hear all his followers speak of nothing but the
charms of that maid , insomuch that , even in the presence of the old
king , they were extolling her , and heightning , if {that_were}
possible , the beauties they had found in her : so that nothing else was
talk'd of , no other sound was heard in every corner where there were
whisperers , but <font> Imoinda ! Imoinda ! <$$font>
BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.8

'T@ @will be imagin'd <font> Oroonoko <$$font> stay'd not long before he
made his second visit ; nor , considering his quality , not much longer
before he told her , he ador'd her . BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.9

I have often heard him say , that he admir'd by what strange inspiration
he came to talk things so soft , and so passionate , who never knew love
, nor was us'd to the conversation of women ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.10

but <paren> to use his own words <$$paren> he said , most happily , some
new , and , till then , unknown power instructed his heart and tongue in
the language of love , and at the same time , in favour of him ,
inspir'd <font> Imoinda <$$font> with a sense of his passion .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.11

She was touch'd with what he said , BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.12

and return'd it all in such answers as went to his very heart , with a
pleasure unknown before . BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.13

Nor did he use those obligations ill , that love had done him ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.14

but turn'd all his happy moments to the best advantage ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.15

and as he knew no vice , his flame aim'd at nothing but honour , if such
a distinction may be made in love ; and especially in that country ,
where men take to themselves as many as they can maintain ; and where
the only crime and sin with woman , is , to turn her off , to abandon
her to want , shame and misery : BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.16

such ill morals are only practis'd in Christian countries , where they
prefer the bare name of religion ; and , without vertue or morality ,
think that sufficient . BEHN-1668-E3-H,156.17

But <font> Oroonoko <$$font> was none of those <P_157> professors ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.18

but as he had right notions of honour , so he made her such propositions
as were not only and barely such ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.19

but , contrary to the custom of his country , he made her vows , she
shou'd be the only woman he wou'd possess while he liv'd ; that no age
or wrinkles shou'd encline him to change ; for her soul wou'd be always
fine , and always young ; and he shou'd have an eternal idea in his mind
of the charms she now bore ; and shou'd look into his heart for that
idea , when he cou'd find it no longer in her face .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.20

After a_thousand assurances of his lasting flame , and her eternal
empire over him , she condescended to receive him for her husband ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.21

or rather , receiv'd him , as the greatest honour the gods cou'd do her
. BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.22

There is a certain ceremony in these cases to be observ'd , which I
forgot to ask how 't@ @was perform'd ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.23

but 't@ @was concluded on both sides , that in obedience to him , the
grandfather was to be first made acquainted with the design :
BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.24

For they pay a most absolute resignation to the monarch , especially
when he is a parent also . BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.25

On the other side , the old king , who had many wives , and many
concubines , wanted not court-flatterers to insinuate into his heart
a_thousand tender thoughts for this young beauty ; and who represented
her to his fancy , as the most charming he had ever possess'd in all the
long race of his numerous years . BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.26

At this character , his old heart , like an extinguish'd brand , most
apt to take fire , felt new sparks of love , BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.27

and began to kindle ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.28

and now grown to his second childhood , long'd with impatience to behold
this gay thing , with whom , alas ! he could but innocently play .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.29

But how he shou'd be confirm'd she was this wonder , before he us'd his
power to call her to court , <paren> where maidens never came , unless
for the king's private use <$$paren> he was next to consider ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.30

and while he was so doing , he had intelligence brought him , that
<font> Imoinda <$$font> was most certainly mistress to the Prince <font>
Oroonoko <$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.31

This gave him some chagreen : BEHN-1668-E3-H,157.32

however , it gave him also an opportunity , one day , when the prince
was a hunting , to wait <P_158> on a man of quality , as his slave and
attendant , who should go and make a present to <font> Imoinda <$$font>
, as from the prince ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.33

he should then , unknown , see this fair maid , and have an opportunity
to hear what message she wou'd return the prince for his present , and
from thence gather the state of her heart , and degree of her
inclination . BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.34

This was put in execution , BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.35

and the old monarch saw , BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.36

and burn'd : BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.37

He found her all he had heard , BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.38

and would not delay his happiness , BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.39

but found he should have some obstacle to overcome her heart ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.40

for she express'd her sense of the present the prince had sent her , in
terms so sweet , so soft and pretty , with an air of love and joy that
cou'd not be dissembled , insomuch that 't@ @was past doubt whether she
lov'd <font> Oroonoko <$$font> entirely . BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.41

This gave the old king some affliction ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.42

but he salv'd it with this , that the obedience the people pay their
king , was not at all inferiour to what they paid their gods ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.43

and what love wou'd not oblige <font> Imoinda <$$font> to do , duty
wou'd compel her to . BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.44

He was therefore no sooner got to his apartment , but he sent the royal
veil to <font> Imoinda <$$font> ; that is , the ceremony of invitation :
BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.45

He sends the lady he has a mind to honour with his bed , a veil , with
which she is cover'd , and secur'd for the king's use ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.46

and 't@ @is death to disobey ; besides , held a most impious
disobedience . BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.47

'T@ @is not to be imagin'd the surprize and grief that seiz'd the lovely
maid at this news and sight . BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.48

However , as delays in these cases are dangerous , and pleading worse
than treason ; trembling , and almost fainting , she was oblig'd to
suffer her self to be cover'd , and led away . BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.49

They brought her thus to court ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.50

and the king , who had caus'd a very rich bath to be prepar'd , was led
into it , where he sate under a canopy , in state , to receive this
long'd-for virgin ; whom he having commanded shou'd be brought to him ,
they <paren> after disrobing her <$$paren> led her to the bath , and
making fast the doors , left her to descend . BEHN-1668-E3-H,158.51

The king , without more courtship , bad her throw off her mantle , and
come to his <P_159> arms . BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.52

But <font> Imoinda <$$font> , all in tears , threw her self on the
marble , on the brink of the bath , BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.53

and besought him to hear her . BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.54

She told him , as she was a maid , how proud of the divine glory she
should have been , of having it in her power to oblige her king ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.55

but as by the laws he could not , and from his royal goodness would not
take from any man his wedded wife ; so she believ'd she shou'd be the
occasion of making him commit a great sin , if she did not reveal her
state and condition ; and tell him , she was another's , and cou'd not
be so happy to be his . BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.56

The king , enrag'd at this delay , hastily demanded the name of the bold
man , that had married a woman of her degree , without his consent .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.57

<font> Imoinda <$$font> , seeing his eyes fierce , and his hands tremble
, <paren> whether with age or anger , I know not , but she fancy'd the
last <$$paren> almost repented she had said so much ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.58

for now she fear'd the storm wou'd fall on the prince ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.59

she therefore said a_thousand things to appease the raging of his flame
, and to prepare him to hear who it was with calmness :
BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.60

but before she spoke , he imagin'd who she meant , BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.61

but wou'd not seem to do so , BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.62

but commanded her to lay aside her mantle , and suffer her self to
receive his caresses , BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.63

or , by his gods he swore , that happy man whom she was going to name
shou'd die , though it were even <font> Oroonoko <$$font> himself .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.64

<font> Therefore <$$font> <paren> said he <$$paren> <font> deny this
marriage , BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.65

and swear thy self a maid . BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.66

That <$$font> <paren> reply'd <font> Imoinda <$$font> <$$paren> <font>
by all our powers I do ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.67

for I am not yet known to my husband . BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.68

'T@ @is enough <$$font> <paren> said the King ; <$$paren>
BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.69

<font> 't@ @is enough both to satisfy my conscience , and my heart .
<$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.70

And rising from his seat , he went BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.71

and led her into the bath ; it being in vain for her to resist .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.72

In this time , the prince , who was return'd from hunting , went to
visit his <font> Imoinda <$$font> , BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.73

but found her gone ; and not only so , BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.74

but heard she had receiv'd the royal veil . BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.75

This rais'd him to a storm ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.76

and in his madness , they had much ado to save him from laying violent
hands on himself . BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.77

Force first prevail'd , and then reason : BEHN-1668-E3-H,159.78

They urg'd all to him , that might oppose his <P_160> rage ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.79

but nothing weigh'd so greatly with him as the king's old age ,
uncapable of injuring him with <font> Imoinda <$$font> .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.80

He wou'd give way to that hope , because it pleas'd him most , and
flatter'd best his heart . BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.81

Yet this serv'd not altogether to make him cease his different passions
, which sometimes rag'd within him , and softned into showers .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.82

'T@ @was not enough to appease him , to tell him , his grandfather was
old , and cou'd not that way injure him , while he retain'd that awful
duty which the young men are us'd there to pay to their grave relations
. BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.83

He cou'd not be convinc'd he had no cause to sigh and mourn for the loss
of a mistress , he cou'd not with all his strength and courage retrieve
. BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.84

And he wou'd often cry , <font> Oh , my friends ! BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.85

were she in wall'd cities , or confin'd from me in fortifications of the
greatest strength ; did inchantments or monsters detain her from me ; I
wou'd venture through any hazard to free her : BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.86

But here , in the arms of a feeble old man , my youth , my violent love
, my trade in arms , and all my vast desire of glory , avail me nothing
<$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.87

Imoinda <font> is as irrecoverably lost to me , as if she were snatch'd
by the cold arms of death : BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.88

Oh ! she is never to be retriev'd . BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.89

If I wou'd wait tedious years , till fate shou'd bow the old king to his
grave , even that wou'd not leave me <$$font> Imoinda <font> free ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.90

but still that custom that makes it so vile a crime for a son to marry
his father's wives or mistresses , wou'd hinder my happiness ; unless I
wou'd either ignobly set an ill precedent to my successors , or abandon
my country , and fly with her to some unknown world who never heard our
story . <$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.91

But it was objected to him , That his case was not the same ; for <font>
Imoinda <$$font> being his lawful wife by solemn contract , 't@ @was he
was the injur'd man , and might , if he so pleas'd , take <font> Imoinda
<$$font> back , the breach of the law being on his grandfather's side ;
and that if he cou'd circumvent him , and redeem her from the otan ,
which is the Palace of the King's Women , a sort of seraglio , it was
both just and lawful for him so to do . BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.92

This reasoning had some force upon him , BEHN-1668-E3-H,160.93

and he <P_161> shou'd have been entirely comforted , but for the thought
that she was possess'd by his grandfather . BEHN-1668-E3-H,161.94

However , he lov'd so well , that he was resolv'd to believe what most
favour'd his hope , and to endeavour to learn from <font> Imoinda's
<$$font> own mouth , what only she cou'd satisfy him in , whether she
was robb'd of that blessing which was only due to his faith and love .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,161.95

But as it was very hard to get a sight of the women , <paren> for no men
ever enter'd into the otan , but when the king went to entertain himself
with some one of his wives or mistresses ; and 't@ @was death , at any
other time , for any other to go in <$$paren> so he knew not how to
contrive to get a sight of her . BEHN-1668-E3-H,161.96

While <font> Oroonoko <$$font> felt all the agonies of love , and
suffer'd under a torment the most painful in the world , the old king
was not exempted from his share of affliction . BEHN-1668-E3-H,161.97

He was troubled , BEHN-1668-E3-H,161.98

for having been forc'd , by an irresistible passion , to rob his son of
a treasure , he knew , cou'd not but be extremely dear to him ; since
she was the most beautiful that ever had been seen , and had besides ,
all the sweetness and innocence of youth and modesty , with a charm of
wit surpassing all . BEHN-1668-E3-H,161.99

He found , that however she was forc'd to expose her lovely person to
his wither'd arms , she cou'd only sigh and weep there , and think of
<font> Oroonoko <$$font> ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,161.100

and oftentimes cou'd not forbear speaking of him , tho her life were ,
by custom , forfeited by owning her passion . BEHN-1668-E3-H,161.101

But she spoke not of a lover only , but of a prince dear to him to whom
she spoke ; and of the praises of a man , who , till now , fill'd the
old man's soul with joy at every recital of his bravery , or even his
name . BEHN-1668-E3-H,161.102

And 't@ @was this dotage on our young hero , that gave <font> Imoinda
<$$font> a_thousand privileges to speak of him , without offending ; and
this condescension in the old king , that made her take the satisfaction
of speaking of him so very often . BEHN-1668-E3-H,161.103

Besides , he many times enquir'd how the prince bore himself :
BEHN-1668-E3-H,161.104

And those of whom he ask'd , being entirely slaves to the merits and
vertues of the prince , still answer'd what they thought conduc'd best
to his <P_162> service ; which was , to make the old king fancy that the
prince had no more interest in <font> Imoinda <$$font> , and had
resign'd her willingly to the pleasure of the king ; that he diverted
himself with his mathematicians , his fortifications , his officers and
his hunting . BEHN-1668-E3-H,162.105

This pleas'd the old lover , who fail'd not to report these things again
to <font> Imoinda <$$font> , that she might , by the example of her
young lover , withdraw her heart , and rest better contented in his arms
. BEHN-1668-E3-H,162.106

But , however she was forc'd to receive this unwelcome news , in all
appearance , with unconcern and content ; her heart was bursting within
, BEHN-1668-E3-H,162.107

and she was only happy when she cou'd get alone , to vent her griefs and
moans with sighs and tears . BEHN-1668-E3-H,162.108

<P_186>

For the future therefore I must call <font> Oroonoko Caesar <$$font> ,
since by that name only he was known in our western world ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,186.110

and by that name he was received on shore at <font> Parham House
<$$font> , where he was destin'd a slave . BEHN-1668-E3-H,186.111

But if the king himself <paren> God bless him <$$paren> had come ashore
, there cou'd not have been greater expectation by all the whole
plantation , and those neighbouring ones , than was on ours at that time
; BEHN-1668-E3-H,186.112

and he was received more like a governour than a slave :
BEHN-1668-E3-H,186.113

notwithstanding , as the custom was , they assigned him his portion of
land , his house and his business up in the plantation .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,186.114

But as it was more for form , than any design to put him to his task ,
he endured no more of the slave but the name , BEHN-1668-E3-H,186.115

and remain'd some days in the house , receiving all visits that were
made him , without stirring towards that part of the plantation where
the negroes were . BEHN-1668-E3-H,186.116

At last , he wou'd needs go view his land , his house , and the business
assign'd him . BEHN-1668-E3-H,186.117

But he no sooner came <P_187> to the houses of the slaves , which are
like a little town by it self , the negroes all having left work , but
they all came forth to behold him , BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.118

and found he was that prince who had , at several times , sold most of
'em to these parts ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.119

and from a veneration they pay to great men , especially if they know
'em , and from the surprize and awe they had at the sight of him , they
all cast themselves at his feet , crying out , in their language ,
<font> Live , O King ! BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.120

Long live , O King ! <$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.121

and kissing his feet , paid him even divine homage .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.122

Several <font> English <$$font> gentlemen were with him ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.123

and what Mr. <font> Trefry <$$font> had told 'em was here confirm'd ;
of which he himself before had no other witness than <font> Caesar
<$$font> himself : BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.124

But he was infinitely glad to find his grandeur confirmed by the
adoration of all the slaves . BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.125

<font> Caesar <$$font> troubled with their over-joy , and over-ceremony
, besought 'em to rise , and to receive him as their fellow-slave ;
assuring them he was no better . At which they set up with one accord a
most terrible and hideous mourning and condoling , which he and the
<font> English <$$font> had much ado to appease : BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.126

but at last they prevailed with 'em , BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.127

and they prepared all their barbarous musick , BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.128

and every one kill'd and dress'd something of his own stock
BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.129

<paren> for every family has their land apart , on which , at their
leisure-times , they breed all eatable things <$$paren>
BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.130

and clubbing it together , made a most magnificent supper , inviting
their grandee captain , their prince , to honour it with his precence ;
which he did , and several <font> English <$$font> with him , where they
all waited on him , some playing , others dancing before him all the
time , according to the manners of their several nations , and with
unweary'd industry endeavouring to please and delight him .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.131

While they sat at meat , Mr. <font> Trefry <$$font> told <font> Caesar
<$$font> , that most of these young slaves were undone in love with a
fine she-slave , whom they had had about six months on their land ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,187.132

the prince , who never heard the name of love without a sigh , nor any
mention of it without the curiosity of examining further into that tale
, which <P_188> of all discourses was most agreeable to him , asked ,
how they came to be so unhappy , as to be all undone for one fair slave
? BEHN-1668-E3-H,188.133

<font> Trefry <$$font> , who was naturally amorous , and lov'd to talk
of love as well as any body , proceeded to tell him , they had the most
charming black that ever was beheld on their plantation , about fifteen
or sixteen years old , as he guess'd ; that for his part he had done
nothing but sigh for her ever since she came ; and that all the white
beauties he had seen , never charm'd him so absolutely as this fine
creature had done ; and that no man , of any nation , ever beheld her
that did not fall in love with her ; and that she had all the slaves
perpetually at her feet ; and the whole country resounded with the fame
of <font> Clemene <$$font> , BEHN-1668-E3-H,188.134

for so <paren> said he <$$paren> we have christen'd her :
BEHN-1668-E3-H,188.135

but she denies us all with such a noble disdain , that 't@ @is a miracle
to see , that she who can give such eternal desires , should her self be
all ice and all unconcern . BEHN-1668-E3-H,188.136

She is adorn'd with the most graceful modesty that ever beautify'd youth
; the softest sigher - that , if she were capable of love , one would
swear she languished for some absent happy man ; and so retired , as if
she fear'd a rape even from the god of day , or that the breezes wou'd
steal kisses from her delicate mouth . BEHN-1668-E3-H,188.137

Her task of work , some sighing lover every day makes it his petition to
perform for her ; which she accepts blushing , and with reluctancy , for
fear he will ask her a look for a recompence , which he dares not
presume to hope ; so great an awe she strikes into the hearts of her
admirers . BEHN-1668-E3-H,188.138

<font> I do not wonder <$$font> <paren> reply'd the prince <$$paren>
<font> that <$$font> Clemene <font> should refuse slaves , being , as
you say , so beautiful ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,188.139

but wonder how she escapes those that can entertain her as you can do :
or why , being your slave , you do not oblige her to yield ?
BEHN-1668-E3-H,188.140

I confess <$$font> <paren> said <font> Trefry <$$font> <$$paren> <font>
when I have , against her will , entertained her with love so long , as
to be transported with my passion even above decency , I have been ready
to make use of those advantages of strength and force nature has given
me : BEHN-1668-E3-H,188.141

But oh ! she disarms me with that modesty and weeping , so tender and
so moving , that <P_189> I retire , and thank my stars she overcame me .
<$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.142

The company laugh'd at his civility to a slave , BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.143

and <font> Caesar <$$font> only applauded the nobleness of his passion
and nature , since that slave might be noble , or , what was better ,
have true notions of honour and vertue in her . BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.144

Thus passed they this night , after having received from the slaves all
imaginable respect and obedience . BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.145

The next day , <font> Trefry <$$font> ask'd <font> Caesar <$$font> to
walk when the heat was allay'd , BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.146

and designedly carry'd him by the cottage of the fair slave ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.147

and told him she whom he spoke of last night lived there retir'd :
BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.148

<font> But <$$font> <paren> says he <$$paren> <font> I would not wish
you to approach ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.149

for I am sure you will be in love as soon as you behold her . <$$font>
BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.150

<font> Caesar <$$font> assured him , he was proof against all the charms
of that sex ; and that if he imagined his heart could be so perfidious
to love again , after <font> Imoinda <$$font> , he believed he should
tear it from his bosom . BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.151

They had no sooner spoke , but a little shock-dog , that <font> Clemene
<$$font> had presented her , which she took great delight in , ran out ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.152

and she , not knowing any body was there , ran to get it in again ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.153

and bolted out on those who were just speaking of her : when seeing them
, she would have run in again , BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.154

but <font> Trefry <$$font> caught her by the hand ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.155

and cry'd , Clemene , <font> however you fly a lover , you ought to pay
some respect to this stranger <$$font> , <paren> pointing to <font>
Caesar <$$font> . <$$paren> BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.156

But she , as if she had resolved never to raise her eyes to the face of
a man again , bent 'em the more to the earth , when he spoke ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.157

and gave the prince the leisure to look the more at her .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.158

There needed no long gazing , or consideration , to examine who this
fair creature was ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.159

he soon saw <font> Imoinda <$$font> all over her ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.160

in a minute he saw her face , her shape , her air , her modesty ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.161

and all that call'd forth his soul with joy at his eyes ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.162

and left his body destitute of almost life : BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.163

it stood without motion , BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.164

and for a minute knew not that it had a being ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.165

and , I believe , he had never come to himself , so oppress'd he was
with over-joy , if he had not met with this allay , that he perceived
<font> Imoinda <$$font> fall dead in the hands of <font> Trefry <$$font>
. BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.166

This awaken'd him , BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.167

and he ran to her aid , BEHN-1668-E3-H,189.168

and caught her in his arms , <P_190> where by degrees she came to her
self ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.169

and 't@ @is needless to tell with what transports , what exstasies of
joy , they both awhile beheld each other , without speaking ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.170

then snatched each other to their arms ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.171

then gaze again , as if they still doubted whether they possess'd the
blessing they grasped : BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.172

but when they recover'd their speech , 't@ @is not to be imagined what
tender things they express'd to each other ; wondring what strange fate
had brought them again together . BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.173

They soon inform'd each other of their fortunes , BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.174

and equally bewail'd their fate ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.175

but at the same time they mutually protested , that even fetters and
slavery were soft and easy , and would be supported with joy and
pleasure , while they cou'd be so happy to possess each other , and to
be able to make good their vows . BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.176

<font> Caesar <$$font> swore he disdained the empire of the world ,
while he could behold his <font> Imoinda <$$font> ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.177

and she despised grandeur and pomp , those vanities of her sex , when
she could gaze on <font> Oroonoko <$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.178

He ador'd the very cottage where she resided , BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.179

and said , That little inch of the world would give him more happiness
than all the universe cou'd do ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.180

and she vow'd , it was a palace , while adorned with the presence of
<font> Oroonoko <$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.181

<font> Trefry <$$font> was infinitely pleased with this novel ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.182

and found this <font> Clemene <$$font> was the fair mistress of whom
<font> Caesar <$$font> had before spoke ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.183

and was not a little satisfy'd , that heaven was so kind to the prince
as to sweeten his misfortunes by so lucky an accident ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.184

and leaving the lovers to themselves , was impatient to come down to
<font> Parham House <$$font> <paren> which was on the same plantation
<$$paren> to give me an account of what had hapned .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.185

I was as impatient to make these lovers a visit , having already made a
friendship with <font> Caesar <$$font> , BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.186

and from his own mouth learned what I have related ; which was confirmed
by his <font> Frenchman <$$font> , who was set on shore to seek his
fortune , and of whom they cou'd not make a slave , because a Christian
; BEHN-1668-E3-H,190.187

and he came daily to <font> Parham Hill <$$font> to see and pay his
respects to his pupil prince . So that concerning and interesting my
self in all that related to <P_191> <font> Caesar <$$font> , whom I had
assured of liberty as soon as the governour arrived , I hasted presently
to the place where these lovers were , BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.188

and was infinitely glad to find this beautiful young slave <paren> who
had already gain'd all our esteems , for her modesty and her
extraordinary prettiness <$$paren> to be the same I had heard <font>
Caesar <$$font> speak so much of . BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.189

One may imagine then we paid her a treble respect ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.190

and tho from her being carved in fine flowers and birds all over her
body , we took her to be of quality before , yet when we knew <font>
Clemene <$$font> was <font> Imoinda <$$font> , we could not enough
admire her . BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.191

I had forgot to tell you , that those who are nobly born of that country
, are so delicately cut and raised all over the fore-part of the trunk
of their bodies that it looks as if it were japan'd , the works being
raised like high point round the edges of the flowers .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.192

Some are only carved with a little flower , or bird , at the sides of
the temples , as was <font> Caesar <$$font> ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.193

and those who are so carved over the body , resemble our antient <font>
Picts <$$font> that are figur'd in the chronicles ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.194

but these carvings are more delicate . BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.195

From that happy day <font> Caesar <$$font> took <font> Clemene <$$font>
for his wife , to the general joy of all people ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.196

and there was as much magnificence as the country would afford at the
celebration of this wedding : BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.197

and in a very short time after she conceived with child , which made
<font> Caesar <$$font> even adore her , knowing he was the last of his
great race . BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.198

This new accident made him more impatient of liberty ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.199

and he was every day treating with <font> Trefry <$$font> for his and
<font> Clemene's <$$font> liberty BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.200

and offer'd either gold , or a vast quantity of slaves , which should be
paid before they let him go , provided he could have any security that
he should go when his ransom was paid . BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.201

They fed him from day to day with promises , BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.202

and delay'd him till the Lord-Governour should come ; so that he began
to suspect them of falshood , and that they would delay him till the
time of his wife's delivery and make a slave of that too :
BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.203

for all the breed is theirs to whom the parents belong .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,191.204

This thought made him very <P_192> uneasy , BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.205

and his sullenness gave them some jealousies of him ; so that I was
obliged , by some persons who fear'd a mutiny <paren> which is very
fatal sometimes in those colonies that abound so with slaves , that they
exceed the whites in vast numbers <$$paren> to discourse with <font>
Caesar <$$font> , and to give him all the satisfaction I possibly could
: BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.206

They knew he and <font> Clemene <$$font> were scarce an hour in a day
from my lodgings ; that they eat with me , and that I oblig'd 'em in all
things I was capable of . BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.207

I entertained them with the loves of the <font> Romans <$$font> , and
great men , which charmed him to my company ; and her , with teaching
her all the pretty works that I was mistress of , and telling her
stories of nuns , and endeavouring to bring her to the knowledg of the
true God : BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.208

But of all discourses , <font> Caesar <$$font> liked that the worst ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.209

and would never be reconciled to our notions of the Trinity , of which
he ever made a jest ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.210

it was a riddle he said would turn his brain to conceive ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.211

and one cou'd not make him understand what faith was .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.212

However , these conversations fail'd not altogether so well to divert
him , that he liked the company of us women much above men ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.213

for he could not drink , BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.214

and he is but an ill companion in that country that can@ @not . So that
obliging him to love us very well , we had all the liberty of speech
with him , especially my self , whom he call'd his great Mistress ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.215

and indeed my word would go a great way with him .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.216

For these reasons I had opportunity to take notice to him , that he was
not well pleased of late , as he used to be ; was more retired and
thoughtful ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.217

and told him , I took it ill he shou'd suspect we wou'd break our words
with him , and not permit both him and <font> Clemene <$$font> to return
to his own kingdom , which was not so long a_way ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.218

but when he was once on his voyage he wou'd quickly arrive there .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.219

He made me some answers that shew'd a doubt in him , which made me ask ,
what advantage it would be to doubt ? BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.220

It would but give us a fear of him , and possibly compel us to treat him
so as I should be very loth to behold : that is , it might occasion his
confinement . BEHN-1668-E3-H,192.221

Perhaps <P_193> this was not so luckily spoke of me ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.222

for I perceiv'd he resented that word , which I strove to soften again
in vain : BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.223

However , he assur'd me , that whatsoever resolutions he should take ,
he would act nothing upon the white people ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.224

and as for my self , and those upon that plantation where he was , he
would sooner forfeit his eternal liberty , and life it self , than lift
his hand against his greatest enemy on that place .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.225

He besought me to suffer no fears upon his account ,
BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.226

for he could do nothing that honour should not dictate ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.227

but he accus'd himself for having suffer'd slavery so long :
BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.228

yet he charg'd that weakness on love alone , who was capable of making
him neglect even glory it self ; and , for which , now he reproaches
himself every moment of the day . BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.229

Much more to this effect he spoke , with an air impatient enough to make
me know he would not be long in bondage ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.230

and though he suffer'd only the name of a slave , and had nothing of the
toil and labour of one , yet that was sufficient to render him uneasy ;
BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.231

and he had been too long idle , who us'd to be always in action , and in
arms . BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.232

He had a spirit all rough and fierce , and that could not be tam'd to
lazy rest ; BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.233

and though all endeavours were us'd to exercise himself in such actions
and sports as this world afforded , as running , wrestling , pitching
the bar , hunting and fishing , chasing and killing tygers of a
monstrous size , which this continent affords in abundance ; and
wonderful snakes , such as <font> Alexander <$$font> is reported to have
encounter'd at the river of <font> Amazons <$$font> , and which <font>
Caesar <$$font> took great delight to overcome ; yet these were not
actions great enough for his large soul , which was still panting after
more renown'd actions . BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.234

Before I parted that day with him , I got , with much-@ @ado , a promise
from him to rest yet a little longer with patience , and wait the coming
of the Lord Governour , who was every day expected on our shore :
BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.235

he assur'd me he would , BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.236

and this promise he desired me to know was given perfectly in
complaisance to me , in whom he had an intire confidence .
BEHN-1668-E3-H,193.237

