<BEGIN_blundev-1597-e2-h>

<P_48R>

<heading>

The Description and vse of the <font> Tables of Sines <$$font> .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48R.4

<$$heading>

Because there is no proportion , comparison , or likenes betwixt a right
line and a crooked , the auntient Philosophers , as <font> Ptolomey
<$$font> and divers other , were much troubled in seeking to know the
measures of a Circle or of any portion thereof by his Diameter , and by
knowing the Diameter to finde out the length of any Chorde in a circle ,
which is alwaies lesser then the Diameter it selfe ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48R.6

and finding that the more parts whereinto the Diameter was diuided , the
nearer they approched to the truth : Some of them therefore , as <font>
Ptolomey <$$font> , diuided the Diameter of a circle into a_120. parts
, and the Semidiameter into 60. parts , and euery such part into 60@ @'
{SIC:6'0.} and euery minute in 60. seconds &c. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48R.7

And in like manner did <font> Arzahel <$$font> , an auntient Arabian ,
who diuided the Diameter into 300. partes and the Semidiameter into
150. and euery of those parts into 6 ' 0. and so forth as before ,
according to which computation they made their Tables :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48R.8

but because the working by those Tables was very tedious and troublesome
, by reason that it was needfull continually to vse the art of numbring
by Astronomicall fractions : therefore <font> Georgius Purbachius
<$$font> , and <font> Regio Montanus <$$font> his Scholer to auoide that
trouble of calculating by Astronomicall fractions , diuided the Diameter
of a Circle into a farre greater number of parts ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48R.9

and made such tables as are vsed at this present , the description and
vse whereof both hereafter follow , first of those that are set downe by
<font> Monte Regio <$$font> in Folio , and then of those that were
lately Corrected and made perfect by <font> Clauius <$$font> the Jesuite
which are Printed in quarto . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48R.10

<P_48V>

And because that the way to find out the proportion which any chord hath
to the whole Diameter , was very hard , therefore the said <font>
Purbachius <$$font> and <font> Monte Regio <$$font> hauing direction
from certaine propositions of <font> Euclyd <$$font> as from the 47.
proposition of his first booke , and from the third proposition of his
third booke , and also from the 15. proposition of his fift booke ,
they made choise of the halfe chord and Semidiameter of the Circle ,
calling the halfe chord , Sinum rectum , and the Semediameter Sinum
totum . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.12

And because that the proportion of any circumference to his diameter
neuer changeth , how great or how little so euer the Circle be : after
that they had calculated for one Circle , they made such tables as might
serue for all Circles , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.13

and though these Tables of sines doe suffice to worke thereby all manner
of conclusions , as well of Astronomie , as of Geometrie , yet for more
ease , our moderne Geometricians haue of late inuented two other right
lines belonging to a Circle called lines Tangent , and lines Secant ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.14

and haue made like tables for them that were made for sines ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.15

and both tables , that is to say , as well of the sines , as of the
lines Tangent and Secant , haue one selfe manner of working thereby , as
shall plainely appeare hereafter when wee come to describe the same .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.16

But first we will beginne with the tables of sines , and plainely define
euery terme or vocable of Art , belonging thereunto :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.17

The termes are these here following : <font> An arch , a Chord <$$font>
, Sinus rectus Sinus versus , Quadrans , Complementum , <font> and
<$$font> sinus Complementi . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.18

<heading>

The definitions of the foresaid tearmes . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.20

<$$heading>

An <font> Arch <$$font> is any part or portion of the circumference of a
circle {SIC:cirle} , which in this practise doth not commonly extend
beyond 180. degrees which is one halfe of the circumference of any
Circle how great or small so euer it be , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.22

for euery Circle containeth 360. degrees . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.23

A <font> Chorde <$$font> is a right line drawne from one end of the
<font> Arch <$$font> to the other end thereof , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.24

and note that all chordes are alwaies lesser then the Diameter it selfe
, BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.25

for that is the greatest Chorde in anye Circle .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,48V.26

Sinus rectus is the one halfe of a <font> Chord <$$font> or string of
any Arke <P_49R> which is double to the Arke that is giuen or supposed ,
and falleth with right Angles vppon that Semidiameter which diuideth the
double Arke into two equall parts . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.27

Sinus versus that is to say turned the contrary way , is a right line ,
and that part of the Semidiameter , which is intercepted betwixt the
beginning of the giuen Arke and the right Sine of the same Arke ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.28

and this is also called in Latine Sagitta , in English a Shaft or Arrowe
, BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.29

for the Demonstratiue figure thereof hereafter following , is not vnlike
to the string of a bowe ready bent hauing a Shaft in the midst thereof .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.30

Quadrans is the fourth part of a Circle containing 90. degrees .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.31

Complementum arcus , is that portion of the Circle , which sheweth how
much the giuen Arke is lesser then the Quadrant , if the giuen Arke doe
containe fewer degrees then the Quadrant , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.32

but if it containe more degrees then the Quadrant , then the difference
betwixt the quarter of the Circle and the said arch , is the complement
of the said giuen Arke . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.33

Sinus complementi , is the right Sine of that Arch which is the
complement of the giuen Arke . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.34

Sinus totus , is the Semidiameter of the Circle ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.35

and is the greatest Sine that may be in the Quadrant of a Circle , which
according to the first tables of <font> Monte Regio <$$font> containeth
6$$000$$000. and according to the last tables 10$$000$$000. parts ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.36

for the more parts that the totall Sine hath , the more true and exact
shall your worke bee , notwithstanding sometime it shall suffice to
attribute unto the totall Sine but 60$$000. parts , which numbers
<font> Appian <$$font> obserueth in teaching the way to finde out the
distance of two places differing both in Longitude and Latitude by the
Tables of Sines , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.37

and some doe make the totall Sine to containe 100$$000. partes , as
<font> Wittikindus <$$font> in his treatise of Dials ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.38

and diuers other doe the like . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.39

Also <font> Clauius <$$font> himselfe saith that in the tables set downe
by him in quarto , you may sometime make the totall Sine to be but
100$$000 , so as you cut off the two last figures on the right hand in
euery Sine , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.40

but you shall better understand euerye thing here aboue mentioned , by
the figure Demonstratiue heere following . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49R.41

<P_49V>

<heading>

The figure Demonstratiue . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49V.44

<$$heading>

In this figure {COM:figure_omitted} you see first a whole Circle drawne
upon the Centre <font> E. <$$font> and marked with the letters <font>
A. B. C D. <$$font> which Circle by two crosse Diameters marked with
the letters <font> A. C. <$$font> and <font> B. D. <$$font> &
passing both through the Centre <font> E. <$$font> is diuided into
fower Quadrantes or quarters , the upper Quadrante whereof on the left
hand is marked with the letters <font> A. B. E. <$$font> in which
Quadrant , the right perpendicular line marked with the letters <font>
F. H. <$$font> betokeneth the right Sine of the giuen Arke <font> A.
F. <$$font> which right Sine is the one halfe of the chord or string
<font> F. G. <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49V.46

and the giuen Arke <font> A. F. <$$font> is the one halfe of the
double Arke or bowe <font> G. A. F. <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49V.47

and <font> A. H. <$$font> is the Shaft called in Latine Sinus versus :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49V.48

Againe the letters <font> F. B. <$$font> doe shew the complement which
together with the giuen Arke <font> A. F. <$$font> doe make the whole
Quadrant <font> A. F. B. <$$font> which is diuided into 9. spaces ,
euery space containing 10. degrees whereby you may plainely perceiue
that in this demonstration , the giuen Arke <font> A. F. <$$font> is
50. degrees , and the complement <font> F. B. <$$font> is 40.
degrees , both which being added together doe make up the whole Quadrant
of 90. degrees , marked with the letters <font> A. F. B. <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49V.49

Now Sinus complementi is the crosse line marked with the letters <font>
F. K. <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49V.50

the totall Sine which is the whole Semidiameter and greatest right Sine
, is marked with the letters <font> B. E. <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,49V.51

But because it is not enough to know the signification of the things
aboue specified to vse the foresaid Tables when neede is , vnlesse you
know <P_50R> also how to find out those things in the said tables , I
thinke it good therefore to shew you the order of the said tables by
describing the same as followeth . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.52

You haue then to vnderstand that the tables of <font> Monte Regio
<$$font> printed in Folio , are contained in 18. Pages , and euery Page
containeth eleauen partitions , called collums , whereof the first on
the left hand containeth 60. minutes , which are to be counted from
head to foote , as they stand in order one right under another in
seuerall places , proceeding from 1. to 60. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.53

The second collum containeth Sines . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.54

The third containeth onely a portion or part of one second ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.55

and from thence foorth proceeding towardes the right hand all the other
collums doe containe in like manner Sines and the portion of one second
. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.56

And right ouer the head of euery Sine <paren> the first collum of Sines
onely excepted , hauing nothing but a Cypher ouer his head <$$paren> are
set downe the degrees of the whole Quadrant called arches , in such
order as from the first Page to the last , there are in all 89. degrees
, or arches , as by perusing the said tables you may plainely see .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.57

Now to find out in these tables the things aboue mentioned , you must
doe as followeth . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.58

First to find out the right Sine of any giuen Arke , you must seeke out
the number of the said Arke in the front of the tables ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.59

and if the giuen Arke hath no minutes ioyned thereunto , then the first
number of Sines right under the said Arke , is the right Sine thereof .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.60

But if it hath any minutes ioyned thereunto , then you must seeke out in
that Page , where you found the giuen Arke , the number of the minutes
in the first collum of the said Page , on the left hand ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.61

and right against those minutes on the right hand , in the square Angle
right under the said arch , you shall find the right Sine .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.62

As for example , you would find out the right Sine of a giuen Arke
containing 8. degrees , and 2 ' 0. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.63

heere hauing found out in the front of the second Page the figure of 8.
standing right ouer the eight collum seeke in the first collum on the
left hand of the said Page , for 20. minutes , and right against the
20. minutes you shal find on the right hand in the common Angle or
square 869593. which is the right Sine of the foresaid giuen Arke , so
as you make 6$$000$$000. to be the totall Sine :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.64

but if you make 60$$000. the totall Sine , then you must alwaies reiect
the two last figures standing on the right hand of the said right sine ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.65

& the rest of the figures shall be the right Sine .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50R.66

<P_50V>

Now to find out the complement , there is nothing to be done , but onely
to subtract the giuen Arke out of the whole Quadrant which is 90.
degrees , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.68

and the remainder shall be the complement : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.69

as in the former example by subtracting 8. degrees , 2 ' 0. out of 90
degrees , you shal find that there remaineth 81. degrees , 4 ' 0.
which is the complement of that arch . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.70

Againe to find out the Sine of the complement you must doe thus ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.71

seeke the complement in the front of the tables of Sines , euen as you
doe to find out any giuen arke : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.72

as in the former example , the complement being 81. degrees 4 ' 0. you
must seeke 81. in the front of the 17. Page of the first tables ,
which being found , seeke out also the 4 ' 0. in the first collum of
the said Page on the left hand , and right against those 4 ' 0. in the
common Angle right under the Arke. 81 you shall finde 5$$936$$649.
which number is the right Sine of the foresaid complement , so as you
make 6$$000$$000. to be the totall Sine , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.73

for if 60$$000. be the totall Sine , then you must reiect <paren> as I
said before <$$paren> the two last figures on the right hand ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.74

and the number remaining shall bee the right Sine of the foresaid
complement , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.75

and therefore in working by these tables , you must alwaies remember
what number you make the totall Sine to be . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.76

Sinus versus commeth seldome in vse , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.77

notwithstanding if you would know how to find it out , you neede to do
no more but subtract Sinum complementi of the giuen Arke , out of the
totall Sine , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.78

and the remainder shall bee Sinus versus , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.79

as in the former example your Sinus complementi was 5$$936$$649. which
being subtracted out of the totall Sine 6$$000$$000. there remaineth
63$$351. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.80

and that number is Sinus versus : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.81

for if you adde this remainder to the number which you subtracted , it
will make up the totall Sine 6$$000$$000. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.82

But there is one thing more necessarie to be knowne then this , because
it commeth oftner in vse , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.83

and that is upon some diuision made how to find out the Arke of any
quotient , which is to be done thus : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.84

Enter with the quotient into the body of the tables ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.85

and leaue not seeking amongst the squares of the Sines , vntill you haue
found out the iust number of the quotient <paren> if it be there
<$$paren> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.86

if not , you must take the number of that Sine which is in value most
nigh vnto it , whether it bee a little more or lesse , it maketh no
matter , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,50V.87

and hauing found that number , looke in the front of that collum , and
you shall find the Arke of your quotient <P_51R> , standing right ouer
the head of that collum , and also the mynutes thereof in the first
collum of the said Page on the left hand . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.88

As for example , hauing diuided one number by another , I finde the
quotient to be 469$$012. whereof I would know the arch ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.89

now in seeking this quotient amongst the Sines , I can@ @not finde that
iust number , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.90

but I find in the first Page , and in the tenth collum 469$$015. which
is the nighest number vnto it that I can see . In the front of which
collum I find the Arke to be 4. degrees , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.91

and directly against that Sine on the left hand , I find 2 ' 9.
belonging to that arch , whereof that quotient is the <font> Sinus
<$$font> , so as I gather hereof that the arch of the foresaid quotient
is 4. degrees , 2 ' 9. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.92

But you haue to note by the way that the number of your quotient must
neuer be much lesse then 1745. for otherwise it is not to bee found in
these tables , unlesse you make the totall Sine to bee but 60$$000.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.93

for then by reiecting the last two figures on the right hand , as I haue
said before , the first right Sine of these tables shal be no more but
17. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.94

and by that account a very small quotient may be found in these tables .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.95

And whatsoeuer hath beene said here touching the order that is to be
obserued in the first tables of <font> Monte Regio <$$font> , whose
totall Sine is 6$$000$$000. the like in all points is to be obserued in
the last tables , whose totall Sine is 10$$000$$000.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.96

Thus much touching the order of the foresaid tables of <font> Monte
Regio <$$font> Printed in Folio : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.97

but for_as_much as those tables be not altogether truely Printed , and
for that they haue beene lately corrected , and made more perfect by
<font> Clauius <$$font> , who doth set downe the saide Tables in quarto
and not in folio , whereby they are the more portable , and the more
commodious , as well for that they are more truely Printed , as also for
that the complement of euery Arke is set downe in euery Page at the
foote of euery collum , so as you need to spend no time in subtracting
the Arke from 90. I thinke it good therefore to make a briefe
description of those Tables , and the rather for that I haue requested
the Printer to print the like here in quarto , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.98

and I doe worke all such conclusions as hereafter follow , by the said
tables , the totall Sine whereof is 10$$000$$000. according to the last
tables of <font> Monte Regio <$$font> . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.99

But for_so_much as some may haue already the tables of <font> Monte
Regio <$$font> Printed in Folio , not knowing perhaps the vse thereof ,
I will set downe two conclusions to bee wrought by those tables ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51R.100

and all the rest of the conclusions <P_51V> are to be wrought by these
tables which I haue here caused to be Printed in quarto like to those of
<font> Clauius <$$font> : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51V.101

and though the two conclusions next following , which are to shew the
vse of the foresaid tables , may be wrought by the tables of Sines in
what forme so euer they be truely Printed in Folio , or in quarto , yet
because I had appointed them to bee done by the Tables of <font> Monte
Regio <$$font> , Printed in folio before that euer I saw <font> Clauius
<$$font> his booke , I mind not now to alter them but to let them stand
still as they are . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,51V.102

<P_152R>

<heading>

Of the Horizon both right and oblique , making thereby three kinds of
Spheares , that is , the right , the Paralell , and the oblique Spheare
. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152R.105

Cap. 17 . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152R.106

<$$heading>

<heading>

What is the Horizon ? BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152R.109

<$$heading>

It is a great immooueable circle which deuideth the upper Hemispheare ,
which is as much to say , as the upper halfe of the world which we see ,
from the nether Hemispheare which wee see not ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152R.111

for standing in a plaine field , or rather upon some high mountaine void
of bushes and trees , and looking round about , you shall see your selfe
inuironed as it were with a circle , and to be in the very midst or
centre thereof , beneath or beyond which circle , your sight can@ @not
passe , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152R.112

and therfore this circle in Greeke is called <font> Horizon <$$font> ,
and in Latine Finitor , that is to say , that which determineth ,
limitteth or boundeth the sight , the Poles of which circle are imagined
to be two points in the firmament , whereof the one standeth right ouer
your heade , called in Arabick <font> Zenith <$$font> : and the other
directlie vnder your feete , called in the same tongue <font> Nadir
<$$font> , that is to say the pointe opposite ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152R.113

and from point to point you must imagine that there goeth a right line
passing through the centre of the worlde , and also <P_152V> through
your bodie both head and feet , which is called the Arletree of the
Horizon , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.114

and you haue to understand that of Horizons there be 2. kinds , that is
, right & oblique , making 3. kinds of Sphears , that is to say , the
right Spheare , the paralel Spheare , and the oblique Spheare .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.115

<heading>

When is the Horizon said to be right , and thereby to make a right
Spheare ? BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.117

<$$heading>

It may be said to be right two manner of waies ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.119

first , when the Horizon passeth through both the Poles of the world ,
cutting the Equinoctiall with right angles , in which Spheare they that
dwell haue their <font> Zenith <$$font> in the Equinoctiall , which
passeth right ouer their heads , to whom the daies and nights are
alwaies equal . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.120

Secondly , they are said to haue a right Horizon , & to dwell in a right
Spheare , to whom one of the Poles of the world is their <font> Zenith
<$$font> , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.121

and their Horizon is all one with the Equinoctiall , cutting the
Arletree of the world in the very midst with right angles ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.122

and because the Horizon & the Equinoctial are Paralels , this kind of
Spheare is called a paralel Spheare , in which Sphear they that dwel
haue 6. moneths day , and 6. moneths night , as you may easily
perceiue by placing the Spheare , so as one of the Poles may stand right
vp in the midst of the Horizon , by meanes wherof you shal see 6.
signes of the Zodiaque to be alwayes aboue the Horizon , and 6. signes
to be alwayes under the Horizon : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.123

Againe by placing the Spheare so as both the Poles may lie vppon the
Horizon , you shall see the shape of the first right Sphear , wherin the
Horizon passeth throgh both the Poles of the world , and the
Equinoctiall passeth through the Poles of the Horizon , which are the
two points called before the <font> Zenith <$$font> and <font> Nadir
<$$font> . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.124

<heading>

When is it said to bee an oblique Horizon , and thereby to make an
oblique Spheare ? BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.126

<$$heading>

When the Pole of the world is eleuated aboue the Horizon , bee it neuer
so little , so as the Horizon doe cut the Equinoctiall with oblique
angles , and looke how much the Pole of the world is eleuated aboue your
Horizon , so much is your <font> Zenith <$$font> distant from the
Equinoctiall , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.128

and the nigher that your Horizon approcheth to the Pole , the nigher
your <font> Zenith <$$font> approcheth to the Equinoctial .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,152V.129

Againe , looke how much the Equinoctiall is eleuated aboue your Horizon
, so much is your <font> Zenith <$$font> distant from the Pole , all
which {COM:see_info_file_regarding_missing_page_153}
<P_154R_misnumbered_as_151R> things this figure here following doth
plainely shew , whereby you may easily perceiue that the latitude ,
which is the distance of your <font> Zenith <$$font> from the
Equinoctiall , is alwaies equall to the altitude of the Pole , which is
the distance betwixt your Horizon & the Pole ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154R_misnumbered_as_151R.130

as for example , knowing the latitude of <font> Norwich <$$font> to be
52 , degrees lay the <font> Zenith <$$font> of this figure upon the 52.
degrees , reckoning from the Equinoctiall towards the pole Arctique on
your left hand , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154R_misnumbered_as_151R.131

and looke what distance is betwixt the saide <font> Zenith <$$font> and
the Equinoctiall , the selfe_same distance you shall find to be betwixt
the Horizon and the foresaid Pole on your right hand ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154R_misnumbered_as_151R.132

and you may doe the like upon the Spheare it selfe by raising the
moouable Meridian aboue the Horizon at that altitude , so as the 52.
degr. may be euen with the Horizon .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154R_misnumbered_as_151R.133

<font> A Figure shewing the latitude of any place to bee equall to the
eleuation of the Pole . <$$font> {COM:figure_omitted}
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154R_misnumbered_as_151R.134

<P_154V_misnumbered_as_151V>

<heading>

What other vses hath this Circle ?
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.137

<$$heading>

In this circle are set downe the foure quarters of the world , as East ,
West , North and South , and the rest of the winds :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.139

Againe , this circle deuideth the artificiall day from the artificiall
night , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.140

for all the while that the Sun is aboue the Horizon it is day ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.141

& whilest it is under the same it is night .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.142

And by this circle wee knowe what starres do continually appeare , and
which are continually hidden , also what starres doe rise and goe downe
. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.143

Againe , in taking the eleuation of the Pole , this circle is chiefly to
be considered , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.144

for when we know how many degrees the Pole is raised aboue the Horizon ,
then we haue the eleuation therof for that place .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.145

For to euery seuerall place , yea to euerye little moment of the earth
in an oblique Spheare , belongeth his proper Horizon and seuerall
altitude of the Pole , whereby it appeareth that the Horizons are
infinite and without number .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.146

<heading>

How shal I know in any place , hauing an oblique Horizon , how much the
Pole is eleuated aboue the Horizon ?
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.148

<$$heading>

That is declared in the second booke of this Treatise , wheras I speake
of the latitude and longitude of the earth , in the 8. chapter .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.150

<heading>

Of the Meridian , and of the vses thereof .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.152

Cap. 18 . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.153

<$$heading>

<heading>

What is the Meridian ? BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.156

<$$heading>

It is a great immoouable circle passing through the Poles of the worlde
, and through the Poles of the Horizon .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.158

<heading>

Why is it called the Meridian ?
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.160

<$$heading>

Because that when the sun rising aboue the Horizon in the East , commeth
to touch this line with the Center of his body , then it is midday or
noonetide to those , through whose <font> Zenith <$$font> that Circle
passeth . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.162

And when the Sun after his going downe in the west commeth to touch the
selfe line againe in the point opposit , it is to them midnight ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.163

and note that diuers Cities , hauing diuers Latitudes , that is to say ,
being distant one from another North and South be it neuer so far , may
haue one selfe Meridian : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,154V_misnumbered_as_151V.164

but if they be distant one from another East & West , bee it neuer so
little , then they must <P_155R_misnumbered_as_152R> needes haue diuers
Meridians , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.165

and such distance betwixt the two seuerall Meridians , is called the
difference of Longitude whereof we shall speake hereafter more at large
when we come to treate of the Longitude and Latitude of the earth ,
which something differeth from the Longitude and Latitude of the starres
or {HELSINKI:of} Planets , whereof we haue already spoken in the 11.
Chapter . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.166

<heading>

How many Meridians be there ?
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.168

<$$heading>

The Astronomers doe appoint for euery two degrees of the Equinoctiall a
Meridian , so as they make in all 180.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.170

Albeit most commonly in the Spheare they set downe but one , which
serueth for all by turning the body of the Spheare to it , which for
y=e= cause is called the mooueable Meridian .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.171

And in such Spheares as haue not a foote and a standing Horizon , there
is no Meridian at al , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.172

but the two Colures are faine to supply their want ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.173

but all terrestriall Globes are commonly described with twelue Meridians
, cutting the Equinoctiall in 24. points , and deuiding the same into
24. spaces , euery space containing 15. degrees , which is an houre ,
by meanes whereof we know how much sooner or latter it is noontide in
any place , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.174

for it is noonetide sooner to those whose Meridian is more Eastward then
to them whose Meridian is more Westward .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.175

And contrariwise the Eclipse of the Sun or Moone appeareth sooner to
those whose Meridian is more Westward .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.176

<heading>

What other vses hath this circle ?
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.178

<$$heading>

This circle deuideth the East part of the world from the West
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.180

and also it sheweth both the North and South ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.181

for by turning your face towardes the East , you shall finde the Sunne
being in that line at noonetide to bee on your right hand right South ,
the opposit part of which circle sheweth on your left hand the North .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.182

Also this Circle by reason that it passeth through both the Poles of the
world , deuideth both the Equinoctiall and all his Paralels into two
equall parts as well aboue the Horizon as under the Horizon ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.183

and by that meanes it deuideth the artificial day and artificiall night
each of them into two parts , that is to say , into two semidiurnall and
into two seminocturnall parts .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.184

For betwixt that part of the Horizon where the Sun riseth , mounting
still untill he come to this Circle , which is at noonetide , is
contayned the first halfe of the day ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.185

& the other halfe is from the same circle to the going down of the Sunne
under the Horizon . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155R_misnumbered_as_152R.186

And the first parte of the night is <P_155V_misnumbered_as_152V> the
space betwixt the Suns going down and his comming againe to the Meridian
, which is at midnight , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.187

and from thence to the time of his rising is the other halfe of the
night , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.188

and also the Astronomers take the beginning of their naturall day from
this circle , counting either from noontide to noontide , or else from
midnight to midnight . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.189

Againe , this circle sheweth the right ascentions and declinations of
the starres , and the highest altitude , otherwise called the Meridian
altitude of the Sun or of any star , or degree of the Ecliptique , or of
any other point in the firmament , al which vses and many others more
you shal better understand hereafter , when wee come to shew the vses of
the globe as well terrestriall as celestiall .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.190

<heading>

Of the verticall circles , and vses thereof
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.192

Cap. 19 {SIC:13} BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.193

<$$heading>

But here you haue to note that though the most part of Geographers doe
set downe in their Spheares but 6. great circles , yet ther is another
great circle called the circle Verticall , which passeth right ouer our
heades through our <font> Zenith <$$font> , wheresoeuer we be vpon the
land or sea , crossing our Horizon in 2. points opposite , and deuiding
the same into two equall parts ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.195

and such kind of circles are called in Arabick <font> Azimuthes <$$font>
, whereof you may imagine that there be so many as ther be rombes or
winds in the Marriners compasse , which are in number 32.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.196

yea , and if you will , you may make halfe so many as there be degrees
in the Horizon , which are in nu~ber 360. the halfe whereof is 180.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.197

If you be right under the Equinoctiall , and doe goe or saile right East
or West , then the Equinoctiall is your Verticall circle ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.198

and if you goe or saile right North or South , then the Meridian is your
uerticall circle , which two circles notwithstanding do alwaies keepe
their names . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.199

But in sayling by any other rombe , that circle which is imagined to
passe from the true East pointe right ouer your head unto the true West
point , or which crosseth your Meridian in the <font> Zenith <$$font>
point with right Sphericall angles , is most properly called the
uerticall circle , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.200

and the learned seamen haue great respect to two speciall kinds of
Verticall circles , that is , the Magneticall Meridian , and the <font>
Azimuth <$$font> of the Sunne .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,155V_misnumbered_as_152V.201

<P_156R_misnumbered_as_155R>

<heading>

What manner of verticall Circles bee those ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.204

and whereto serue they ? BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.205

<$$heading>

M. Borrough in his discourse of the variation of the Compasse ,
defineth the Magneticall Meridian to bee a great Circle , which passeth
through the Zenith and the Pole of the load_stone called in Latine
Magnes , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.207

and deuideth the Horizon into two equall parts , by crossing the same in
two points opposite . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.208

Againe the Azimuth of the Sunne is a great Circle , passing through the
Zenith and the Centre of the Sunne in what part of the heauen so euer he
be , so as he be aboue the Horizon , which Circle deuideth the Horizon
into two equall parts by crossing the same in two points opposite .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.209

And by helpe of these two Circles and a certaine instrument made of
purpose to giue a true shadow , he teacheth to finde out the true
Meridian of any place : And also to know how much any Mariners Compasse
doth varie from the true North and South , in Northeasting or
Northwesting , whereof I shall speake more at large hereafter in my
treatise of Nauigation . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.210

<heading>

What vse is there of the verticall Circles , or Azimuthes ?
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.212

<$$heading>

The uerticall Circle sheweth what time the Sunne or any other starre
rysing beyond the true East pointe , is passed that Sunne or saide
starre , commeth to the true East or anye other rombe .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.214

Also in what Coast or part of heauen , the Sunne , Moone , or any other
starre is at any time being mounted aboue the Horizon , as whether it
bee Southeast or Northeast , or in any other rombe :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.215

Also by helpe of the uerticall Circle most properly so called , are the
twelue houses of heauen set , according to <font> Campanus <$$font> and
<font> Gazula <$$font> . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.216

And by helpe of these Circles you may also knowe how any place vppon the
earth beareth one from another eyther Eastward or {HELSINKI:of} Westward
, and so foorth , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.217

for euerie place hath his seuerall Azimuth aunswerable to the Horizon
and Zenith of the saide place .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.218

<heading>

Of certaine circles called <font> Almicanterathes <$$font> ?
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156R_misnumbered_as_155R.220

<$$heading>

Since I haue spoken heere somewhat of the uerticall Circles called
<font> Azimuthes <$$font> , it shall not be amisse to shew you also that
there be other Circles to bee considered of in the Spheare as well as in
the Astrolabe called <font> Almicanterathes <$$font> , that is to say ,
Circles of Altitude , which though they be not al great Circles , for
euery one <P_156V_misnumbered_as_155V> lesser then other proceeding fro~
the oblique Horizon of any place to the Zenith of the said place , yet
the first <font> Almicanterath <$$font> which is the verie oblique
Horizon it selfe , is a great Circle deuiding the Spheare into two
equall parts , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.222

and all the rest are lesser and lesser , untill you come to the verie
Zenith , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.223

and are paralels to the Horizon , euen as the Tropiques and the other
lesser Circles are paralels unto the Equinoctiall .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.224

And the Zenith in Sphericall bodies is the Centre of them all , though
it bee not so in Astrolabes ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.225

in there euerie <font> Almicanterath <$$font> is saine to haue his
seuerall Centre , of which Circles there be in all 90. according to the
number of 90 degrees contained betwixt the oblique Horizon and the
Zenith , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.226

and these Circles doe serue to shew the Altitude of the Sunne or Moone ,
or of any other starre fixed or wandring , being mounted at any time
aboue the oblique Horizon , which is easie to bee found by any Quadrant
, Crosse-staffe , or Astrolabe .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.227

But leauing to speake any further of these Circles , because they are
not vsed to be described in Spheares but onely in Astrolabes , I will
now treate of the foure lesser Circles before mentioned , which are
commonly set downe in euery Spheare or Globe .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.228

<heading>

of the foure lesser circles , that is to say , the circle Arctique , the
circle Antarctique , the Tropique of Cancer , and the Tropique of
Capricorne , and also of the fiue Zones , that is to say , two cold ,
two temperate , and one extremely hoat .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.230

Cap. 20 . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.231

<$$heading>

<heading>

Which call you the lesser Circles ?
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.234

<$$heading>

They are those that doe not deuide the Spheare into two equall parts ,
as the great Circles doe ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.236

and of such there bee foure , that is the two Polar circles , and the
two Tropiques , that is to say , the Tropique of <font> Cancer <$$font>
, and the Tropique of <font> Capricorne <$$font> , of which Polar
circles the one is called Arctique , and the other Antarctique ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,156V_misnumbered_as_155V.237

and are made by the turning about of the two Poles of the Zodiaque ,
which Poles being situated in the Colure of the
<P_157R_misnumbered_as_156R> Solstices are so farre distant from the
Poles of the world , as is the greatest declination of the Sunne from
the Equinoctiall , which is 23. degrees , 2 ' 8. as hath beene said
before . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.238

<heading>

Which is the Arctique Circle ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.240

and why is it so called ?
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.241

<$$heading>

The Arctique Circle is that which is next to the North Pole ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.243

and hath his name of this worde Arctos , which is the great Beare or
Charles wayne , which are seuen stars placed next to this Circle on the
outside thereof , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.244

and it is otherwise called the Septentrionall Circle of this word
Septentrio , which is as much to say as seuen Oxen , signified by the
seuen stars of the little Beare , which doe mooue slowly like Oxen , and
are placed all within the sayde Circle ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.245

and the bright starre that is in the tippe of the tayle of the sayde
little Beare , is called of the Mariners the loade starre or North
starre , whereby they sayle on the Sea ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.246

and the Centre of this Circle is the North Pole of the world which is
not to be seene with mans eye .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.247

<heading>

What is the Antarctique Circle ?
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.249

<$$heading>

It is that which is next unto the South Pole ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.251

and it is so called , because it is opposite or contrarie to the Circle
Arctique . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.252

<heading>

Now describe the two Tropiques .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.254

<$$heading>

The Tropique of <font> Cancer <$$font> is a Circle imagined to bee
betwixt the Equinoctiall and the Circles Arctique , which Circles the
Sun maketh when he entreth into the first degree of <font> Cancer
<$$font> , which is about y=e= twelue or thirteenth day of June being
then in his greatest declination from the Equinoctiall Northward , and
nighest to our Zenith , being ascended to the highest point that he can
goe , at which time the daies with us be at the longest , and the
nightes at the shortest .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157R_misnumbered_as_156R.256

And so from thence he declineth to the other Tropique called the
Tropique of <font> Capricorne <$$font> , which is a Circle imagined to
be betwixt the Equinoctiall and the Circle Antarctique , which the Sunne
maketh when hee entreth into the first degree of <font> Capricorne
<$$font> , which is about the twelfth or thirteenth daye of December at
which time hee is againe in his greatest declination from the
Equinoctiall Southwarde , and furthest from our Zenith : whereby the
dayes with us bee then at the shortest , and the nights
<P_157V_misnumbered_as_156V> at the longest :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157V_misnumbered_as_156V.257

And note that these two Circles are called Tropiques of this Greeke word
Tropos , which is as much to say as a conuersion or turning ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157V_misnumbered_as_156V.258

for when the Sunne arriueth at any of these two Circles , he turneth
backe againe either ascending or descending , by reason of which foure
Circles as well the firmament as the earth is deuided into fiue Zones ,
that is to say , two colde , two temperate , & one extremely hoat ,
otherwise called the burnt Zone , of which fiue Zones , the foresaid
foure circles are the true bounds .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157V_misnumbered_as_156V.259

For of the two cold Zones , the one lyeth betwixt the North pole and the
Circle Arctique , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157V_misnumbered_as_156V.260

and the other lyeth betwixt the South Pole and the Circle Antarctique ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157V_misnumbered_as_156V.261

& of the two temperate Zones , the one lyeth betwixt the Circle Arctique
, & the Tropique of <font> Cancer <$$font> ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157V_misnumbered_as_156V.262

and the other lyeth betwixt the Circle Antarctique , and the Tropique of
<font> Capricorne <$$font> ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157V_misnumbered_as_156V.263

& the extreme hoat Zone lyeth betwixt the two Tropiques , in the middest
of which two Tropiques , is the Equinoctiall line , as you may see in
this figure and also in the Spheare or Globe it selfe .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157V_misnumbered_as_156V.264

<font> A figure shewing the fiue foresaid Zones . <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,157V_misnumbered_as_156V.265

{COM:figure_omitted}

<P_158R_misnumbered_as_157R>

Of which Zones the auncient men were wont to say that three were
unhabitable , that is , the two colde , and the extreame hoat , which
experience sheweth in these latter daies , to be untrue , as we shall
declare more at large when we come to treate of the diuision of the
earth : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,158R_misnumbered_as_157R.268

Againe you haue to understand that euery one of these lesser Circles
doth containe in length , 360. degrees as well as euery one of the
greater Circles , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,158R_misnumbered_as_157R.269

but the degrees are not of like bignesse , no more then the Circles
themselues are like in compasse or circuit ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,158R_misnumbered_as_157R.270

for the lesser the Circles are in circuit , the lesser their degrees
must needes be . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,158R_misnumbered_as_157R.271

<heading>

Sith euery of the lesser Circles differ one from another in circuit ,
and thereby the degrees of euery Circle be lesser then other , how shall
I know the true quantitie of euery degree in ech Circle , and how manye
minutes are required in euerie lesser degree proportionally to answere
one degree of the Equinoctiall .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,158R_misnumbered_as_157R.273

<$$heading>

For the better knowledge hereof , you must first imagine that there may
bee as many Circles made from the Equinoctiall towards any of the Poles
, as there be degrees of Latitude , which are in number 90. as hath
beene said before : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,158R_misnumbered_as_157R.275

And the nigher that any circle is to the Equinoctiall , the greater it
is in circuit , and the further from the Equinoctiall towards any of the
Poles , the lesser in circuit ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,158R_misnumbered_as_157R.276

and therfore more or lesse minutes are requisite to answere to one
degree of the Equinoctiall , as you may easily perceiue by this Table
following , consisting of 6. collums , euery front or head whereof is
noted with three great letters , D. M. S. signifying degrees ,
minutes and seconds , sixe times repeated ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,158R_misnumbered_as_157R.277

and in the beginning of the first collum on the left hand is set downe
one degree , which is the first degree of 90. and nighest unto the
Equinoctiall , right against which one degree is placed towards the
right hand , 59. minutes , and 59. seconds :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,158R_misnumbered_as_157R.278

and so proceeding from degree to degree successiuely , untill you come
to 90. you shall finde how many minutes and seconds doe answere to one
degree of the Equinoctiall ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,158R_misnumbered_as_157R.279

and this Table will also serue to shew the difference of miles in euery
sundry clyme or paralell , whereof we shall speake hereafter when we
come to treat of the earth .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-H,158R_misnumbered_as_157R.280

