<BEGIN_brinsley-1627-e2-h>

<P_8>

<heading>

CHAP. II . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,8.4

<heading>

WHEN THE SCHOLLER SHOULD FIRST BE SET TO THE SCHOOLE .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,8.6

<$$heading>

<font> Spoud. <$$font> That I may begin at the very first entrance of
the Schoole : let me inquire this of you , how soon you would have your
childe set unto the Schoole ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,8.8

for I thinke that worthy to be first knowne , if so be that you purpose
to have your scholler fitted for the Universitie , by fifteene yeeres of
age . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,8.9

<font> Phil. <$$font> I like your reason well , to enter there .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,8.10

But to the intent that I may more fully make knowne unto you , what I
thinke , and have found in this behalfe , let mee heare first of you ,
as I wished in generall , at what age you use in your countrey , to set
your children to begin to learne . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,8.11

<P_9>

<font> Spoud. <$$font> For the time of their entrance with us , in our
countrey schooles , it is commonly about seven or eight yeeres old :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.13

sixe is very soone . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.14

If any beginne so early , they are rather sent to the schoole to keepe
them from troubling the house at home , and from danger , and shrewd
turnes , then for any great hope and desire their friends have that they
should learne any thing in effect . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.15

<font> Phil. <$$font> I finde that therein first is a very great want
generally ; for that the child , if hee be of any ordinary towardnesse
and capacitie , should begin at five yeere old at the uttermost , or
sooner rather . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.16

My reasons are these : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.17

1 . Because that then children will begin to conceive of instruction ,
and to understand ; and bee able not onely to know their letters , to
spell and to reade , but also to take a delight therein , and to strive
to goe before their fellowes . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.18

Experience heerein will quickely teach every one , who shall make triall
of it , if so be that they doe follow a right course .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.19

2 . Very reason must needs perswade every one of this .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.20

For , if they bee apt much before five yeeres of age , to learne
shrewdnesse , and those things which are hurtfull , which they must bee
taught to unlearne againe ; why are they not as well fit to learne those
things which are good and profitable for them , if they be entred and
drawne on in such a manner , as they may take a delight and finde a
kinde of sport and play in the same ? BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.21

This delight may and ought to be in all their progresse , and most of
all in their first entrance , to make them the better to love the
schoole , and learning , as we shall see after .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.22

3 . Many of them doe learne so much untowardnesse and naughtinesse
amongst other rude children , in that time before they come to schoole ,
that they are worse for it continually after : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.23

and also they feele such sweetnesse in play and idlenesse , as they can
hardly bee framed to leave it , and to take a delight in their bookes
without very much adoe . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,9.24

<P_10>

4 . This first age is that wherein they are most pliant , and may bee
bended and fashioned most easily to any good course .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.26

And being thus accustomed to good things from their infancie , and kept
so much as may be , from all practice and sight of evill , custome
becomes unto them another nature . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.27

So great a thing it is <paren> according to the old proverbe <$$paren>
to accustome children , even from their tender yeeres ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.28

and so undoubtedly true is that common verse , Quo semel est imbuta
recens seruabit odorem testa diu . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.29

5 . Above all these is a principall benefit , that by this meanes two
or three yeeres may well be gained , to fit your Scholler so much sooner
for the Universitie , or for any honest trade or calling . So that a
child thus entred rightly , shall doe much more at eight yeeres old ,
then another so neglected can doe at ten , or it may bee at eleven or
twelve . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.30

Also many such shall be meete for trades and like imployments , when
they have no learning to fit them thereunto . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.31

This must needs be a great griefe to the Parents of such , whose
children have so lost their time , as it is a joy to others whose
children have beene so well brought up , when they see their children
compared together . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.32

6 . Lastly , our time being so short , it much concerneth every parent
, to see their children to have the best education and instruction ,
which is the chiefe patrimonie , and the greatest comfort and hope both
of the Parents and Children , and also of their houses and posteritie .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.33

And this so soone as ever may bee , to fit them for some profitable
imploiment for Church or Common-wealth . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.34

<font> Spoud. <$$font> But they will say with us , that it will hinder
the growth of their children to be set to schoole so young .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.35

<font> Phil. <$$font> Let the schoole be made unto them a place of play
: and the children drawn on by that pleasant delight which ought to be ,
it can then no more hinder their growth then their play doth , but
rather further it , when they sit at their ease ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.36

besides that continuall experience doth confute this errour .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,10.37

<font> Spoud. <$$font> Bee it so as you say : yet this is a received
opinion , <P_11> that it will cause them to hate the schoole , whe~ they
should be set to it in good earnest . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.38

<font> Phil. <$$font> Nay rather it is clean contrary :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.39

for being acquainted with the schoole so young , and with the sport and
pleasure which they finde amongst other children there ; and also being
kept from feeling the overmuch sweetnesse in play , it shall cause them
to love & to delight in the schoole continually , and to goe on without
any repining , or so much as thinking of being away from the schoole :
whereas they being nuzled up in play abroad , are very hardly reclaimed
and weaned from it , to sticke to their bookes indeede .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.40

<font> Spoud. <$$font> But yet it is thought that they can get but
little learning then , being so very young , and therefore there is the
smaller losse of a yeere or two , at that time .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.41

<font> Phil. <$$font> The losse will bee found in the end , although it
bee indeed in the beginning . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.42

For looke how many yeeres they lose in the beginning if they bee apt ,
so many in the end they will bee shorter , of such of their fellowes ,
who are but of their owne age , and applied all alike being of like
capacitie . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.43

Therefore , as wee will not let them lose a day , when they growe
towards the Universitie , so neither should we when they are young ; but
prevent this losse , and take the time in the beginning .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.44

<font> Spoud. <$$font> We see notwithstanding some very long ere ever
they begin , who then goe forward with it the fastest of all .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.45

<font> Phil. <$$font> It is true in some pregnant wits , and who are
industrious : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.46

but you shall have others as blockish and dull .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.47

Also , for those , if they go so fast in the rudiments & first grounds ,
how much more would they doe so at the same time in better studies ?
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.48

Neither can they have halfe that learning in all things , which others
of like age and aptnesse have , who have been well applyed from their
first yeeres . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.49

<font> Spoud. <$$font> I yeeld to all which you have said in this
behalfe ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,11.50

and I doe see plainely the exceeding benefits , that must needs come
hereby , especially in gaining of time ; if they may bee entred in that
playing manner , and goe forward <P_12> with alacritie and contention ;
and moreover so , that they bee not any way overloaded or discouraged ,
nor yet indangered , by the overcharging of their wits and memories .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,12.51

<font> Phil. <$$font> For that take you no feare ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,12.52

you shall <paren> God willing <$$paren> see the evidence of that , and a
plaine direction in every Chapter , how to proceede in that easie and
playing kinde . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,12.53

Therefore , if you be satisfied in this , let us come unto the next
point . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,12.54

<font> Spoud. <$$font> Very gladly Sir : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,12.55

for I long to heare this , how you would teach your child being so yong
, to reade so soon and readily . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,12.56

<font> Phil. <$$font> I like the point well : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,12.57

proceed according to your order . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,12.58

<heading>

CHAP. III . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,12.60

HOW THE SCHOLLER MAY BE TAUGHT TO READE ENGLISH SPEEDILY , TO FIT HIM
THE SOONER , AND BETTER FOR THE GRAMMAR SCHOOLE .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,12.61

<$$heading>

<font> Spoud. <$$font> Before wee enter into this question , let me put
you in minde of one thing , which doth much trouble mee concerning this
very matter . That it seemeth to mee an unreasonable thing , that the
Grammar Schooles should bee troubled with teaching A. B. C. seeing it
is so great a hinderance to those paines which wee should take with our
Grammar Schollers , for whom wee are appointed : Because it doth take up
almost one halfe of our time , and thereby doth deprive us of a chiefe
part of the fruit of our labours ; especially when our mindes are so
distracted , and our thoughts carried so many wayes , to doe good to all
. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,12.63

The very little ones in a towne , in most countrey townes which are of
any bignesse , <P_13> would require a whole man , of themselves , to bee
alwaies hearing , poasing & following them , so as they ought to be
applyed : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.64

for continuall applying in a right course , is in this and all other
parts of learning , above all other meanes . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.65

And young ones , by a little slaking our hands , run faster backe , then
ever they went forward ; as boates going up the streame .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.66

Besides , it is an extreme vexation , that we must be toiled amongst
such little petties , and in teaching such matters , whereof wee can get
no profit , nor take any delight in our labours .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.67

<font> Phil. <$$font> I am well inured with this grievance , which you
speake of , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.68

and doe know by long experience your complaint to bee just in this
behalfe . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.69

I myselfe have complained of it many a time . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.70

For it were much to be wished , that none might bee admitted to the
Grammar schooles , untill they were able to reade English : as namely ,
that they could reade the New Testament perfectly , and that they were
in their Accidences , or meet to enter into them .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.71

There might bee some other schoole in the towne , for these little ones
to enter them . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.72

It would helpe some poore man or woman , who knew not how to live
otherwise , and who might doe that well , if they were rightly directed
. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.73

Also it would be such an ease to all Grammar Schoolemasters , as they
might doe much more good in their places . Wherefore , all such
Schoolemasters who are incumbered with this inconvenience , are not
onely to wish , but also to labour to have it reformed in their severall
schooles . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.74

Yet notwithstanding , where it can@ @not be redressed , it must be borne
with wisdome and patience as an heavy burden . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.75

Patience shall make it much more light . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.76

And therefore every one is to doe his best indeavour , to know how to
make it most easie , if it doe lie upon him . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,13.77

Moreover , seeing we purpose , God willing , to goe thorow all the whole
course of learning , and also sith our labour is to finde out the meanes
, whereby to make the way plaine , to traine up every childe from the
very first entrance into learning , <paren> as was said <$$paren> <P_14>
untill wee have brought him into the Universitie , we can@ @not omit any
point , which may tend unto the same {SIC:fame} , much lesse the first
steppe of all . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.78

For , a child well entred is halfe made : according to that Proverbe ,
Principium , dimidium totius . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.79

The foundation well layd , the building must needs goe forward much more
happily . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.80

This is specially true in learning ; wherein children feeling a
sweetnesse in the beginning , are very much incouraged , as daily
experience will manifest to every one . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.81

<font> Spoud. <$$font> I see well the necessitie of undergoing this
burden , in those places where remedy can@ @not be had , without greater
inconveniences . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.82

And therefore , sith that necessitie hath no law , nor for myselfe I
know no meanes how to bee freed from it ; I pray you let us returne
againe unto the point , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.83

and let mee still intreat of you your best direction , to make this
burden so light as may bee . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.84

This is a thing worth the diligence of all , who must be imployed
amongst little ones : to wit , to teach children how to read well , and
to pronounce their letters truly ; as also to spell right , and to know
how to write true Orthography in a short space .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.85

For <paren> that I may acknowledge the truth , and which hath bin no
small discredit unto mee in this behalfe <$$paren> I have had some who
have beene with me , two or three yeeres , before they could reade well
. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.86

And that which hath yet been much more grievous to me . I have
sometimes beene so abashed and ashamed , that I have not knowne what to
say , when some being a little discontented , or taking occasion to
quarrel about paying my stipend , have cast this in my teeth , that
their children have been under me sixe or seven yeeres , and yet have
not learned to reade English well . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.87

I myselfe have also knowne , that their complaints have been true in
part ; though I have taken all the paines with them that ever I could
devise . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.88

Therefore good Sir , set downe as plainely and shortly as you can , how
this may be helped . Both myselfe and many other shal be much beholden
for your direction in this first entrance . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,14.89

For my maner of entring them , it is that which I take to be everywhere
: to teach & heare them <P_15> so oft over untill they can say a lesson
, and so to a new . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.90

<font> Phil. <$$font> I likewise have been well acquainted with this
your trouble : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.91

and therefore I will indevour , to afford you so much as I have yet
learned , how to avoid these clamours ; and how any poore man who will
imploy his paines , may learn to teach children to read well in a short
time , though this may seeme unbefitting our profession .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.92

First the childe is to be taught , how to call every letter ,
pronouncing each of them plainely , fully and distinctly ; I meane , in
a distinct and differing sound , each from others , and also naturally ,
from the very first entrance to learning . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.93

More specially to bee carefull , for the right pronouncing the five
vowels , in the first place , as <font> a , e , i , o , u <$$font> .
Because these are first and most naturall , and doe make a perfect sound
, so that they may bee pronounced fully of themselves ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.94

and they being rightly uttered , all the rest are more plaine .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.95

After these vowels , to teach them to pronounce every other letter :
which are therefore called Consonants , because they can@ @not make a
perfect sound of themselves , without a Vowell .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.96

This may be done , and also the teaching of children to spell any
syllable , before the child do know any letter on the booke ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.97

and that , some wise and experienced doe hold the surest and best course
. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.98

But they are , at least , to be taught to pronounce their letters thus ,
as they doe learne them ; to prevent the griefe and wearisomnesse of
teaching them to forget evil customes in pronouncing , which they tooke
up in their first ill learning . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.99

And so ever in teaching to read , the teachers are to continue the like
care of sweet and naturall pronunciation . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.100

Secondly , for the knowing of the letters <paren> besides that common
manner practised in Schooles , which is by oft reading over all the
letters forwards and backwards untill they can say them <$$paren> they
may be much furthered thus ; That is , by causing the childe to find out
, and to shew you which is <font> a <$$font> , which <font> b <$$font> ,
which <font> c <$$font> , which <font> f <$$font> , and so any other
letter . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.101

First to finde them in the Alphabet , then in any other place .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,15.102

<P_16>

Or if you will let them learne but one letter at once , untill they can
readily know or finde out that letter in any place , and after that
another in the same manner : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,16.104

This is holden the surer and more easie way : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,16.105

But this at your owne judgement . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,16.106

<P_41>

<heading>

CHAP. V . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.109

OF CERTAINE GENERALL OBSERVATIONS TO BEE KNOWNE OF SCHOOLE-MASTERS , AND
PRACTISED CAREFULLY IN ALL GRAMMAR LEARNING CHIEFELY .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.110

AND FIRST , OF CAUSING ALL THINGS TO BE DONE WITH UNDERSTANDING .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.111

<$$heading>

<font> Phil. <$$font> For the generall Observations , the first may be
this : 1. That Schollers be taught to do all things with understanding
; and to be able to give a reason of every matter which they learne .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.113

And so in every lecture which they learne in any tongue , first to
understand the matter of it , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.114

and the lesson will be learned presently . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.115

But before I speake any more of this , I pray you let me heare of you
what course you have taken in this point . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.116

<font> Spoud. <$$font> This first observation seemeth strange unto me ,
at the very naming of it . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.117

I my selfe have used onely this course , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.118

and I thinke it to be all that is done in most of our countrey Schooles
; To give Lectures to the severall formes , or cause some Scholler to do
it . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.119

And therein first to reade them over their Lecture , then to construe
them , and in the lower formes to parse them .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.120

So when they come to say ; to heare them whether they can reade , say
without booke , construe and parse . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.121

More , as I take it , is not much used , for the understanding and
making use of them . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.122

<font> Phil. <$$font> I know it to be as you say ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.123

and do hold it to be a verie great defect in Schooles generally : yea a
farre greater hinderance to learning , then that of letting them to lose
so many yeeres , before they begin to learne .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,41.124

For this is a matter which of all other concerneth the credit of
Schooles , and furthereth learning wonderfully ; to teach Schollers to
understand whatsoever they learne , and to be <P_42> able to give a
reason of every thing why it is so ; and to doe this from the lowest to
the highest . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.125

My reasons are these : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.126

1 . Because if it were rightly knowne , and constantly practised in
Schooles , it would bring forth very neere double so much good and sound
learning , as is now gotten co~monly . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.127

2 . It would bring withall , so much ease , pleasure and delight , both
to all teachers and learners , and also so much certainety , and cause
them to go forward with such cheerefulnesse , boldnesse and contention ,
as will hardly be beleeved untill it be tried by experience .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.128

In a word ; it would cause all things to be gotten much more speedily ,
layed up more safely , and kept more surely in memory .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.129

Therefore , that old rule is true ; Legere & non intelligere negligere
est . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.130

To reade and not to understand what we reade , or not to know how to
make use of it , is nothing else but a neglect of all good learning ,
and a meere abuse of the meanes and helps to attaine the same .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.131

It is no other thing but a very losse of our precious time , and of all
our labour and cost bestowed therein , in regard of that which is read
with understanding . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.132

We may see triall here of sundry wayes . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.133

1 . Let children be examined together ; I meane such as of whom one of
them alone hath beene taught to do all things by reason and with
understanding ; so that he is able to give you a plaine reason , and
make the right use of every thing , which he hath learned : the other
have learned onely to say without booke , to construe and parse ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.134

then marke the difference . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.135

Although all these learne one and the same Author ; yet when they come
to the triall , you would thinke that one to have all learning , when
you heare him to give a reason of every thing , and that he can make use
of all things ; all the rest to have almost nothing at all , or at least
nothing in regard of that one so taught . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.136

2 . Prove it thus in getting learning . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.137

Teach your Scholler one lesson which you cause him to understand
perfectly before : another of the same matter , whereof he understandeth
little or nothing ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,42.138

and then trie <P_43> whether he will not do that , whereof he
understandeth the meaning and reasons , almost in halfe the time , which
the other will require . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,43.139

And this also so , as you may evidently discerne it , that he will do it
with much more ease , certainety and boldnesse , then he can do the
other . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,43.140

3 . We our selves may make triall of it by our owne experience , in
construing any difficult piece of Latine , Greeke , or Hebrew , or
committing any thing to memorie ; whether if so be that we do but
understand the matter of it before perfectly , we shall not do it in
halfe the time , and with one halfe of the labour , that otherwise it
would require . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,43.141

Or if we would write or speake of any thing , let us prove it but thus :
If we first understand the matter well , and have it perfectly in our
head , whether words to expresse our minds will not follow as of
themselves . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,43.142

To this very purpose , for confirming the truth hereof , and to keepe a
continuall remembrance of this point ; these three verses of <font>
Horace <$$font> were worthy to be written in letters of gold , and to be
imprinted in the memorie of every one who is desirous to get the best
learning : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,43.143

for so they would indeede prove golden verses , and make undoubtedly
golden times ; Scribendi recte sapere est & principium & fons : Rem tibi
Socraticae poterunt ostendere chartae ; Verbaque prouisam rem non inuita
sequentur . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,43.144

The meaning of the verses , I take it to be this :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,43.145

To attaine to this facultie , to be able to write or speake of any
matter , and so to come to all excellent learning , the very first and
chiefe fountaine , and that which is all in all , is to understand the
matter well in the first place . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,43.146

As for store of matter , the writings of learned men <paren> such as
<font> Socrates <$$font> was <$$paren> will furnish you abundantly
therewith . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,43.147

And when you have the matter thoroughly in your head , words will follow
, as waters out of a Fountaine , even almost naturally , to expresse
your mind in any tongue , which you studie in any right order .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,43.148

<P_44>

This will be found to be true in Latine , Greeke , Hebrew , and by a
like reason in every other tongue , and in every facultie : whether we
would write , speake , learne , resolve , or remember and lay up for
ever . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.150

This was a principall cause that made <font> Tully , Ovid , Virgil
<$$font> , and some others so to flow in eloquence ; and especially
<font> Virgil <$$font> , whom men worthily account the chiefe of all
Latine Poets , because they did understand so fully whatsoever they writ
of . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.151

I might instance this also in Preachers , by our daily experience ; of
whom some are better able to preach powerfully in two dayes warning ,
and having words at will , then other {are_able_to_do_so} in two moneths
; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.152

and all because the one sort are so full of understanding and matter ,
the other are so barren thereof . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.153

Thus in all these examples , every man may see a plaine demonstration of
the truth of these verses of <font> Horace <$$font> , which he no doubt
did write upon his owne experience , as every man shall find , who wil
set himselfe to make triall . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.154

Prove and confirme what tongue soever your Scholler learnes , even from
the first reading of English , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.155

if he can repeate you the matter , or the summe of it , or have it in
his head , trie whether he will not have the words presently .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.156

The plentifull experience which I have seene , of the sweete delight and
fruite of this course , of causing children to do all things with
understanding and reason , compared with the fruitlesse toyles and
griefes of former times , do make me not onely confident for the thing ,
but also desirous to make all other partakers of the benefit .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.157

<font> Spoud. <$$font> I do fully see the evidence of all that which
you have said , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.158

and therefore I must needs be perswaded of it .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.159

I do heartily thanke God for it , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.160

and will endevor myselfe to put it in practise continually .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.161

Only here is the difficulty , how a Schoolemaster may do this , to teach
his Scholler so to proceede with understanding , and how to give a
reason of every matter which they learne , to make use of all their
learning . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,44.162

Above all , how hee may beginne to fraught young <P_45> Schollers with
all store of matter , as they goe on : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.163

this very much passeth my skill . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.164

I should thinke my selfe most happy , to obtaine this knowledge , if it
possibly can be done . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.165

<font> Phil. <$$font> Attend to those things which I shall relate , and
I have no doubt , but I shall very much accomplish your desire in this :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.166

for our whole conference doth tend chiefely to this end .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.167

As all learning is grounded on reason : so in every Chapter I shall
endeavour my selfe to manifest the reasons of every thing , and how you
may teach others ; so farre forth , as hither to the Lord hath made them
knowne unto me . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.168

And more hereafter , as I shall learne more . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.169

The principall meanes for their understanding , is , by asking short
questions of the matter : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.170

for so they will understand any thing , which they are to learne .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.171

But of that more hereafter in the particular examples ; and chiefly ,
Chap. 23 . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.172

<font> Spoud. <$$font> If you have done then with this , let us goe
forward to your next generall observation ; and so thorow them all , as
briefly as you can . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.173

<font> Phil. <$$font> My next observation is this : that as I would
have them to do all things with understanding ; so to learne onely such
bookes and matters , as whereof they may have the best use ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.174

and that perpetually in all their learning , or in their whole life .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.175

For this is well knowne to every one ; that things well learned in youth
, will be kept most surely all the life long ; because in that age they
are most easily imprinted , and sticke the longest in fresh memory .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.176

And for that cause , children should spend no time unfruitfully in such
bookes , as whereof they can@ @not have both very good and continuall
use . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.177

This can@ @not be but a great folly , to mis-spend our precious time in
such studies , whereof neither our selves nor others can have benefit
after ; or else in such , as the knowledge whereof will vanish for want
of practise : and much more in those , which will corrupt and hurt in
stead of doing good . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.178

And therefore all filthy places in the Poets would be wisely passed over
, or wearily expounded . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.179

It were well if there were an Index Expurgatorius , to purge out all the
filth out of these by leaving it out , or changing it .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,45.180

<P_46>

Third rule , and that generall for all Students , is this : that
whatsoever difficult words , or matters of speciall observation , they
do reade in any Author , be marked out ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,46.182

I meane all such words or things , as either are hard to them in the
learning of them , or which are of some speciall excellency , or use ,
worthy the noting : or which after that they have beene a certaine time
in construction , they have not either learned , or at least they know
not where they have learned them . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,46.183

For the marking of them , to do it with little lines under them , or
above them , or against such parts of the word wherein the difficulty
lieth , or by some prickes , or whatsoever letter or marke may best
helpe to call the knowledge of the thing to remembrance , yet so much as
may be , without marring of their books . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,46.184

To do this , to the end that they may oft-times reade over these , or
examine and meditate of them more seriously , untill that they bee as
perfect in them , as in any of the rest of their bookes :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,46.185

for having these , then have they all . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,46.186

This would be universall , in getting all kinde of learning ; after that
children do grow to any discretion to marke such things rightly :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,46.187

you will marvell <paren> if you have not made triall of it <$$paren> how
much they will go thorow , and what sound knowledge they will come unto
in any kinde of study ; and how soone by this helpe , more then they can
do without it . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,46.188

And when they have once gotten it , they may as easily keepe it , and as
surely , by oft-times running over those things , which are so noted ,
above all the rest . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,46.189

This is the reason that you shall have the choysest bookes of most great
learned men , and the notablest students , all marked thorow thus , in
all matters either obscure , or of principall and most necessary use .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,46.190

And this one chife meanes , whereby Schollers may have the difficultest
things in their Authours so perfectly , as that whensoever they shall
bee examined of a sudden , they shall be very ready , to their great
praise , and to the just commendation of the Schoole .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,46.191

For the manner of noting , it is best to note all School bookes with
inke ; and also all others , which you would have gotten ad unguem , as
we use <P_47> to say , or whereof we would have daily or long practice ;
because inke will indure : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.192

neither will such bookes be the worse for their noting , but the better
, if they be noted with judgement . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.193

But for all other bookes which you would have faire againe at your
pleasure ; note them with a pensil of blacke lead :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.194

for that you may rub out againe when you will , with the crums of new
wheat bread . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.195

The very little ones , which reade but English , may make some secret
markes thus at every hard word ; though but with some little dint with
their naile : so that they doe not marre their bookes .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.196

Of this I shall speake more particularly in the manner of parsing ,
Chap. 9 . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.197

A fourth observation , is this : That whatsoever bookes or matter
Schollers do learne , after they beginne to learne without booke ; that
they learne them so perfectly , and hold them so surely , by daily
repetition and examination , that they may have in their minds such an
absolute knowledge of all the words , and matters which they have
learned ; as wheresoever they shall meete with the same againe , or
shall have occasion to use them , they may not neede to be driven to
learne them {COM:preceding_word_"them"_emended} {HELSINKI:then} anew ;
but that they may tell of a sudden where they have learned them , or can
repeat the place : and so make their use and benefit of them .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.198

To teach the same things twise , or thrise , is a double labour and
griefe : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.199

but to have all things which they have learned , ever in readinesse , is
a singular benefit , and a rare commendation .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.200

For besides the preventing of all losse of labour and time , it shall be
to the great delight of all who heare them tried , and the exceeding
furtherance of their continuall growth in all good learning .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.201

And to effect this yet more fully ; acquaint them in all their Lectures
and exercises , some one of them or other , who can tell first , to
repeate where they have learned every hard word :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.202

and that chiefly in their Grammar , if they have learned it there , to
have that exceeding perfect ; and to marke surely every new word ,
according to the direction which I have before given .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,47.203

<P_48>

A fift generall observation , and which is not inferiour to any of the
former , for the good both of Masters and Schoollers , and the very
great benefit of Schooles , is this : that the whole Schoole be divided
into so few fourmes as may be , of so many as can any way be fitted to
goe together : though they be sixteene , or twenty , yes , fortie in a
fourme , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.205

it is not the worse . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.206

The reasons of it are most cleere . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.207

1 . In most things it is almost the same labour to teach twenty , as to
teach two : as in reading all Lectures and rules unto them , in
examining all parts and Lectures . Like as it is in Sermons , and
Catechisings , where it is the same labour to teach one , that it is to
teach a_thousand , if all can heare alike . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.208

This is very generall , except in exercises of writing ; wherin also
great advantage may be gotten by this meanes , if right order be
observed , as we shall shew after . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.209

2 . Secondly , the fewer fourmes there are , the more time may be spent
in each fourme ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.210

and more labour may be bestowed in examining every tittle necessary .
Which worke of continuall examination , is a notable quickner and
nourisher of all good learning ; helping marvellously understanding ,
audacity , memory , and provoking emulation of the Schollers :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.211

and therefore a principall part of the Master's labour , and of the time
in the Schoole , would be imployed in this . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.212

3 . By this meanes , every one of a fourme shall some way provoke , or
incourage the rest of their fellowes . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.213

If they be but dull , the rest will thinke to go before them ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.214

but if they be more pregnant and witty , or more painefull and diligent
, they shall put spirits into all the rest , and be as a spurre unto
them . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.215

For there is in our nature an inbred desire to ayme at the best , and to
wish to equalize them in each commendable quality : if there be right
meanes of direction and incouragement thereunto .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.216

Also every one of a forme may someway helpe the rest :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.217

for none are so dull , but they may happely remember some thing , which
none of the rest did . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-H,48.218

