<BEGIN_burnetcha-1698-e3-h>

<P_1.1,165>

With the restoration of the king a spirit of extravagant joy being
spread over the nation , that brought on with it the throwing off the
very professions of virtue and piety : all ended in entertainments and
drunkenness , which overran <P_1.1,166> the three kingdoms to such a
degree , that it very much corrupted all their morals .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,166.3

Under the colour of drinking the king's health , there were great
disorders and much riot every where : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,166.4

and the pretences to religion , both in those of the hypocritical sort ,
and of the more honest but no less pernicious enthusiasts , gave great
advantages , as well as they furnished much matter , to the profane
mockers at all true piety . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,166.5

Those who had been concerned in the former transactions thought they
could not redeem themselves from the censures and jealousies that these
brought on them by any method that was more sure and more easy , than by
going in to the stream , and laughing at all religion , telling or
making stories to expose both themselves and their party as impious and
ridiculous . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,166.6

The king was then thirty years of age , and , as might have been
supposed , past the levities of youth and the extravagance of pleasure .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,166.7

He had a very good understanding : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,166.8

he knew well the state of affairs both at home and abroad .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,166.9

He had a softness of temper , that charmed all who came near him , till
they found how little they could depend on good looks , kind words , and
fair promises , in which he was liberal to excess , because he intended
nothing by them but to get rid of importunity , and to silence all
further pressing upon him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,166.10

He seemed to have no sense of religion : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,166.11

both at prayers and sacrament he , as it were , took care to satisfy
people that he was in no sort concerned in that about which he was
employed : so that he was very far from being an hypocrite , unless his
assisting at those performances was a sort of hypocrisy , as no doubt it
was ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,166.12

but he was sure not to increase that by any the least appearance of
devotion . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,166.13

He said once to my self , he was no atheist , but he could not think God
would make a man <P_1.1,167> miserable only for taking a little pleasure
out of the way . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.14

He disguised his popery to the last : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.15

but when he talked freely , he could not help letting himself out
against the liberty that under the Reformation all men took of inquiring
into matters : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.16

for from their inquiring into matters of religion , they carried the
humour further , to inquire into matters of state .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.17

He said often , he thought government was a much safer and easier thing
where the authority was believed infallible , and the faith and
submission of the people was implicit : about which I had once much
discourse with him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.18

He was affable and easy , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.19

and loved to be made so by all about him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.20

The great art of keeping him long was , the being easy , and the making
every thing easy to him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.21

He had made such observations on the French government , that he thought
a king who might be checked , or have his ministers called to an account
by a parliament , was but a king in name .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.22

He had a great compass of knowledge , though he was never capable of
great application or study . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.23

He understood the mechanics and physic ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.24

and was a good chemist , and much set on several preparations of mercury
, chiefly the fixing it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.25

He understood navigation well : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.26

but above all he knew the architecture of ships so perfectly , that in
that respect he was exact rather more than became a prince .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.27

His apprehension was quick , and his memory good ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.28

and he was an everlasting talker . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.29

He told his stories with a good grace : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.30

but they came in his way too often . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.31

He had a very ill opinion both of men and women ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,167.32

and did not think there was either sincerity or chastity in <P_1.1,168>
the world out of principle , but that some had either the one or the
other out of humour or vanity . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,168.33

He thought that nobody served him out of love :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,168.34

and so he was quits with all the world , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,168.35

and loved others as little as he thought they loved him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,168.36

He hated business , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,168.37

and could not be easily brought to mind any :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,168.38

but when it was necessary , and he was set to it , he would stay as long
as his ministers had work for him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,168.39

The ruin of his reign , and of all his affairs , was occasioned chiefly
by his delivering himself up at his first coming over to a mad range of
pleasure . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,168.40

One of the race of the Villiers , then married to Palmer , a papist ,
soon after made earl of Castlemaine , who afterwards , being separated
from him , was advanced to be duchess of Cleveland , was his first and
longest mistress , by whom he had five children .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,168.41

She was a woman of great beauty , but most enormously vicious and
ravenous , foolish but imperious , <P_1.1,169> ever uneasy to the king ,
and always carrying on intrigues with other men , while yet she
pretended she was jealous of him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.42

His passion for her , and her strange behaviour towards him , did so
disorder him , that often he was not master of himself , nor capable of
minding business , which , in so critical a time , required great
application : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.43

but he did then so entirely trust the earl of Clarendon that he left all
to his care , and submitted to his advices as to so many oracles .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.44

The earl of Clarendon was bred to the law ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.45

and was like to grow eminent in his profession .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.46

When the wars began he distinguished himself so in the house of commons
, that he became considerable , and was much trusted all the while the
king was at Oxford . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.47

He stayed beyond sea following the king's fortunes , till the
restoration ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.48

and was now an absolute favourite , and the chief or the only minister ,
but with too magisterial a way . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.49

He was always pressing the king to mind his affairs , but in vain .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.50

He was a good chancellor , only a little too rough , but very impartial
in the administration of justice . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.51

He never seemed to understand foreign affairs well :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.52

and yet he meddled too much in them . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.53

He had too much levity in his wit , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.54

and did not always observe the decorum of his post .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.55

He was haughty , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.56

and was apt to reject those who addressed themselves to him , with too
much contempt . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.57

He had such regard to the king , that when places were disposed of ,
even otherwise than as he advised , yet he would justify what the king
did , and disparage the pretensions of others , not without much scorn ;
which created him many enemies . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,169.58

He was indefatigable in business , <P_1.1,170> though the gout did often
disable him from waiting on the king : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.59

yet , during his credit , the king came constantly to him when he was
laid up by the gout . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.60

The man next to him in favour with the king was the duke of Ormond : a
man every way fitted for a court , of a graceful appearance , a lively
wit , and a cheerful temper : a man of great expense , decent even in
his vices , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.61

for he always kept up the forms of religion .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.62

He had gone through many transactions in Ireland with more fidelity than
success . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.63

He had made a treaty with the Irish , which was broken by the great body
of them , though some few of them adhered still to him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.64

But the whole Irish nation did still pretend , that , though they broke
the agreement first , yet he , or rather the king in whose name he had
treated with them , was bound to perform all the articles of the treaty
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.65

He had miscarried so in the siege of Dublin that it very much lessened
the opinion of his military conduct : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.66

yet his constant attendance on his master , his easiness to him , and
his great sufferings for him , raised him to be lord steward of the
household , and lord lieutenant of Ireland .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.67

He was firm to the protestant religion , and so far firm to the laws
that he always gave good advices : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.68

but even when bad ones were followed , he was not for complaining too
much of them . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.69

The earl of Southampton was next to these .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.70

He was a man of great virtues , and of very good parts :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.71

he had a lively apprehension , and a good judgment .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.72

He had merited much by his constant adhering to the king's interests
during the war , and by the large supplies he had sent him every year
during his exile ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.73

for he had a great estate , and only three daughters to inherit it .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.74

He was made lord treasurer : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.75

but he grew soon weary of business ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.76

for as he was subject to the stone , which returned often and violently
upon him , so he retained the principles of liberty ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.77

and did not go in to the violent measures of the court .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,170.78

When he saw the king's temper , and his way of managing , or rather of
spoiling , <P_1.1,171> business , he grew very uneasy ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.79

and kept himself more out of the way than was consistent with that high
post . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.80

The king stood in some awe of him , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.81

and saw how popular he would grow if put out of his service :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.82

and therefore he chose rather to bear with his ill humour and
contradiction , than to dismiss him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.83

He left the business of the treasury wholly in the hands of his
secretary , sir Philip Warwick , who was an honest but a weak man ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.84

he understood the common road of the treasury ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.85

but , though he pretended to wit and politics , he was not cut out for
that , and least of all for writing of history .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.86

But he was an incorrupt man , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.87

and during seven years management of the treasury he made but an
ordinary fortune out of it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.88

Before the restoration the lord treasurer had only a small salary , with
an allowance for a table , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.89

but he gave , or rather sold , all the subaltern places ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.90

and made great profits out of the estate of the crown :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.91

but now , that being gone , and the earl of Southampton disdaining to
sell places , the matter was settled so , that the lord treasurer was to
have 800 +L {TEXT:+L800} a year , and the king was to name all the
subaltern officers . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.92

And it continued to be so all his time : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.93

but since that time the lord treasurer has both the 800 +L {TEXT:+L800}
and a main hand in the disposing of those places .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,171.94

<P_1.1,172>

The man that was in the greatest credit with the earl of Southampton was
sir Anthony Ashley Cooper , who had married his niece , and became
afterwards so considerable , that he was raised to be earl of
Shaftesbury . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.96

Since he came to have so great a name , and that I knew him for many
years , and in a very particular manner , I will dwell a little longer
on his character ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.97

for it was of a very extraordinary composition .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.98

He began to make a considerable figure very early .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.99

Before he was twenty , he came into the house of commons ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.100

and was on the king's side , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.101

and undertook to get Wiltshire and Dorsetshire to declare for him ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.102

but he was not able to effect it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.103

Yet prince Maurice breaking articles to a town that he had got to
receive him , furnished him with an excuse to forsake that side , and to
turn to the parliament . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.104

He had a wonderful faculty in speaking to a popular assembly ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.105

and could mix both the facetious and the serious way of arguing very
agreeably . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.106

He had a particular talent of making others trust to his judgment , and
depend on it : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.107

and he brought over so many to a submission to his opinion , that I
never knew any man equal to him in the art of governing parties , and of
making himself the head of them . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.108

He was , as to religion , a deist at best .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,172.109

He had the dotage of astrology in him to a high <P_1.1,173> degree :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.110

he told me , that a Dutch doctor had from the stars foretold him the
whole series of his life . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.111

But that which was before him , when he told me this , proved false , if
he told true : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.112

for he said he was yet to be a greater man than he had been .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.113

He fancied that after death our souls lived in stars .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.114

He had a general knowledge of the slighter parts of learning ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.115

but understood little to bottom : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.116

so he triumphed in a rambling way of talking ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.117

but argued slightly when he was held close to any point .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.118

He had a wonderful faculty at opposing , and running things down ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.119

but had not the like force in building up .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.120

He had such an extravagant vanity in setting himself out , that it was
very disagreeable . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.121

He pretended that Cromwell offered to make him king .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.122

He was indeed of great use to him , in withstanding the enthusiasts of
that time . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.123

He was one of those who pressed him most to accept of the kingship ,
because , as he said afterwards , he was sure it would ruin him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.124

His strength lay in the knowledge of England , and of all the
considerable men in it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.125

He understood well the size of their understanding and their tempers :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.126

and he knew how to apply himself to them so dexterously , that , though
by his changing sides so often it was very visible how little he was to
be depended on , yet he was to the last much trusted by all the
discontented party . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.127

He had no sort of virtue , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.128

for he was both a lewd and corrupt man BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.129

and had no regard either to truth or justice .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.130

He was not ashamed to reckon up the many turns he had made :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.131

and he valued himself on the doing it at the properest season , and in
the best manner : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,173.132

and was not out of countenance in owning his <P_1.1,174> unsteadiness
and deceitfulness . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.133

This he did with so much vanity , and so little discretion , that he
lost many by it , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.134

and his reputation was at last run so low that he could not have held
much longer , had not he died in good time , either for his family or
for his party . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.135

The former would have been ruined if he had not saved it by betraying
his party . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.136

Another man very near of the same sort , who passed through many great
employments , was Annesley , advanced to be earl of Anglesea ; who had
much more knowledge , and was very learned , chiefly in the law .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.137

He had a faculty of speaking indefatigably upon every subject :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.138

but he spoke ungracefully , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.139

and did not know that he was ill at raillery ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.140

for he was always attempting it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.141

He understood our government well , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.142

and had examined far into the original of our constitution .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.143

He was capable of great application , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.144

and was a man of a grave deportment , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.145

but stuck at nothing , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.146

and was ashamed of nothing . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.147

He was neither loved nor trusted by any man or any side :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.148

and he seemed to have no regard to the common decencies of justice and
truth , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.149

but sold every thing that was in his power :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.150

and sold himself so often , that at last the price fell so low that he
grew useless , because he was so well known that he was universally
despised . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,174.151

<P_1.1,175>

Holles was a man of great courage , and of as great pride .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.153

He was counted for many years the head of the presbyterian party .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.154

He was faithful and firm to his side , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.155

and never changed through the whole course of his life .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.156

He engaged in a particular opposition to Cromwell in the time of the war
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.157

They hated one another equally . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.158

Holles seemed to carry this too far : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.159

for he would not allow Cromwell to have been either wise or brave ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.160

but often applied Solomon's observation to him , <font> that the battle
was not to the strong , nor favour to the men of understanding , but
that time and chance happened to all men <$$font> .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.161

He was well versed in the records of parliament ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.162

and argued well , but too vehemently ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.163

for he could not bear contradiction . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.164

He had the soul of an old stubborn Roman in him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.165

He was a faithful but a rough friend , and a severe but fair enemy .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.166

He had a true sense of religion , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.167

and was a man of an unblameable course of life , and of a sound judgment
when it was not biassed by passion . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.168

He was made a lord for his merit in bringing about the restoration .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.1,175.169

<P_1.2,156>

<heading>

CHAPTER IX . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.172

THE POPISH TERROR AND THE IMPEACHMENT OF DANBY .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.173

DISSOLUTION OF THE PENSIONARY PARLIAMENT .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.174

<$$heading>

Three days before Michaelmas Dr. Tonge came to me .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.176

I had known him at Sir Robert Moray's . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.177

He was a gardener and a chemist , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.178

and was full of projects and notions . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.179

He had got some credit in Cromwell's time ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.180

and that kept him poor . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.181

He was a very mean divine , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.182

and seemed credulous and simple , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.183

but I had always looked on him as a sincere man .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.184

At this time he told me of strange designs against the king's person ;
and that Coniers , a Benedictine , had provided himself of a poniard ,
with which he undertook to kill him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.185

I was amazed at all this , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.186

and did not know whether he was crazed , or had come to me on design to
involve me in a concealing of treason . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.187

So I went to Lloyd , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.188

and sent him to the secretary's office with an account of that discourse
of Tonge's , since I would not be guilty of misprision of treason .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.189

He found at the office that Tonge was making discoveries there , of
which they made no other account but that he intended to get himself to
be made a dean . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.190

I told this next morning to Littleton and Powle ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.191

and they looked on it as a design of Danby's , to be laid before the
next session , thereby to dispose them to keep up a greater force ,
since the papists were plotting against the king's life .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.192

This would put an end to all jealousies of the king , now the papists
were conspriring against his life . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.193

But lord Halifax , when I told him of it , had another apprehension of
it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,156.194

He said , considering the suspicions all had of the duke's religion , he
believed every discovery of that sort would raise a flame which the
court <P_1.2,157> would not be able to manage .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.195

Two days after that , Titus Oates was brought before the council .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.196

He was the son of an anabaptist teacher , who afterwards conformed and
got into orders , and took a benefice , as this his son did .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.197

He was proud and ill_natured , haughty , but ignorant .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.198

He conversed much with Socinians , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.199

and had been complained of for some very indecent expressions concerning
the mysteries of the Christian religion .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.200

He was once presented for perjury , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.201

but he got to be a chaplain in one of the king's ships , from which he
was dismissed upon a complaint of some unnatural practices , not to be
named . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.202

He got a qualification from the duke of Norfolk as one of his chaplains
: BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.203

and there he fell into much discourse with the priests that were about
that family . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.204

He seemed inclined to be instructed in the popish religion .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.205

One Hutchinson , a Jesuit , had that work put on him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.206

He was a weak and light-headed man , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.207

and afterwards came over to the church of England .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.208

He was a curate about the city near a year ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.209

and came oft to me , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.210

and preached once for me . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.211

He seemed to be a sincere , devout man , who did not at all love the
order , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.212

for he found they were a crafty , deceitful and meddling sort of people
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.213

They never trusted him with any secrets ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.214

but employed him wholly in making converts .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.215

He went afterwards back to that church .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.216

So all this was thought a juggle only to cast an odium upon Oates .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.217

He told me that Oates and they were always in ill terms .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,157.218

They did not allow him above nine@ @pence a day , of which he complained
<P_1.2,158> much , and Hutchinson relieved him often .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.219

They wished they could be well rid of him ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.220

and sent him beyond sea , being in very ill terms with him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.221

This made him conclude , that they had not at that time trusted him with
their secrets . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.222

He was kept for some time at S. Omer's , and from thence sent through
France into Spain , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.223

and was now returned into England . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.224

He had been long acquainted with Tonge , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.225

and made his first discovery to him , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.226

and by the means of one Kirby a chemist , that was sometimes in the
king's laboratory , they signified the thing to the king .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.227

So Tonge had an audience , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.228

and told the king a long thread of many passages , all tending to the
taking away his life ; of which the king , as he afterwards told me ,
knew not what it could amount to , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.229

yet among so many particulars he did not know but there might be some
truth . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.230

So he sent him to Danby , who intended to make some use of it , but
could not give much credit to it , and handled the matter too remissly :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.231

for , if at first the thing had been traced quick , either the truth or
the imposture of the whole affair might have been made appear .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.232

The king ordered Danby to say nothing of it to the duke .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.233

In the mean while some letters of an odd strain relating to plots and
discoveries were sent by the post to Windsor , directed to Bedingfield ,
the duke's confessor ; who , when he read them , carried them to the
duke , and protested he did not know what they meant , nor from whom
they came . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.234

The duke carried them to the king : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.235

and he fancied they were writ either by Tonge or Oates , and sent on
design to have them intercepted for giving credit to the discovery .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.236

The duke's enemies on the other hand gave out that he had got some hints
of the discovery , and brought these as a blind to impose on the king .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,158.237

The matter lay in a secret and remiss management for six <P_1.2,159>
weeks . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.238

At last , on Michaelmas eve , Oates was brought before the council ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.239

and entertained them with a long relation of many discourses he had
heard among the Jesuits , of their design to kill the king .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.240

He named persons , places , and times , almost without number .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.241

He said many Jesuits had disguised themselves , and were gone to
Scotland , and held field conventicles , on design to distract the
government there . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.242

He said he was sent first to St. Omer's , then to Paris , and from
thence to Spain , to negotiate this design ; and that upon his return ,
that {COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} he brought many letters and
directions from beyond sea , there was a great meeting of the Jesuits
held in London , in April last , in different rooms in a tavern near St.
Clement's ; and that he was employed to convey the resolutions of those
in one room to those in another , and so to hand them round .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.243

The issue of the consultation was , that they came to a resolution to
kill the king by shooting , stabbing , or poisoning him . That several
attempts were made , all which failed in the execution , as shall be
told when the trials are related . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.244

While he was going on , waiting for some certain evidence to accompany
his discovery , he perceived they were jealous of him ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.245

and so he durst not trust himself among them any more .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.246

In all this there was not a word of Coniers , of which Tonge had spoke
to me : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.247

so that was dropped . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.248

This was the substance of what he told the first day .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.249

Many Jesuits were upon this seized on that night , and the next day ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.250

and their papers were sealed up . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.251

Next day he accused Coleman of a strict correspondence with P. de la
Chaise , whose name he had not right , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,159.252

for he called him <P_1.2,160> Father le Shee :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.253

and he said in general that Coleman was acquainted with all their
designs . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.254

Coleman had a whole day to make his escape , if he had thought he was in
any danger . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.255

And he had conveyed all his papers out of the way :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.256

only he forgot a drawer under a table , in which the papers relating to
74 , 75 , and a part of 76 were left : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.257

and from these I drew the negotiations that I have formerly mentioned as
directed by him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.258

If he had either left all his papers or withdrawn all , it had been
happy for his party . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.259

Nothing had appeared if all had been destroyed :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.260

or if all had been left , it might have been concluded that the whole
secret lay in them . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.261

But he left enough to give great jealousy ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.262

and no more appearing all was believed that the witnesses had deposed .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.263

Coleman was out of the way the second day ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.264

but hearing that there was a warrant out against him , he delivered
himself next day to the secretary of state .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.265

When Oates and he were confronted , Oates did not know him at first :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.266

but he named him when he heard him speak ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.267

yet he only charged him upon hearsay : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.268

so he was put in a messenger's hands . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.269

Oates named Wakeman , the queen's physician ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.270

but did not know him at all , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.271

and being asked if he knew anything against him , he answered he did not
, adding , God forbid he should say any thing more than he knew , he
would not do that for all the world . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.272

Nor did he name Langhorn , the famous lawyer , that indeed managed all
their concerns . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.273

The king found him out in one thing : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.274

he said , when he was in Spain , he was carried to Don John , who
promised great assistance in the execution of their designs .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.275

The king , who knew Don John well , asked him what sort of a man he was
: BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.276

he answered , he was a tall lean man : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.277

now Don John was a little fat man . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.278

At first he seemed to design to recommend himself to the duke and the
ministers : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,160.279

for he said he heard the Jesuits oft <P_1.2,161> say , that the duke was
not sure enough to them : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.280

and they were in doubt whether he would approve of their killing the
king : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.281

but they were resolved if they found him stiff in that matter to
despatch him likewise . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.282

He said they had oft made use of his name , and counterfeited his hand
and seal without his knowledge . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.283

He said the Jesuits cherished the faction in Scotland against Lauderdale
; and intended to murder the duke of Ormond , as a great enemy to all
their designs : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.284

and he affirmed he had seen many letters in which these things were
mentioned , and had heard them oft spoke of .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.285

He gave a long account of the burning of London , at which time he said
they intended to have killed the king : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.286

but they relented when they saw him so active in quenching the fire ,
that , as he said , they had kindled . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.287

The whole town was all over inflamed with this discovery .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.288

It consisted of so many particulars that it was thought to be above
invention . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.289

But when Coleman's letters came to be read and examined , it got a great
confirmation ; since by these it appeared that so many years before ,
they thought the designs for the converting the nation , and rooting out
the pestilent heresy that had reigned so long in these northern kingdoms
, was very near its being executed : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.290

mention was oft made of the duke's great zeal for it :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.291

and as many indecent reflections were made on the king , for his
unconstancy , and his disposition to be brought to anything for money .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.292

They depended upon the French king's assistance :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.293

and therefore were earnest in their endeavours to bring about a general
peace , as that which must finish their design .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.294

On the second day after this discovery , the king went to Newmarket .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,161.295

<P_1.2,162>

This was censured as a very indecent levity in him , to go and see horse
races , when all people were so much possessed with this extraordinary
discovery , to which Coleman's letters had gained an universal credit .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.297

While the king was gone , Tonge desired to speak with me .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.298

So I went to him to Whitehall , where both he and Oates were lodged
under a guard . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.299

I found him so lifted up , that he seemed to have lost the little sense
he had . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.300

Oates came in BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.301

and made me a compliment , that I was one that was marked out to be
killed . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.302

He had before said the same of Stillingfleet ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.303

but he made that honour he did us too cheap , when he said Tonge was to
be served in the same manner , because he had translated the Jesuits'
morals into English . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.304

He broke out into great fury against the Jesuits ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.305

and said he would have their blood : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.306

but I , to divert him from that strain , asked him , what were the
arguments that prevailed on him to change his religion , and to go over
to the church of Rome ? BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.307

He upon that stood up , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.308

and laid his hands on his breast , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.309

and said , God and his holy angels knew that he had never changed , but
that he had gone among them on purpose to betray them .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.310

This gave me such a character of him , that I could have no regard to
anything that he either said or swore after that .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.311

A few days after this a very extraordinary thing happened , that
contributed more than any other thing to the establishing the belief of
all this evidence . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.312

Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey was an eminent justice of peace , that lived
near Whitehall . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.313

He had the courage to stay in London , and keep things in order , during
the plague , which gained him much reputation , and upon which he was
knighted . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.314

He was esteemed the best justice of peace in England ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.315

and kept the quarter where he lived in very good order .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.316

He was then entering upon a great design of taking up all beggars , and
putting them to work . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.317

He was thought vain and apt to take too much upon him :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.318

but there are so few men of public spirits , that small faults , though
they lessen them , yet ought to be gently censured .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.319

I knew him well , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,162.320

<P_1.2,163>

and never had reason to think him faulty that way .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.322

He was a zealous protestant , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.323

and loved the church of England , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.324

but had kind thoughts of the nonconformists ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.325

and was not forward to execute the laws against them :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.326

and he , to avoid the being put on doing that , was not apt to search
for priests or mass-houses : so that few men of his zeal lived in better
terms with the papists than he did . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.327

Oates went to him the day before he appeared at the council board ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.328

and made oath of the narrative he intended to make , which he afterwards
published . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.329

This seemed to be done in distrust of the privy council , as if they
might stifle his evidence ; which to prevent , he put it in safe hands .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.330

Upon that Godfrey was chid for his meddling in so tender a matter ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.331

and it was generally believed that Coleman and he were long in a private
conversation , between the time of his {COM:Coleman's} being put in the
messenger's hands and his being made a close prisoner : which was done
as soon as report was made to the council of the contents of his letters
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.332

It is certain Godfrey grew apprehensive and reserved :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.333

for meeting me on the streets , after some discourse of the present
state of affairs , he said he believed he himself should be knocked on
the head . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.334

Yet he took no care of himself , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.335

and went about , according to his own maxim , still without a servant ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.336

for he used to say that the servants in London were corrupted by the
idleness and ill company they fell into while they attended on their
masters . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.337

On that day fortnight in which Oates had made his discovery , being a
Saturday , he went abroad in the morning ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.338

and was seen about one o'clock near S. Clement's church ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.339

but was never seen any more . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.340

He was a punctual man to good hours : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.341

so his servants were amazed when he did not come home :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.342

yet , he having an ancient mother that lived at Hammersmith , they
fancied he had heard she was dying , and so was gone to see her .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.343

Next morning they sent thither , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.344

but heard no news of him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.345

So his two brothers , who lived in the city , were sent to .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.346

They were not acquainted with his affairs :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,163.347

so they did not know whether <P_1.2,164> he might not have stepped aside
for debt , since at that time all people were calling in their money ,
which broke a great many : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.348

but no creditor coming about the house , they on Tuesday published his
being thus lost . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.349

The council sat upon it , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.350

and were going to order a search of all the houses about the town ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.351

but were diverted from it , by many stories that were brought them by
the duke of Norfolk : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.352

sometimes it was said he was indecently married ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.353

and the scene was often shifted of the places where it was said he was .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.354

Norfolk's officiousness in this matter , and the last place he was seen
at being near Arundel house , brought him under great suspicion .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.355

On Thursday one came into a bookseller's shop after dinner ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.356

and said he was found thrust through with a sword .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.357

That was presently brought as news to me ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.358

but the reporter of it was not known . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.359

That night late his body was found in a ditch , about a mile out of town
, near St. Pancras church . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.360

His sword was thrust through him , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.361

but no blood was on his clothes or about him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.362

His shoes were clean , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.363

his money was in his pocket : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.364

but nothing was about his neck , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.365

and a mark was all round it , an inch broad , which shewed he was
strangled . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.366

His breast was likewise all over marked with bruises ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.367

and his neck was broken . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.368

All this I saw ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.369

for Lloyd and I went to view his body . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,164.370

There were many drops of white waxlights <P_1.2,165> on his breeches ;
which he never used himself ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,165.371

and since only persons of quality or priests use those lights , this
made all people conclude in whose hands he must have been .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,165.372

And it was visible he was first strangled , and then carried to that
place , where his sword was run into his dead body .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,165.373

For a while it was given out that he was a hypochondriacal man , and had
killed himself . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,165.374

Of this the king was possessed , till Lloyd went and told him what he
had seen . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,165.375

The body lay two days exposed , many going to see it , who went away
much moved with the sight . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,165.376

And indeed men's spirits were so sharpened upon it , that we all looked
on it as a very great happiness that the people did not vent their fury
upon the papists about the town . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-H,1.2,165.377

