<BEGIN_capel-1676-e3-h>

<P_88>

<heading:edcomment:LXXII_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX_TO_THE_KING>

May it please yr Ma=ty= Having sent over Sir Cyrill Wyche to attend yr
Majesties service in Parlm=t= who being sufficiently instructed to give
yr Mat=y= a full account of all ye affairs in this Kingdom T'@ @will be
unnecessary by this Letter to trouble yr Mat=y= with ye particulars .
Two things have principally employd my time here since my last kissing
yr Mat=y's= hands ; The {COM:sic} ascertaining ye Quit rents by reducing
those wch are upon barren lands , and the {COM:sic} settling ye province
of Conaght , both wch will I doubt not turne to acct for your Mat=y's=
service : CAPEL-1676-E3-H,88.4

For ye first of them will render that Revenue for ever after solvent ,
CAPEL-1676-E3-H,88.5

And ye latter as it is a work of great Justice and Charity , and will
relieve many poor familys , who have for divers years bin kept out of
their estate , so will it also in some proportion improve yr Mat=ey's=
Revenue by bringing many Quitt Rents into charge , wch could not be done
till ye lands were passt in patent : CAPEL-1676-E3-H,88.6

In both these as also in all other matters Sir Cyrill Wyche , when yr
Mat=y= shall please to allow him ye opportunity will give yr Mat=y= a
relacon of ye methods of my proceedings , and ye measures I take in all
, wherein I hope yr Mat=y= will receive that satisfaction as may bee a
further confirmation of ye truth and reallity , wherein I desire to
appear in all humility Yr Mat=ys= , etc. , etc. CAPEL-1676-E3-H,88.7

<P_126>

<heading:edcomment:CVII_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX_TO_THE_KING>

May it please yr Mat=y= . I doe with all humility acknowledge ye favour
yr Mat=y= was pleased to doe mee in signifying by a letter written with
yr owne hand yr intention of my returning home , and that yr Mat=ey= has
also therein given mee such an undeniable testimony of yr satisfaction
in my management of those affairs wch yr Mat=ey= hath for almost five
years committed to my care wth ye assurance yt you will be pleased to
retain in yr princely memory ye endeavors I have used justly and
honestly to discharge my Trust wch truly I can justify to all ye world I
have performed with an upright conscience CAPEL-1676-E3-H,126.10

and if any cavills have arisen agnst my proceedings here it may bee they
have bin founded upon my insisting strictly on yr Mat=y's= Right and not
admitting some persons to take that as due wch if allowed they ought to
accept as Grace from yr Majestie : CAPEL-1676-E3-H,126.11

And as it hath ever bin my practice in these Employments wherewith yr
Mat=y= hath thought fitt to honour mee strenuously to assert and
maintaine ye prerogative to wch you were borne so I hope yr Mat=y= will
be pleased to believe yt in all capacitys yr Mat=y= shall at any time
place mee I will continue steady and firme to ye same cause as being
with all devotion , etc. , etc. CAPEL-1676-E3-H,126.12

To Ye King CAPEL-1676-E3-H,126.13

Dublin Castle CAPEL-1676-E3-H,126.14

April 28 , 1677 . CAPEL-1676-E3-H,126.15

