<BEGIN_charles-1676-e3-h>

<P_24,A>

<heading:edcomment:XIV_CHARLES_R._TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

Charles R. CHARLES-1676-E3-H,24,A.4

Right Trusty and Right Wellbeloved Cousin & Councellour , Wee Greet you
Well . CHARLES-1676-E3-H,24,A.5

Whereas Wee are given to understand that the Earle of Orrery hath
applyed to you for your Lycence & permission to plant certaine greate
Guns in his Castle or House of Ballymartin within that Our Kingdome ,
and that hee doth further pretend to Power under the Greate Seale of
that Our Kingdome to fortify one other of his Houses called Charle Ville
in Our said Kingdome with Forts and Bullwarkes , and to Mount and use
Greate Guns on the said Fortifications , Wee can@ @not but take notice
to you how unfitt Wee thinke it That any such Lycences should be granted
, CHARLES-1676-E3-H,24,A.6

<P_25,A>

And therefore Wee doe not onely well approve yo=r= refusall of the
desire he made as to Ballymartin , CHARLES-1676-E3-H,25,A.8

But further Wee will , and accordingly Wee doe hereby sufficiently
authorise and require you to give order for the {COM:sic} recalling and
revokeing in such way and forme as shall bee found necessary the said
Power and Lycence soe pretended to be granted to him to fortify his
House of Charle Ville as aforesaid , in case upon enquiry you doe finde
that any such Lycence or Authority has been granted to him , which Wee
can@ @not but Looke upon as a surprise of a dangerous nature upon us ,
if indeed Wee have att any time heretofore made him such a Grant . For
which these Our Letters shall bee your Warrant .
CHARLES-1676-E3-H,25,A.9

And soe Wee bid you heartily farewell . CHARLES-1676-E3-H,25,A.10

Given att Our Court att Whitehall the 7th day of September in the 24th
yeare of Our Reigne 1672 . CHARLES-1676-E3-H,25,A.11

<P_112,A>

<heading:edcomment:LXXVIII_CHARLES_R._TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

Charles R. CHARLES-1676-E3-H,112,A.14

Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin & Counsellor , Wee greet you
well , CHARLES-1676-E3-H,112,A.15

Whereas Wee were pleased to referre the examination of the late
difference arisen in the Corporae~on {COM:sic} of Our City <P_113,A> of
Dublin in that Our Kingdome , about the Election of Com~on Councell men
out of the severall Companies , to the Com~ittee of Our Privy Councill
for the affaires of Ireland , and they having reported their opinion
thereupon to us , and Wee considered & approved of the same , Wee have
thought fit in pursuance thereof to signify to you Our Pleasure that the
last choice made by the Lord Mayor of that Our Citty of the compleate
number of Com~on Counsell men all at once , leaving out the ten or
eleven Roman Catholiques that were chosen at the first choice , shall
stand and be confirmed CHARLES-1676-E3-H,113,A.16

and Wee doe hereby require and direct you to doe all things , and give
all necessary Orders for the speedy settling of this affaire accordingly
. CHARLES-1676-E3-H,113,A.17

And for soe doing this shall be your Warrant .
CHARLES-1676-E3-H,113,A.18

Given at Our Court at Whitehall , the {COM:a_blank_in_the_edition} day
of August , 1673 , in the Five_and_Twentieth yeare of Our Reigne .
CHARLES-1676-E3-H,113,A.19

<P_197,A>

<heading:edcomment:CXXX_CHARLES_R._TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

Charles R. CHARLES-1676-E3-H,197,A.22

Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin and Councellour , Wee greet you
well . CHARLES-1676-E3-H,197,A.23

Whereas Wee have been informed of certaine disorders fomenting in Our
Citty of Dublin to create disturbances upon y=e= account of y=e= late
Rules for regulating that and the other <P_198,A> Corporations of Our
Kingdome of Ireland . And Whereas the procuring of hands to a Petition
against a Law is in it self an Act of Sedition , especially when
prepared to be addressed to such a Power as can@ @not change the Law ,
though never soe greivous . Wee having taken the same into Our
consideration , and that the said Rules , as farre as wee can take
notice of them , are extreamely usefull to Government in many respects ,
and that if Wee should think fit to give way against any complaints ,
though they may seem very specious , might yet in the consequence
disturbe Our whole Government there . And that the said Rules are of
equall credit and Authority with the Act of Settlement , the attempt of
breaking any part whereof Wee look upon as very dangerous and
prejudiciall to Our Service . Wee have , therefore , thought fit to
direct and require you , as Wee doe by these Presents , to use such
means as you shall think fit for the effectuall {COM:sic} suppressing
all Preparations to such a Disorder in the same manner as you would doe
any other Sedition , and that you give Order to Our Atturney or
Sollicitor Generall there to proceed by information against the
Principall movers in this businesse , if you should think it for Our
Service . CHARLES-1676-E3-H,198,A.24

Neverthelesse , Our pleasure is , that you enquire and certify unto Us ,
with what convenient speed you may , what Numbers there are of persons
living in any of the Corporations of that Our Kingdome within the
benefit of the words <bracket> and others <$$bracket> in the second Rule
, that may give occasion of offence , to the End that Wee may be
informed whether there may be any seeming grounds for these complaints .
CHARLES-1676-E3-H,198,A.25

And for soe doing this shall be your Warrant .
CHARLES-1676-E3-H,198,A.26

And soe Wee bid you heartily farewell . CHARLES-1676-E3-H,198,A.27

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 31=st= day of March , 1674 , in the
Six_&_Twentieth yeare of Our Reigne . CHARLES-1676-E3-H,198,A.28

