<BEGIN_chatton-1691-e3-h>

<P_2,159>

<heading:edcomment:CHARLES_HATTON_TO_HIS_WIFE>

Nov=r= 11 , 1690 {COM:preceding_word_"1690"_emended} .
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,159.4

I am very sorry , my dearest , y=t= y=r= son Robin continues soe very
ill . CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,159.5

God grant he may receive benefit by the advice of y=e= new surgeon .
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,159.6

But , my dearest , I fear my threats will prove more effectual then I
designed ; CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,159.7

for I told thee in jest if thou did pass Sunday thou shou'dst be shut
out , w=ch= is likely to prove true in earnest ,
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,159.8

for y=e= hungry head jaylor here is soe greedy of his pretended fee he
growes every day more and more barbarous and vexatious .
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,159.9

Had he been educated at Ambonia , he cou'd not be more merciless .
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,159.10

And finding y=t= noe person will take notice of his extravagant usage of
me , he is y=e= more encouraged therto . CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,159.11

<P_2,160>

Worthy M=r= Ennis , who being turned out of his living here for not
swearing and therfore not capacitated to exercise his ecclesiastick
function in his own country , Scotland , is this weeke going to try
whither he can@ @not more quietly live among y=e= heathens in America ,
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.13

and last Sunday in y=e= afternoon came to take leave of me ,
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.14

and brought w=th= him M=r= Sawyer , who came to renew y=t= 2d time I saw
him y=e= promise he made me y=e= first time I ever did , w=ch= is to be
bayle for me . CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.15

But on Monday morning came gingle-key , by his masters order , foaming
at y=e= warder for leting any person come to me ,
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.16

and charged him he shou'd let noebody come at me .
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.17

Certainly I shall be either tryed or bayled .
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.18

If tryed , it is a strang outlandish barbarity not practic'd heretofore
in England not to have y=e= advise of counsell to prepare for a defence
, and , in order therto , to advise w=th= y=m= .
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.19

I am certain , in y=e= Popish plot all y=e= prisoners had , some
considerable time before their tryal , y=e= freedom of having their
freinds and councell come to them . CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.20

If I be bayled , it is very reasonable I shou'd endeavour to find out
some persons who are willing to doe me y=t= kindness , and ag=t= whom
ther can be noe exception ; CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.21

and y=t= I find very difficult ; CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.22

and pri@ @thee , my dearest , doe you endeavour w=t= you can to find out
some , CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.23

for , tho very probably I shall not have occasion for them , yet it
wou'd be very vexatious to want them shou'd ther be occasion .
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.24

I am very much concern'd my brother Hatton shou'd for his health be
forced out of town . CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.25

Both for his sake and my own , I wish you cou'd contrive some way to
acquaint my brother w=th= my distress and prevaile w=th= him to
endeavour to get his son in law to stop y=e= mouth of y=e= hungry cur
here , CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.26

for I can@ @not doe it w=th= a crust , CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.27

it wou'd be too costly . CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.28

My cloak transformed in a coat is too thinn for this cold place .
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.29

Pray let y=e= linning of y=e= cloake be sent to y=e= taylor to interline
y=e= coat . CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.30

The buttons are as you ordred , CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.31

and therfore you may be secure they please me ,
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.32

and I assure you they doe without any compliment ;
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.33

but , if they did not , I durst not find fault , w=ch= I know you will
beleeve . CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,160.34

<P_2,161>

A dieu , my dearest . CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,161.36

If you come alone , you are welcome ; but more , if w=th= liberty of my
seeing my freinds . CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,161.37

If that honest Scot , Mr. Ennis <paren> whose integrity is a disgrace
to most Englishmen of his coate <$$paren> , comes to bid you farewell ,
pray acknowledge his kindness to me , y=r=self , and y=r= son .
CHATTON-1691-E3-H,2,161.38

