<BEGIN_clowes-1602-e2-h>

<P_9>

The Cure of the foresaid Euill is manyfolde : to wit , inwardly and
outwardly , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,9.3

and is performed by two speciall remedies : the one <font> Medicinall
<$$font> , and the other <font> Instrumentall <$$font> , without the
which fewe good workes or Cures in Chyrurgery can be brought to
perfection : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,9.4

The reason is , because in this Cure , the vncleanenesse of the body is
such , which feedes the matter of the disease . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,9.5

Therefore , first of all the matter must be purged ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,9.6

for as it is said , the roote of al the Cure is y=e= wel purging of the
body , whereby Nature is the better enabled to expell and vnburden her
selfe of many bad and vnprofitable humours . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,9.7

And now <paren> by the fauour of the learned <$$paren> I will therefore
begin with remedies <font> Medicinall <$$font> , according to the maner
of Method , published by <font> Calmatheus <$$font> , one whome amongst
many other learned men in Phisicke and Chirurgery , I haue obserued most
diligently , as it were a Day-starre or Christallin cleare looking
glasse , following him with feruent zeale and earnest desire : by reason
<paren> as it seemeth vnto me <$$paren> he was not ignorant in any thing
that might make for the truth of his writing , chiefly for the Cure of
the foresaid Euill . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,9.8

Yet <paren> I protest <$$paren> I am no such deuote fauorite of his , or
any other mans whatsoeuer , further then iustly they haue deserued :
which is the onely cause that hath mooued mee to haue a reuerent
estimation of him and all other learned men , whether they doe remaine
beyond the Sea , or otherwise abide with vs at home .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,9.9

Now followeth the maner of Methode , by Phisicall remedies for the Cure
of <font> Struma <$$font> , or the Euill which our Kings or Queenes haue
and doe still Cure : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,9.10

the experimentall proofe thereof I haue often times seene effected :
wherefore I will be short , and presently proceede vnto the first
intention . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,9.11

<P_10>

<heading>

THE FIRST INTENTION PHISICALL BY INWARD MEANES . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.14

<$$heading>

The first Intention <paren> after <font> Calmatheus <$$font> <$$paren>
in the 12. Chap. of his book , for the general cure of <font>
Vnnaturall Tumours <$$font> , is that the curing of this disease called
<font> Struma <$$font> , doth co~sist in Dyet that dryeth moderately , &
heateth and attenuateth the humours : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.16

Hunger is profitable , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.17

and fulnes is hurtfull : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.18

Sleep and Idlenes are euill : exercise before meate very good :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.19

the vse of <font> Sulphure <$$font> or Alume water , is very good and
profitable . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.20

<heading>

THE SECOND INTENTION PHISICALL BY INWARD MEANES .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.22

<$$heading>

The second Intention is the vse of breaking , attenuating , mundifying &
opening Medicaments ; as are these Remedies now following .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.24

viz. Recipe . Rad, Ireos Cort. Sambucj. Boiled in white wine ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.25

then adde vnto this decoction , a quantity of Ginger .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.26

For this decoction breaketh , attenuateth , openeth & mundifieth
dolorous <font> tumors <$$font> : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.27

so doth it also prouoke vrine , w=c= in this affect is a special matter
. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.28

The often vse of the Pilles of Hiera simplex is much commended to cast
out Flegme of the stomacke & guts . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.29

But if so be that thou wilt purge the whole body , thou shalt vse the
Pilles of Agarico Coccis : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.30

if thou list to dissolue & cast out Phlegme , these Pils following must
be taken , viz. Pillulae de Sagap : de Opopan , de Elleboro , de
Euphorbio . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.31

The Phisitians in times past commended the powder of <font> Turbith ,
Ginger <$$font> , and <font> Suger <$$font> , of each equall parts : The
<font> Doses <$$font> whereof was to two <font> Dragmes <$$font> .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,10.32

<P_11>

<heading>

THE THIRD INTENTION PHISICALL BY INWARD MEANES . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,11.35

<$$heading>

The third Intention is the vse of this powder , which doth consume
<paren> as they terme it <$$paren> the Antecedent matter , which it doth
as well by his manifest quality , and <paren> as they say <$$paren> by a
secret property . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,11.37

<font> This powder doth consume Phlegme , by little & little .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,11.38

Rx. Rad. Aristo. Rotundae . Raphani . Spattulae foetidae . An.
{TEXT:dram_symbol} i. Fol. Pimpinell. Pilosell. Rutae Maioris . An.
{TEXT:dram_symbol} ii. Scrophulariae . Philipend. An.
{TEXT:dram_symbol} ss. Semen Anisi . {TEXT:dram_symbol} ii. Zingiber
. {TEXT:dram_symbol} i. Turbith Optimi Sene Orient. An.
{TEXT:dram_symbol} iii. Saccari Albissimi {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iii. .
<$$font> CLOWES-1602-E2-H,11.39

Make all these into powder , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,11.40

and let the Patient take euery day in the morning a Spoonefull , with
white Wine , or the water of Broome . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,11.41

<font> Guido <$$font> taketh the forenamed powders ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,11.42

and boyleth them in white Wine vntill halfe , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,11.43

& giueth euery third day one quarter thereof . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,11.44

<font> Galen <$$font> approoueth & commendeth the vse of Theriaca Vetus
, Athanasia et Ambrosia . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,11.45

The vse of Aurea Alexa~drina for the co~forting of y=e= stomack , is
very good . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,11.46

Also it is said <P_12> that Theriaca Athanasia doe both resolue , breake
and digest humours , being compact and gathered together in the
profundity of the body . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.47

<font> Mercurialis <$$font> saith moreouer , that about the purging of
children <paren> which is diligently to be obserued <$$paren> the state
of children is weake , that it must bee handled with verie gentle
medicines , & rather to be often repeated , & more easier then to
minister any stronge Medicines : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.48

therfore the belly shall thus be mollifyed . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.49

Rx. Mellis Rosatj. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iii. Decoctionis fructuum .
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. Foliorum Senae {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii. ss.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.50

Misce . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.51

But that the humours may be prepared , it must bee done with this
Medicine . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.52

Rx. Folior. Scrophulariae Plantaginis . Betonicae . Menthae . Ana
M. ss. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.53

Make a Decoction according to Arte , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.54

and then take of the said Decoction {TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. Syrup Rosatj
recentis , Oxymel. simplisis Ana. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ss.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.55

Mingle these : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.56

When the humours bee prepared , they may be purged with this Medicine .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.57

Rx. Agaricj Trochiscat. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. Squinantj. gra. ij.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.58

Steep them in Betony water CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.59

and straine them . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.60

and put thereto . Rx. Mellis Rosatj solutiuj {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii.
. Electuarii de Psylio {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. . Decoctionis Cordialis
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. Polipodio {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,12.61

Thus much as concerning this briefe note , or compendious Methode of the
forenamed Authors , which may very well serue for a very fit President
or beginning <P_13> to the rest that followeth : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.62

Now it remaineth that I make heere also report of the singular and rare
efficacy of our manuel operation therunto annexed and belonging , with
the right vse of the topicall or outward remedies , which is to be
externally applyed . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.63

The reason is , because it is referred vnto the skilfull Chirurgians
manuel or handy working , for the Cure of this great Infirmity , which
doth outwardly affect the superficiall parts of the body .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.64

For <paren> as saith <font> Iacobus Ruffus <$$font> <$$paren> that to
the perfection and accomplishing of the foresaid Cure <paren> called ,
<font> The Euill by the King , or Queene Cured <$$font> <$$paren> he
doth reduce it into sixe Intentions Chirurgicall , as followeth .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.65

The experimentall verifying of his excellent skill in this disease , as
also in many others , is by diuers worthy men often times commended :
which Malady doth vexe and trouble most pitifully the common sort of
people . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.66

The first Intention is , In Attritione , et Compressione .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.67

1

The second Intention is , In Discussione , et Resolutione .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.69

2

The third Intention is , In Suppuratione et Maturatione .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.71

3

The fourth Intention is , In Incisione et Extractione .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.73

4

The fift Intention is , In Corrosione et Mundificatione .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.75

5

The sixt Intention is , In Obligatione et Evultione .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.77

6

Also <paren> after <font> Fuchsius <$$font> and other learned
{HELSINKI:leaned} men <$$paren> it is accordingly to be vnderstood as
followeth : who also hath written of these Phlegmaticall or Glandulous
abcessions called <font> Struma <$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,13.79

<P_14>

If <paren> say they <$$paren> these abscessions that bee seated in the
stronge parts of the body , and because they are not yet olde and
inueterate , hauing a thin <font> Cystis <$$font> that couereth them :
these are to be appeased and consumed , and after dryed vp .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,14.81

<heading>

THE FIRST INTENTION CHYRURGICALL BY OUTWARD MEANES .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,14.83

<$$heading>

Now I will set downe Examples and Instances for the Cure of the said
Malady , the which I haue obserued and gathered <paren> as heereafter
ensueth <$$paren> for the perfection and accomplishing of the before
named first Intention , if the strength and ability of the Patient will
serue and admit the same . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,14.85

Then one chiefe thing <paren> as you are before tolde <$$paren> is ,
that the Patient doe keep a thin & sparing dyet , which is the efficient
cause belonging vnto Phisick . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,14.86

The reason is , as I haue noted , that those which are thus affected ,
haue alwaies a great inclinatio~ to a grosse disordered liberty of
feeding : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,14.87

Therefore the Patient must be sustained with such meates , as are
agreeable to Nature , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,14.88

and to eschew such meates which make grosse Juyce : and not <paren> as
it is said <$$paren> to lay gorge vpon gorge . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,14.89

And further yee shall note , though it bee said before , that abstinence
is greatly to be commended : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,14.90

yet you must consider it is not meant , that Nature should there by bee
enfeebled , or ouerthrowne , and that especially in weake bodyes , great
care must be had : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,14.91

But onely to keepe all possible abstinence , that is to eate and drinke
sparingly and measurably , onely to preserue the strength , and to
satisfie Nature : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,14.92

I meane , that it bee such as is agreeable to the strength of the
Patient , and <P_15> greatnes of the Infirmity . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.93

Likewise it is said , the often vse of purging and bleeding on both the
Armes , is profitable . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.94

Also , it is auailable to vse Frictions , Rubbings , Borings ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.95

and Blisterings is much praised after purgings , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.96

for it stoppeth the flowing matter <paren> being applyed vpon the head
<$$paren> by revulsion or drawing back , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.97

& causeth euacuatio~ . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.98

Moreouer , it is said , y=t= to discusse these kinds of <font> Tumours
<$$font> which are found in mooueable parts , & superficially lodged
neer vnto the outward parts , A plate of Leade is most familiar therfore
, especially in young persons , by reason of the raritye and softnes of
the skinne : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.99

It is thought vnfit <paren> by diuers learned men <$$paren> to blister
Childrens heads with <font> Cantharides <$$font> ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.100

it hath been seene to cause much paine and pissing of bloud :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.101

but to doe it by aduisement , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.102

either with Mustard or with Nettles , is good . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.103

Also , many learned men , of a certaine knowledge and sound
vnderstanding , haue in their bookes greatly commended a playster made
thus : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.104

Recipe . Olde dryed Goates dung , Hony and Vineger , being decocted at
an easie fire , to the consistence of a playster .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.105

Also , Doues dung mingled with Hony , hath the same effect ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.106

So is it by me also wel approoued , this plaister called <font>
Oxicroceum <$$font> , whose composition is not far to be sought for .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.107

Rx. Cerae , Picis , Colophen , Croci An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iiii. .
Terebinth , Galbanu~ , Ammoniaci . Mastici , Olibanum An.
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. {TEXT:dram_symbol} iiij.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.108

Dissolue the Gums in Vineger , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.109

and powder that which is to be powdred , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.110

& so make a plaister according to Arte : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.111

Also a plaister of Figs baked and spred , and so applyed vpon <font>
Struma <$$font> is approoued good . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.112

Likewise , Oleum Cucumiris Asininus , dropped into the eare , on that
side where the <font> Struma <$$font> is , is most effectuall to
disperse and dissolue . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,15.113

In like maner , is generally commended Emplastru~ de <P_16> Ranis cum
Mercurio , to be appropriate and respectiue in this Cure , to consume
superfluous humidity , engendring this disease .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,16.114

Howbeit , vpon a time a certaine repyning enuious man , being full
gorged with a malicious rayling spirit , being proudely giuen <paren> in
the gall of much bitternesse , with many scandalous words , and bragging
comparisons ill beseeming his person <$$paren> reported that the
aforesaid plaister De Ranis was dangerous vnto the patient ;
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,16.115

and said , who so did holde the contrary opinion , it was erroneous ,
foolish and deceiptfull : by reason <paren> quoth hee <$$paren> of the
coldnes of the Quick-siluer : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,16.116

and boldly did seeme to maintaine the same , with a number of very
spruse termes , and picked phrases , like as young Children vse to doe ,
when <paren> in mockery <$$paren> they counterfeite a strange kinde of
language , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,16.117

& forsooth placed them as it were in <font> Geometrical <$$font>
proportions , as though he had bin the onely Son of <font> Archimedes
<$$font> that great <font> Geometritian <$$font> .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,16.118

In deed it is a most true saying : <font> That fish which is bred in the
durt will alwaies taste of the Mud <$$font> : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,16.119

And I told him that I neuer yet found any more coldnes in this Playster
, then there is heate in a paynted fire . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,16.120

But this I doe speake vpon mine owne knowledge , that there is as much
difference in Arte and Judgement , betweene this odde fellow <paren>
which would seeme to bee a second <font> Aesculapius <$$font> <$$paren>
and a man replenished with true knowledge indeed , as is betweene a
Master Cooke and a Scullian of a Kitchin . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,16.121

Howbeit , hee said also , that his skill was such , that if a man were
wounded at <font> Yorke <$$font> , bring him the weapon that hurt the
Patient , and he would cure him <font> forsooth <$$font> by onely
dressing of the weapon , and though he neuer see the Patient . As
certaine as the Sea burnes . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,16.122

And now heere I will surcease to speake any further of these matters ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,16.123

for I regarded not such sayings , sith it is truely said ; <font> Euery
man must yeeld an accompt , both of <P_17> his ease , and of his labour
. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,17.124

Themistocles <$$font> , a Captaine of the <font> Grecians <$$font>
<paren> as Historians make mention <$$paren> supposed it better to be
enuyed of the malicious , then to liue in Idlenes and basenes of minde ,
without doing some good for the benefit of his Country and Common wealth
, wherein he was borne and bred . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,17.125

Now to the second Intention , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,17.126

and so in order with the rest as they doe lye , and offer themselues
vnto vs . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,17.127

<heading>

THE SECOND INTENTION CHYRURGICALL BY OUTWARD MEANES .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,17.129

<$$heading>

The second Intention Chirurgicall , is the right vse of those remedies
which doe mollifye , discusse and consume great abscessions , which are
not yet hard and inueterate . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,17.131

And that the same is true , may easily be gathered as followeth .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,17.132

And for that I wold haue this second Intention made plaine <paren> as
much as in me lyeth <$$paren> and also familiarly knowne vnto the
studyous Reader : I doe therfore say , It is meete and conuenient , that
those Medicamentes which are to bee vsed , be of the Nature and property
to molifie and discusse , and so to open the powers of the skinne by
euaporating , breathing and scattering abroad , and make thinne the
grosse matter and Phlegme . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,17.133

Then for the better performance thereof , without further discoursing ,
I will heere presently set downe <paren> as it were <$$paren> a
Store-house of diuers and sundry approoued Chirurgicall remedyes ,
necessary for the curing and safe healing of the forenamed <font>
Strumacic <$$font> and <font> Phlegmaticall <$$font> sicknesse : The
which from time to time I haue by experience <paren> the Mistris of all
Artes and Sciences <$$paren> carefully obserued , and faithfully also
collected out of the famous writinges of sundry worthy Authors , <P_18>
as also out of the fruitefull labours , of diuers men famous in
experience : whose painful trauailes and studyes , haue <paren> at this
day <$$paren> most excellently refined this worthy Arte of Chyrurgerie
from <font> Barbarisme <$$font> : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,18.134

otherwise it is greatly to be feared , a number at this day had not been
so skilfull and rich in knowledge , and otherwise , as they are said to
be . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,18.135

Therefore we ought not to thinke any study , paines , or trauaile too
great , wherein we hope of much benefit to our patients , and also
profit and commodity to our selues : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,18.136

And heere I must needs say , <paren> according to my poore ability
<$$paren> I haue my self been very industrious for the common benefit ,
and good of others , truly to set downe diuers approoued remedies of
mine own collection : wherin <paren> to my knowledge <$$paren> I haue
not in al this whole discourse , published any superfluous and
vnapprooued remedies , or otherwise kept backe any worthy secret I had :
but as did the <font> Euangelicall <$$font> and heauenly woma~ mentioned
in y=e= Scriptures , who presented into the Lords Treasury al y=e=
wealth & substance she had . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,18.137

Notwithstanding , I haue read y=t= men in times past did with great care
& diligence consecrate & keep secret <paren> as a precious treasure vnto
the~selues <$$paren> al such chosen & peculiar remedies , w=c= they had
experienced & approoued for the curing & healing of any dangerous malady
: and <paren> as it is said <$$paren> bound themselues by oath one to
another , not to bewray their Secrets by their bookes or writing .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,18.138

Howbeit , I more regarding the publick vtility & good of posterity , did
w=t= great care & diligence consider with my self , what profit can
there be to any ma~ to bury his labors in the lake of obliuion , or
otherwise to hide it in the denne of darkenesse .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,18.139

And although I know the matter heer spoken of , may seeme a paradox to
some , & so of smal worth : neuerthelesse , although I am none of the
greatest Clarks , yet I know it wil be more auailable , then some
happily doe make account of . For which cause I haue laboured w=t= as
much perspicuity & <P_19> plainnes , as possible I could , to deliuer
the truth of my honest & faithful good meaning , so far foorth as God
hath enabled me in knowledge , skil & memory . Wherefore I meane heere
presently to make publicke & open testimony of the same , though now and
then I make a little digression , and swarue from my matter , by reason
of certaine Crosbyters , who haue heertofore <paren> behinde my backe ,
and to my face also <$$paren> not a little abused me :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,19.140

Howbeit , I wil heere conclude this discourse concerning this <font>
Second Intention Chirurgicall <$$font> , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,19.141

& doe confesse and considerately affirme , that there is but few mens
labors at the first made so perfect , but that in processe of time &
further consideration , they may be bettered , corrected and amended .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,19.142

Yet I can@ @not but much maruaile , that wise men now_a_daies are growne
to this passe , that they do so seriously follow exorcismes and the
Illusions of certaine Charmes of Clowtes and Rags , which is very
inhumane and barbarous ; neuer practised , neither written of , nor
allowed by any learned Phisitio~ or Chirurgian that euer I yet heard or
read of . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,19.143

Howbeit , the world is <paren> as it were <$$paren> led in a stringe &
carried away to beleeue these vanities , which make a shadow or shew of
verity for the safe curing of diuers maladies , & sildome <paren> they
say <$$paren> misse not : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,19.144

But I know the contrary is true , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,19.145

for I haue cured both old & young persons , when these Charmers of
clowtes & rags , with their incredible operations haue failed them , &
prooued flat foolery & absurdities . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,19.146

But to leaue this new Leach craft , with thier doting inuentions , I wil
here speake of diuers remedies very respectiue & appropriate , for the
cure of the before named infirmity , as a president and example for
young practizers of Chirurgery to follow . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,19.147

Now vnto the said <font> Second Intention <$$font> , which is first to
set downe those special remedies , whose properties are to open the
pooers of the skin , & to soften the hard parts , by insencible
transspiration . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,19.148

<P_20>

A choyse and speciall mollyfying and resoluing plaister ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.150

and serueth well for the curing of this greeuance : As my selfe haue
many times approoued . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.151

Rx. Serapini {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iiii. . Ammoniaci
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} iii. . Bdellij {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. . Galbani
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. . Euphorbij {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii. .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.152

Let these be dissolued in good Malmesey , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.153

and then adde thereunto . Ol. Lilior. Ol. Amigdalar. An.
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. Propoleos {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iiii. ss.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.154

Misc , fiat Implastrum . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.155

Another . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.156

Rx. Galbani . Ammoniaci . Picis Albae . An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol}
iii. Cerae Citrinae . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iiii. Ol. pedis Vaccini .
q. s. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.157

Misce . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.158

I doe many times insteed of the Oyle , take the Marew :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.159

Then what profit doth ensue , time will approue the same .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.160

Another . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,20.161

Rx. Farinae fabar. Farinae Hord. An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} v. <P_21>
Liqueritiae , Rad. Althaeae . Picis . An. {TEXT:dram_symbol} x.
Cerae Albae . Adipis Anserini . An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} x.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.162

Let there be added the Vrine of a Boy , and of olde Oyle q s .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.163

And so boyle it to the forme of a Plaister . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.164

Another . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.165

Rx. Gum. Ammoniaci . lb. ss. Rad. Brioniae in pul.
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. Turp. Mineralis . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i.
Cinnabrij . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} x. Cerae . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.166

Let the Gumme <font> Ammoniacke <$$font> bee dissolued in Vineger ,
according to Arte , and after made vp in rowles .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.167

Among a number of his memorable deedes , which hee hath left vnto the
minde and memory of posterity , this his Plaister deserueth great
commendations . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.168

Another . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.169

<font> Mercurialis <$$font> commendeth a Playster made of <font> Lyme
<$$font> and <font> Salt-Petre <$$font> , of each like much , being
mixed with <font> Barrowes grease q. s. <$$font>
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.170

But such remedyes are too stronge for Children , least it cause Agues ,
and hurt the soft and tender flesh of their bodies , <paren> chiefly
about the Necke <$$paren> it is to be auoyded . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.171

Moreouer , I read , that to {COM:sic} make a Playster of <font> Nitrum
<$$font> and <font> Lyme <$$font> , of each a like quantity , and of
<font> Cardamonium <$$font> & <font> Fenygreeke <$$font> 4. times so
{SIC:so_so} much , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.172

and with Hony make heereof a Plaister . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,21.173

<P_22>

Aetius saith , when <font> Struma <$$font> beginneth in children , they
must be molifyed and dispersed : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.175

And for mollifying in children is approoued this remedy following .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.176

Rx. Diachylon . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iiii. Oesypi .
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. Radicum Ireos Pulueriset. {TEXT:ounce_symbol}
iiii. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.177

Misce . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.178

Another . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.179

Recipe . The Lees of white or red wine , & of stronge Vineger , of each
a quart : Mallowe leaues 4. good handful : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.180

Boile them till the leaues bee tender , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.181

then stampe the leaues , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.182

& put them againe into the said licour , with halfe a pound of sweet
butter : of barley meale & of beane meale , of each a good handfull : Of
Linseede & Fenigrek of each 4. ounces : Of the powder of red Rose
leaues one good handfull : Of yolkes of Egges 3. or 4. an of Saffron
the waight of 3. d. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.183

fiat cataplas. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.184

I might easily bring in a confused number of other remedies to the same
end & purpose , out of diuers learned mens writings , which heer to
repeate were needles , and to no great vse , sith I know these may
suffice : Wherefore I thinke it good to pretermit the nominating of the
rest , &c. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.185

<heading>

THE THIRD INTENTION CHYRURGICALL BY OUTWARD MEANES .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.187

<$$heading>

The third Intention is , to ripen , open and clense such <font>
Phlegmaticall <$$font> Corruptions and Ulcerous Apostumes , which do
pertaine to Suppuration : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,22.189

This needeth no long discourse , sith it plainely appeareth , <P_23>
that these troublesome , hard kernelly swellings , be found so
rebellious , that they doe resist all emollientes and <font>
Diaphoreticall <$$font> remedies before named : by meanes wherof it can
not be dissolued & consumed as we happily would , or do desire . For
which causes we are further constrained to alter our course , with due
consideration , that is to wit : Not to leaue the Patient helples , but
to vse stronger Medicamentes , I meane <font> Suppuratiues <$$font> , as
is before said , such as whose property is to bring superfluous humours
to maturity and ripenes , by these and such like Emplasticke remedies ,
which <paren> as it is said <$$paren> doe by the closing of the pooers
of the skin , augment the naturall heate , whereby the matter so
enclosed causeth the generatio~ of matter or Pus .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,23.190

But I must confesse , I haue not often times seene these hard
Phlegmaticall abcessions easily brought to suppuration .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,23.191

The matter being once colde , dull , Clammy , hard and knotty , and
deeply seated , and of a long continuance in a body , whose skin is
grosse and thicke , & the matter hardly compact : These kindes <paren> I
haue found <$$paren> do sildome come to maturity and ripenes , vnlesse
<paren> as <font> Cornelius Celsus <$$font> saith <$$paren> the said
<font> Tumours <$$font> bee mixed and made of matter and bloud .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,23.192

And <font> Trincauel <$$font> reparteth , that some of these <font>
Tumours <$$font> that haue heate in them , doe ripen and come to matter
& suppuration : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,23.193

But there be others that be more hard , and doe resist suppuration ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,23.194

and then they come neerer vnto the nature of a <font> Scirrhus <$$font>
. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,23.195

Now it followeth that I set downe those approoued remedies , being in
vulgar vse , seruing for suppuration , which are long agoe ratifyed and
well allowed of , by a vniforme consent , both of olde & late writers ,
which were men of an industrious capacity , & of a most rare & exquisite
knowledge in the Arte . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,23.196

And first I wil begin with <font> Iohannes de Vigo <$$font> , one of the
chief Fathers , & true Patrones of al good learning & knowledge in the
Arte of Chirurgery : <P_24> As it <paren> in some sort <$$paren> may
appeare by Master <font> Bartholmew Traheron <$$font> , which first
Translated <font> Vigo <$$font> in the English tongue .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,24.197

In his Epistle Dedicatory <paren> whose iudgement therein I doe
acknowledge <$$paren> hee {HELSINKI:bee} sayth : that although <font>
Vigo <$$font> were not brought vp in the knowledge of the Tongues , yet
through his singular wit , long experience , and diligent study , hee
hath inuented and set foorth , more notable things in the Arte of
Chirurgerie , then any other heeretofore : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,24.198

and I thinke sayth he , nothing can better testifye the cunning of this
man , then {can_the_fact} that he continued so long in <font> Rome
<$$font> , in such a company of pocky Curtezans : neither Priests ,
Bishops , nor Cardinals excepted , as it appeareth in his Booke :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,24.199

for where such cariones been , the best Egles will resort , &c.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,24.200

A Maturatiue Playster . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,24.201

Rx. Radices Althaeae . Capit. Liliorum . Ana. lb. ss.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,24.202

Let these boyle in a sufficient quantity of Water ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,24.203

and after being stamped , put vnto them of Garlicke and white Onions
roasted , vnder the coales of each . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iij.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,24.204

Ol. Liliorum . Butyri . An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii. Pinguedinis
porcini . Anserinae . An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii. ss. Farinae
Tritici . Fenigreci . An. q. s. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,24.205

Make a Playster at the fire , adding in the ende , the yolkes of two
Egges : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,24.206

There bee some <paren> I know <$$paren> doe <P_25> little prize or value
this Playster , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.207

but I doe acknowledge it to be an infallible remedy .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.208

Another . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.209

Rx. Radices Bryoniae . lb. ss. Ceparum. No. ii. Rad. Althaeae
recentiu~ . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iiii. Fol. Maluarum Siccarum . p.
i. Hidropiperis . M. i. Ficuum . Passularum Enucleatarum . An.
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.210

Boyle them well , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.211

then adde vnto them . Fermenti . Axungiae suillae Insulsae . An.
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii. Euphorbij. pul. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.212

Misce et fiat Emplastrum secundum artem . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.213

This playster worketh miraculous effectes in this Cure .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.214

Another Playster . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.215

Rx. Mirrhae . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} x. Ammoniaci Thymiamatis .
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} vii. Visci Quercini . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} viii.
Galbani . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iiii. Propolis . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.216

Misce et fiat Emplastrum secundum Artem . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.217

A Maturatiue Cataplasme . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,25.218

Recipe . Rye-bread lib. i. White Onions & of Lilly <P_26> Rootes ,
roasted vnder the Ashes , of each 4. <font> Ounces <$$font> . A Bryony
Roote , and Figges boyled in Malmesey , of each 6. Ounc. Fenygreke &
Lynseede , of each 3. Oun. Barlye meale and Beane meale , of each 4.
Oun. Oyle of Roses , Camomill and Wormewood , of each 3. Oun. Hony 4.
Oun. The yolkes of 4. Egges hard roasted . Saffron the waight of 4.
d. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,26.219

Boyle all these together to a laudable consistence ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,26.220

and apply it thicke vnto the greeued partes , morning and euening warme
. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,26.221

Also I read in <font> Iohannes Libaulty <$$font> , his Booke Intituled
<font> Le Meson Rustick <$$font> , and also in other Learned Writers ,
that the dung of a Cow heated vnder the Ashes , betwixt Wine or Colwort
leaues , & mingled with vineger , hath the property to bring <font>
Scrophulous <$$font> swellings to ripenes , &c. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,26.222

Nothwithstanding , if all these chaunce to faile , then haue recourse to
that which followeth in the <font> Fourth Intention <$$font> , which is
perfomed by Section or Incision , when wee finde the matter before
rehearsed , vnfit to yeeld eyther to Resolution or Suppuration , &c.
{TEXT:&,} CLOWES-1602-E2-H,26.223

<heading>

THE FOURTH INTENTION CHYRURGICALL BY OUTWARD MEANES .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,26.225

<$$heading>

The fourth Intention of these <font> Strumous Tumors <$$font> , which
are not cured by former remedies <paren> & yet are gentle , obedient and
tractable <$$paren> is to cut them off , and then to pull them out .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,26.227

In the vse of these outward Incisions , this scope ought chiefly to be
regarded , that is : to be very circumspect in your handy operations ,
attempted & done co~cerning the cure of this great Malady :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,26.228

That is , the apertion or opening by launcing or Incision of those
glandulous <font> Tumours <$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,26.229

For as it is said , bloud is the treasure of life , and habitation of
the soule : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,26.230

Moreouer , it is surely very hard and difficult , especially when there
is in the affected place , eyther <font> Nerue <$$font> , great Vaine ,
or <font> Artery <$$font> , &c. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,26.231

<P_27>

Therefore such persons as are to endure this painfull action , ought to
haue much patience , and to be of a good courage :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,27.233

Then it may bee the better attempted and done by a cunning and skilfull
Chyrurgian : which there is no doubt , but he will be so prouident ,
that nothing shall offend . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,27.234

How_be_it , it is not necessary or sufferable ouer_curiously to search
and attempt the cutting them out by Incision : For that many of them are
subiect to violent and inordinate bloudy Fluxes , and other euill
accidents , which doubtlesse will much amaze you and hinder your handy
operation : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,27.235

I meane , when these <font> Tumors <$$font> bee deeply planted , and
secretly lodged amongst the great vaines and Arteries called <font>
Carotides <$$font> , or otherwise neere the Nerui recurrentes , which is
often times the cause that some bee_come speechlesse thereby .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,27.236

And it can@ @not be iustly denyed , but that these Incisions haue often
times been attempted with a launce by our Ancestors & Fore-fathers .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,27.237

But amongst a number of those worthy men , <font> Wickar <$$font> being
a man of good knowledge & skill in the Cure of the foresaid Euill , his
counsaile is , that before we doe attempt the said action by Inscision ,
the Patient be first layde vpon his Bed , and so both his feet must be
strongly tyed vnto the bed poasts , his head & both his hands must also
be fast held by men of strength , and skilfull in holding : In such sort
as we doe in cutting those which haue the crooked or wrye neckes .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,27.238

And he that is chosen to be the Operator of the said action , must
prudently and wisely <paren> saith <font> Vigo <$$font> , and other
learned men <$$paren> co~sider the greatnes & smalnes of the said <font>
Tumor <$$font> , which must be incised & cut fro~ one length of the
<font> Tumor <$$font> to an other . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,27.239

Then by litle & litle , seperate , diuide & vndermine the whole <font>
Cistis <$$font> round about , to the very bottome & roots therof , no
rashly , nor by violence , but orderly by degrees , seperate in your
fingers , & other seruiceable instrume~ts , as you vse to diuide y=e=
forenamed <P_28> Wennes called <font> Steatoma , Atheroma <$$font> and
<font> Meliceris <$$font> : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.240

And confessed it is for a certaine , that if any portion or part of the
said <font> Cistis <$$font> or bagge , chaunce to remaine behinde , and
not cleere taken away by the rootes , it will <paren> doubtlesse
<$$paren> breed and increase againe : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.241

But to preuent such greeuances , me thinkes I can@ @not speake too
sufficie~tly therof : wherfore , if any part remain behinde , then lay
vpon it the powder of <font> Mercury precipitate <$$font> , or <paren>
if that bee too weake <$$paren> adde to it of Alumen Combust , or
Vitriolum Album combust , of each equall portions :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.242

notwithstanding I beleeue , & confidently hold , that the worke of your
hands is the best instruments you haue to trust to , and to relieue you
in this distresse . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.243

Moreouer , <font> Mercurialis <$$font> he further sayth these words ,
for the curing and effecting of this matter : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.244

First <paren> saith he <$$paren> choose some light place ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.245

& let the Patient lye on his bed , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.246

for in sitting he wil soone sound : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.247

therfore binde his legges together , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.248

and after binde them to the Bedside , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.249

and let one holde his head fast , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.250

and then the Chirurgean taking the swelling in his left hand , let him
make an Incision , eyther right or straight , or somewhat crooked , on
the necke vnder the Jaw-bones , vntill he come to the matter inclosed in
the Bladder , which is sometimes one and single , as in the lesser
swellinges , and sometimes double , like the Mirtle leafe in the greater
swellinges : So that conueniently <paren> eyther by the finger or other
Instrumentes <$$paren> the Bladder may bee by little and little
separated , and drawne from the next partes , together with the matter
inclosed in it . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.251

But take good heede that the Bladder be not cut , because it is hardly
drawne away , and much hindreth the Cure , and the euill will come
againe : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.252

But if any such thing chaunce , it were good to consume it with eating
Medicines . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.253

Great care must also be had , that neyther the Arteries , vaines , nor
notable Nerues be hurt , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,28.254

but by little <P_29> and little gently put it aside .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.255

Yet if in the cutting some vessell be diuided , and the issue of bloud
trouble and hinder the worke : then apply some meete thing to stay the
bloud , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.256

and so come againe to your worke : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.257

For if the lippes of the Incision be inflamed , and the swelling or
<font> Struma <$$font> bee not safely dissolued away : then lay on a
<font> Stupa <$$font> beaten with the White of an Egge , and such things
as be good for stopping of bloud . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.258

After , apply Medicines that wil a little concoct ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.259

and then vse abstersiues , and next such as causeth fleshe to growe and
heale vp the scarre . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.260

<heading>

THE FIFTH INTENTION CHYRURGICALL BY OUTWARD MEANES .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.262

<$$heading>

The fifth Intention is , those which are vnmooueable , and deepely
rooted within , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.264

Corrode them about CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.265

and clense them throughly . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.266

I graunt it tollerable and very conuenient , to vse in this Cure the due
applycation of Potential Cauteries , such as whose propertye and seruice
is to corrode the flesh & the skin , and may with very good
circumspection very safely be attempted , being administred vpon a body
that is of a reasonable constitution , & in such sort that his strength
is able to holde and endure the same . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.267

And heere I will make further demonstration thereof , that is to say :
that your Cautery be not applyed vpon any Sinnewy part , neither vpon
the great Vaines nor Arteries , for that these bee accompted indeede
principall and chiefe vessels : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.268

Also you must consider the quallity and quantity of the Causticke you
doe administer , for that some are more violent and stronger then other
, CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.269

and some wil run and spread more then another . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,29.270

<font> Iaques Guillemeau <$$font> Chyrurgian vnto the now French <P_30>
King which now is : saith , truely it is not necessary , nor allowable
to apply the Caustick vpon the endes or beginnings of Muscles ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,30.271

for if your Patient that is to bee Cauterized , haue an vnsound and
sickly body , you must first of all bee sure before you administer the
sayd Cautery , to Phlebotomize & purge him : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,30.272

The reason is , least in the Cauterized parts , there chaunce to come
concursion , or gathering together of humours . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,30.273

Also , it is further sayd , that a small part of your potentiall
Cauteryes , doth and will worke as forcibly on a soft and tender bodye ,
as a great quantity thereof will doe vpon a stronge and grosse obdurate
person . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,30.274

Ouer and besides , the greater abcessions are to bee Cauterized one way
, and the lesser an other way , and that with good consideration .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,30.275

And heere to put you in memory , that you must bee very carefull and
circumspect in defending the partes round about the sayd <font> Tumors
<$$font> , for feare <paren> as I haue said <$$paren> that your Cautery
doe run and spread too farre abroad : for the which cause you shall
strengthen , fortifye & defend the foresaid affected parts , that is to
say : by inuironing and compassing it round about with some repercussiue
Medicamentes , lest the grieued part <paren> which by long infirmity is
become thereby sore weakned & enfeebled <$$paren> and may so bring with
it great swelling & other euill accidents : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,30.276

And therfore it is not without good cause , that the parts greeued be
rightly ordred & defended , whereby you shall be sure the better to
effect your intended purpose without the said perrill or daunger but
with the highest commendation in preuenting the euil that otherwise
might ensue : which reasons alwaies enduced mee to laye round about the
Cauterized parts , some speciall defensiue , as is this , or the like
heereafter following . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,30.277

Reci. Emplastrum Diachalcithios dissolued in Ol. papaueris et Ol.
ros. wherunto is added Ouorum albumin . <P_31> et Aceti. ros. An.
q. s. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.278

Et fiat Emplastrum . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.279

This done , then presently goe about with your Causticke , to roote out
all the whole <font> Schrophulous <$$font> and hard kernelly substances
, either with the common Ruptory or Causticke , which in this case best
contenteth my minde : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.280

the making heereof I doe not heere set downe , because it is so commonly
knowne . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.281

Howbeit , there is an other Causticke , which <paren> as it is reported
vnto me by a skilful Chirurgian <$$paren> doth work without any paine ,
or very litle at al . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.282

The reputed Author therof is said to bee a famous practizer in
Chirurgery , dwelling at <font> Mountpelier <$$font> in <font> France
<$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.283

I must needes thinke reuerently of the Author of this Caustick , hoping
his minde was not such to delight himselfe with publishing of vntruth :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.284

But if it doe indeede worke without paine , the mistery thereof is farre
above my reach . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.285

Rec. Lixiuij Saponarij . lib ij. Vitriolj Romanj .
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} iij. Mercurij sublimatj {TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. .
Made into very fine powder : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.286

in the end of the boyling put in of <font> Opium <$$font> 2 drams .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.287

Misce et fiat Trochiscj . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.288

You shall further note , that if at any time your Causticke doe happen
not to worke so well and sufficiently to your minde , as happily you
would wish it should do , then apply the same Cautery againe :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.289

but you must first make Incision alongst_wise , vpon the middle of the
foresaid <font> Escharre <$$font> : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.290

Then put in some small quantity <paren> that is , so much as you suppose
will penetrate into the profundity & very rootes therof <$$paren>
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.291

for it doth behooue a prouident & wise Artist to preuent & see all
eminent danger in y=e= doing therof , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.292

& the~ by Gods help , ye may safely in a short time roote out these hard
<font> Strophulous Tumors <$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,31.293

For <paren> as I haue said <$$paren> vnlesse the roote be cleane take~
out , <P_32> this Malady will growe and increase againe .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,32.294

But if there chaunce to approach any painefull accidentes <paren> as I
haue knowne and seene to follow in sundry persons <$$paren> then with
speed remooue and take away the same : which done , yee shall procure
the fall of the <font> Eschar <$$font> , with Vnguentu~ Populeum : or
els with Vnguentum Rosarum , or sweete Butter . And to apply vpon it
Emplastrum Diacalcitheos , or Emplastrum Deminio .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,32.295

So after all the <font> Escharres <$$font> be remooued , then if there
be required mundifying and clensing , these following are vulgarly vsed
, as Vnguentum Apostoloru~ , called of some also Vnguentum Christianoru~
: which <font> Vnguent <$$font> in this effect can@ @not be bettered :
and Vnguentum Egiptiacum , and sometimes to mixe two parts of Vnguentum
Apostolorum , and one part of Vnguentum Egiptiacum .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,32.296

Also , Vnguentum Apij , is auaileable in this Cure ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,32.297

viz. Recipe Succi Apij et Plantaginis . An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii.
Farinae hordej et Orobj . An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. ss.
Terebinthinae , {TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. Mellis , {TEXT:ounce_symbol}
iij. Mirrhae {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iij. CLOWES-1602-E2-H,32.298

Misce et fiat Vnguentum . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,32.299

If you adde to this <font> Vnguent <$$font> the yolkes of Egges and
<font> Mercury Praecipit. it doth worke much better .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,32.300

Also the powder of <font> Mercury Praecipit. <$$font> is good of it
selfe , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,32.301

and if you will haue it worke more forcibly , adde vnto it of Allum
<font> combust <$$font> according to discretion .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,32.302

With these foresaid remedyes you may continue vntill there appeare pure
and quicke flesh : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,32.303

then it followeth to vse Incarnatiues , & Agglutinatiues , with other
medicamte~s , fit for consolidation . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,32.304

Thus hauing sufficiently intreated of the fifth Intention : now it
remaineth for a full conclusion , to present <P_33> in order last of all
, the sixt Intention , as followeth . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,33.305

<heading>

THE SIXTH INTENTION CHYRURGICALL BY OUTWARD MEANES .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,33.307

<$$heading>

The sixt Intention Chirurgicall is , that in those <font> Strumas
<$$font> that are fastened but to a thinne and slender roote , you shall
binde them about and plucke them out . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,33.309

This last action <paren> as it appeareth <$$paren> is verie easily
performed by a skilfull Operator or cunning Chirurgian :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,33.310

neyther doth it require any great curiosity , but a decent and
artificiall strong binding , meete for the plucking of them out <paren>
as it is said <$$paren> by the rootes . In which action you neede not
feare any great perrill of Fluxe of bloud , but that it may easily bee
restrained with my restringent powder , published in my last booke of
Obseruations , which hath <paren> of a number of good Artistes <$$paren>
a friendlye acceptation : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,33.311

If it chaunce through the ill disposition of the body , any dolorous
accidentes doe happen to follow , then mitigate the same <paren> sayth
<font> Wicker <$$font> <$$paren> with stupes wet in the white of an Egge
, and oyle of Roses : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,33.312

and afterwards if there growe filthynes , let it be clensed with those
remedyes before rehearsed : then no fault being committed through
negligence or want of skill , you shall no doubt with good successe ,
finish this last Intention . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,33.313

But amongst a number of excellent remedyes for the curing of this euill
<paren> after the partes bee throughly clensed from all annoyances
<$$paren> this Playster following hath all the properties , that is
prescribed in these kindes of remedyes before named : Which noble
Playster I obtained of one <font> Isack <$$font> a stranger borne , a
famous Incisioner and Licentiate Chirurgian of <font> London <$$font> ,
who for his excellent knowledge in <P_34> his Arte , was called beyond
the Seas , <font> The golden Master or Doctor <$$font> .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,34.314

Rx. Bdellii , et Ammoniaci . An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. ss. Lapidis
Sanguinalis , lapidis Magnetis . An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. ss.
Aristolochiae rotundae , aloes Hepaticae . An. {TEXT:dram_symbol} iii.
Olibanj et Masticis . An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. Lithargirij arge~t.
et lapidis calaminaris . An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iii. Corallj Rubj et
albi . An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii. Lumbricorum in pul.
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. Succj scrophulariae . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} vj.
Colophoniae . lb. ss. Terebynthiae Venetae . {TEXT:ounce_symbol}
iiij. Cerae Albae . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} xii. Olej Hispanicj . Olej
Hipericj cum gummis . Olej Laurini An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iii.
Camphor {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ss. . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,34.315

Misce et fiat Implastrum . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,34.316

With this Playster onely I cured a Bricklayers Daughter neere London ,
of diuers bad <font> Scrophulous <$$font> Vlcers in her necke and
throate . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,34.317

Howbeit , there be some <paren> who are as it were so note-wise
<$$paren> that forsooth they can not abide to read any medicine , that
is of a long composition , be it neuer so precious .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,34.318

Contrariwise , there be others againe , that will not endure to read a
short composition , bee it neuer so well approoued :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,34.319

for they plainely say , there can bee no great matter of worth in them :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,34.320

And thus they are as variable in their opinions <paren> for want of true
Arte and iudgement <$$paren> as the Camelions be in their colours .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,34.321

Quot capita tot sensus : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,34.322

so many heades so many opinions . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,34.323

Now heere I will forbeare <P_35> any further to discourse of this <font>
Sixt Intention Chirurgicall <$$font> , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.324

but I will set downe certaine Obseruations for the Cure of this greeuous
Malady by me perfected , as followeth : least otherwise happily it may
be said , <font> He that telleth a long processe or boasting tedious
tale without some proofe , must needs require credit , either for his
long boasting tedious tale , or else for some speciall Authority that is
in his person <$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.325

But as for boasting amongst wise men , it can winne litle credit .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.326

<heading>

AN OBSERUATION . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.328

<$$heading>

A few monthes past there was sent vnto me by a Gentleman of <font> Essex
<$$font> , a certaine husband man , being about the Age of thirty yeeres
, who was molested <paren> for the space of sixe monthes <$$paren> with
certaine outward swellings , or vnnaturall <font> Strumous <$$font>
Abscessions : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.330

some of them were great with notable hardnesses , some meane , and some
smaller , being for the most part packed and heaped together ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.331

but yet mooued too and fro , hyther and thyther : For the which he was
first purged <paren> with great moderation and aduisement <$$paren> with
the pilles of Euphorbium and Trochisce ex Viperis : or the Pilles of
<font> Vipers <$$font> , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.332

and he did take many times Theriace Andromachj , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.333

& kept a very slender dyet withall : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.334

after hee was well purged from grosse and rawe humours , then I applyed
vpon his necke and both his shoulders 3 great cupping glasses ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.335

and so did draw bloud and humours in good quantity .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.336

After the application of this kinde of Boring or <font> Ventoses
<$$font> , then presently I applyed vpon his swelling this <font>
Vnguent <$$font> , and these Plaisters following .
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,35.337

<P_36>

Recip. Colewort leaues , greene Leekes and blades : of water Betonye ,
Motherwort , the lesse {TEXT:sic} Plantine , Daysie leaues and Flowers ,
Mallows , Nicotian , and Pelitory of the wall , of each a handfull :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,36.339

Beate and shred these hearbes very fine : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,36.340

then adde to these foresaid hearbes of Wine Vineger lib. ii. of Hogs
grease and sweet Butter , of each lib ii. of oyle of Almonds lib. j.
a young Fox , of earth worms , & shel snailes , of each lib. i.
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,36.341

Let all these lye infused & buryed in horse dung the space of a month ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,36.342

then boyle all together till the watrynes be consumed :
CLOWES-1602-E2-H,36.343

then strayne it strongly , CLOWES-1602-E2-H,36.344

& heere with morning and euening anoynt his necke very warme , for halfe
an houre together : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,36.345

Then applyed I Emplastrum de ranis cum Mercurio : and at other times ,
Emplastrum Dyachilon maius , et de Muscilaginibus , of each equal
portions : CLOWES-1602-E2-H,36.346

and by this way and order of curing , he was by me cured and safely
healed within the space of 40. dayes . CLOWES-1602-E2-H,36.347

