<BEGIN_commiss-1673-e3-h>

<P_I,54>

<heading:edcomment:XXXIX_COMMISSIONERS_OF_CUSTOMS_TO_LORD_CLIFFORD>

Feb. 10 , 1672-3 . COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,54.4

May it please your Lop. In pursuance of your Lop. reference signifyed
to us by S=r= Rob=t= Howard , wee have considered of y=e= Letter of his
Excellency y=e= Lord L=t= of Ireland & y=e= Paper annent to it ;
COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,54.5

and having fully weigh'd y=e= matters therein contained , wee doe humbly
present your Lop. w=th= y=e= following state thereof .
COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,54.6

The severall Plantac~ons in America having been first Planted from this
Kingdome of England w=th= the losse of y=e= Lives of many men , & a vast
Expence of Treasure , the trade therefore of those plantac~ons hath been
by severall Lawes & Acts of Parliam=t= appropriated to England alone .
COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,54.7

And this is also y=e= practice of other Nations to keep their
plantac~ons enter'd to themselves . COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,54.8

That w=ch= is now proposed on behalfe of y=e= Irish nation , That they
may have Liberty for a certain number of ships during the present warre
or his Ma=ts= Pleasure to trade to y=e= Plantac~ons and unlade in
Ireland , paying his Ma=tie= there the halfe penny p~ pound ,
notw=th=standing y=e= Lawes in force to y=e= contrary , because of y=e=
want of trade in that kingdome by reason of y=e= warrs , wil@ @be very
prejudiciall to y=e= trade & interest of this nation .
COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,54.9

<P_I,55>

For by such an allowance y=e= Kingdome of Ireland will have y=e=
oportunity of vending not only their owne manufactures , but those also
of other parts of Europe in y=e= Plantac~ons , where only those of
England were before sold . COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,55.11

And their navigating cheaper then y=e= English because of their plenty
of Provisions will at least put them in a condition to undersell y=e=
English , COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,55.12

and so y=e= manufacture of England must necessarily ly upon their hands
, and y=e= navigation thereof be much obstructed .
COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,55.13

This will unavoydably create y=e= setting up of Ireland in Trade and
Wealth on y=e= basis of y=e= Ruine of this nation w=th=out any increas
of Revenue or advantage to his Ma=tie= , but very much y=e= contrary .
COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,55.14

For all traders to y=e= Plantac~ons will more readily goe for Ireland
where they may expect better advantages by Bills of Store & otherwise
from y=e= farmers of y=e= Revenue there , then y=e= Constituc~on of y=e=
present management of y=e= Customes in England will allow of ,
COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,55.15

& consequently will much lessen his Ma=ts= Customes heer in Linnen ,
Brandyes & other Comodityes w=ch= pay great duty in importac~on , & are
hence exported to y=e= Plantac~ons , & make Ireland y=e= staple of all
Plantac~on Comodityes . COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,55.16

As to what is alledged on behalfe of y=e= sd~ Kingdome of Ireland in
relac~on to y=e= present warre , as an argum=t= for granting them y=e=
Liberty desired during y=e= Warre , will easily be answered when it is
considered that the whole burden of y=e= warre lyes on y=e= Kingdome of
England , & that it partakes more of y=e= effects of y=e= warre by
hindrance of trade than Ireland can doe . COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,55.17

The danger w=ch= is intimated in y=e= paper , of ships coming from y=e=
plantac~ons to Ireland , and from thence hither according as they are
obliged by their bonds , being chiefly attested on account of Privateers
infesting y=e= Irish Coast , wee doe for that matter {SIC:matter_matter}
humbly present to your Lop. That no Ship goeing from England to y=e=
Plantac~on , or coming from thence , can be any wayes directly bound for
Ireland w=th=out absolute forfeiture of their bonds ,
COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,55.18

& therefore it may be supposed that no ship puts into Ireland but upon
some extrordinary necessity , or in expectac~on of more then ordinary
advantages . COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,55.19

<P_I,56>

Besides all this , If y=e= Liberty of twenty ships should be granted
w=ch= is insinuated as ships of small Burden , they would easily be
furnish=t= w=th= ships of Greater Burden from y=e= New England men , &
others who have found y=e= encouragem=t= from y=e= farm=rs= of Ireland
to y=e= ruin of y=e= fair Trader here . COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,56.21

Nor can it be duly kept to a Limited number of Ships considering y=e=
convenience & number of their Ports , COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,56.22

but it would in time amount to a gen=ll= Liberty .
COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,56.23

At least y=e= charge of collecting y=e= halfe-penny per pound in Ireland
will neer ballance y=e= Revenue that will arise to his Ma=tie= thereby ,
COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,56.24

and will certainly be a great losse in y=e= Customes heer . All w=ch=
w=e= humbly submit to your Lo=p= . COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,56.25

Rich. Temple . Will. Thomson . W=m=. Garway . F. Millington .
John Ipton . COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,56.26

Custome House , COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,56.27

London , COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,56.28

10 February , 1672 . COMMISS-1673-E3-H,I,56.29

