<BEGIN_conway-1623-e2-h>

<P_2.3,154>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCXCII>

Most gratious patron . I am commaunded by his Majestie for the
shortening of his labour , to signifie unto your Grace that his Highnes
may soe be informed of the great streyght and distress his Majestie was
in upon the receipt and consideracon of the Articles brought by M=r=.
Killigrey , upon three poynts : CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,154.4

1 . The perpetuitie of time for the abrogation of all Lawes concerning
the Roman Catholiques , in noe time to bee renewed against them , nor
any other to bee raised in their place upon any occasion .
CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,154.5

2 . His Majestie must do his best that the Articles in favour of the
Roman Catholiques must bee confirmed by Parliament within three yeares
infallibly , and sooner , if the constitution of affairs would permit it
. CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,154.6

<P_2.3,155>

3 . The Councells oath . CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,155.8

In the first , his Majestie foresawe an infinite liberty , a perpetuall
emunity graunted to the Roman Catholiques ; which if it should bring
them to daungerous encrease , or incourage them to the acting of
insolencies , his conscience opposeth his wisedome of Gouerment , and
his Soueraignity {COM:sic} runs a daunger . CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,155.9

Touching the Parliament , his Majestie sawe it impossible for him to
effect , CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,155.10

neither did his affection and reason incline to exercise his power that
way if it were in his hand . CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,155.11

And for the Councells oath , as his actes had not need of theire
fortification ; soe might his honor and the cause recieve prejudice by
their refusall . CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,155.12

But that which pinch't and perplex't most , was , that this was not now
a free and entire cause . CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,155.13

But his Majesties power was given to the Prince : according to which
power , his Highness had concluded theise Articles : soe as now it went
upon the honor of his Majestie and the Prince , and perhaps upon the
liberty and power of his Highness returne and safety of his person .
CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,155.14

These tender considerations of honor , suerty of his estate , fatherly
loue , and conscience , his Majestie debated some dayes , with as much
wisedome , naturall affection , courage , and piety , as became a greate
, wise , religious Kinge , and tender louing Father .
CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,155.15

And in conclusion having often honored Secretary Calvert , Cottington ,
and myself with the hearing of <P_2.3,156> his wise apprehensions and
deliberations , in and about his greate perplexity , his Majesty
resolved to call to him some of the most eminent of his Councell <paren>
whose names are here inclosed <$$paren> that hee might open himself to
them , recieve advice or confirmacion , or at least take , by those
leading voyces , a measure of the iudgments and affections of the rest .
CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,156.16

Without flattery I speak the truthe before God , those Councellors
assembled on Sunday at Wanstid ; CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,156.17

His Majestie made the most serious , <paren> I may say <$$paren> the
most sadd , fatherly , kinde , kingly , wise , and pious , manly , stout
speech that ever I heard , which noe man can repeate or relate <paren>
without blemishing <$$paren> but himself . CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,156.18

But this effect it wrought , all the Lords were of opinion that his
Highness wordes and Articles must bee made good ; that the oath by the
Councell must bee taken ; CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,156.19

and with one voyce gave counsell <paren> as without which nothing could
bee well <$$paren> that the Prince must marry and bringe his Lady away
with him this yeare ; this old yeare ; or ells , the Prince presently to
returne without marriage or contract ; leaving both those to bee
accomplished by the usuall formes . CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,156.20

My Maister having honored mee with his commaundements in the trayne and
shadow of that , I presume to convey by your Grace , to his Highnes , as
humble thankfulnes as my poore heart is capable of , for the signe of
his Highnes memory of me and favour to me received by M=r= Killigrey .
CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,156.21

And I beseech your Grace to promise to his Highnes for mee that I will
<P_2.3,157> not onely fill my pocketts with papers to attend his service
, but bleeding , emptie my vaynes for it . CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,157.22

It is your free goodnes and favour to mee which open's the way , and
hath ledd mee to that condition of favour I have .
CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,157.23

Preserve your creature , as farr as you iudge my faith and thankfulnes
will warrant you , which I dare not discribe ; knoweing my thoughts
exceede my words , and may outgoe the opinion of others , and fall short
of my owne knowledge , a part of which is that I will live and dye Your
Graces Most humble servant Edw. Conwey . CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,157.24

Theobalds CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,157.25

17=th= of July 1623 . CONWAY-1623-E2-H,2.3,157.26

