<BEGIN_coverte-1612-e2-h>

<P_11>

The 12. day our Pinnis went on shore to the same place , with master
<font> Iordan <$$font> , one of our Merchants . At whose comming on
shore , after some conference with some that could speake <font>
Portugall <$$font> , but not with those <paren> as it seemed <$$paren>
with whom we spake the day before , for these told master <font> Iordan
<$$font> the King was a <font> Mallaibar <$$font> , and after some other
conference , master Iordan told them , that although our ship were an
English ship , yet he was a <font> Portugall <$$font> Merchant , and the
goods in the ship were <font> Portugals <$$font> goods .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,11.3

Then they told vs wee should not want for any thing they had ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,11.4

and hereupon they sent a <font> Moore <$$font> into our boat to make
search for a conuenient watering place , who after some small search ,
brought vs to a little hole at the bottome of a hill , being hemmed in
with the hill on the one side and a dich on the other side ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,11.5

there we filled our Barreecoes , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,11.6

and being ready to goe aboard , wee desired the <font> Moore <$$font> to
goe aboard with vs , who willingly agreed thereto ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,11.7

and we vsed him very kindly , till the next morning that we went to
water againe , and carried him on shore with vs , by whose report of his
kinde vsage aboard , there came downe with him , another that could
speake a little <font> Portugall <$$font> , who <paren> as hee said
<$$paren> was one of the Kings Gentlemen , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,11.8

him wee also brought aboard COVERTE-1612-E2-H,11.9

and vsed him very kindly , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,11.10

and set him a shore the next day . Who promised at his deperture to
bring vs Hennes , Coquonuts , and Orenges , <P_12> which he did
accordingly , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.11

and then our Master , with master <font> Reuet <$$font> and my selfe
went ashore with some others of the Company , where wee dined ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.12

and after dinner came two Cauelliers , and a <font> Moore <$$font> being
one of their slaues to the watering place , where our men were filling
of the Caske , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.13

and asked whether there were any of the chiefe of our ship , or Company
there , to who~ <font> Edward Churchman <$$font> one of our Company made
answer , & said there was our Master , and one of the Merchants , whom
<paren> if it pleased them <$$paren> he would bring to parlee with them
: COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.14

and at their meeting , they saluted each other after the <font>
Portugall <$$font> maner . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.15

And after some Conference , demanding what wee were , we told them we
were <font> Englishmen <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.16

and they replied that we were very welcome , and all that they had , or
the Iland could afford , was at our command and disposing ; to whom we
gaue harty thanks . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.17

But these sugred words of theirs , was only in outward shew , to cloake
their treacherous practises , as afterward we found it true .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.18

Then we demanded what they were , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.19

and it was answered , that one of them was the Kings brother , who
instantly shewed vs a siluer ring , whereon was ingrauen the number of
villages , and houses , or cottages in the Iland ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.20

and said he was Ruler and Gouernor of all those places .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.21

Then we asked them , if there were any <font> Portugals <$$font> in the
Iland , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.22

they said no , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.23

for they had banished them all because they would haue reliefe there
perforce , and would make slaues of the people of the Iland , <paren>
which being not able to indure <$$paren> they made continuall warres
with them at their comming thither . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.24

In the meane time , our Pinnis came on shore , which had beene at an
other place of the Iland for Cattell , according to appointment ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.25

but were deferred of , till they might get fitter opportunity for their
intended treacherie . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,12.26

<P_13>

Then our men told vs that they had heard of that side of the Iland where
they were for Cattell that 15. saile of <font> Hollanders <$$font> had
lately taken <font> Mosembege <$$font> , and put all the <font>
Portugals <$$font> to the sword , which newes they had heard from <font>
Zinzibar <$$font> to be true , whereat these Cauelliers seemed outwardly
to reioice , which was also another subtill traine to bring vs within
compasse of their intended treachery . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.28

And when night drew on , we intreated them to goe aboard with vs , which
then , they refused to doe , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.29

but promised to come aboard the next day being the seuenteenth day of
December , which the Kings brother <paren> as he named himselfe
<$$paren> did with two others , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.30

but before they came aboard , they craued pledges , which they had ,
viz. <font> Thomas Caue , Gabriel Brooke <$$font> , and <font> Laurence
Pigot <$$font> our Surgeon . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.31

The other three being then aboard , we vsed them verie kindly vntill
they went on shore , on the eighteenth day in the morning :
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.32

And our General gaue the chiefe of them two Goats , a paper Cartridge of
Gunpowder and some other small trifles to the other two ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.33

and so went on shore , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.34

and master <font> Reuec <$$font> , master <font> Iordan <$$font> ,
<font> M. Glascot <$$font> & my selfe went with them for our pledges ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.35

& at our comming on shore and fearing no treacherie , we went sixe or
eight vnaduisedly vp to the houses for our pledges , whom we found
garded with fifty or sixty men armed with seuerall weapon , as Bowes and
Arrowes , Swords and Bucklers , Darts , and Curltleaxes ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.36

yet at our comming thither , wee receiued our pledges
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.37

and without longer stay , departed to the Sea side , accompanied with
the Kings brother , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.38

and immediatly most of those <font> Moores <$$font> came also after vs ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.39

and sixe or eight of them came to our Pinnis side
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.40

and viewed her COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.41

and so departed againe to the rest of their fellowes .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.42

And we instantly entered our boat , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.43

and intreated the Kings brother to go aboard with vs , which he
willingly did , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,13.44

& we entertained him with all kindnes that we <P_14> could , vntill
towards night that he was to depart , when our Master offered him a
knife , with some other odde trifles , which he scornfully refused ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.45

and presently went ashoare in our boat . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.46

Vpon this , we mistrusted some trechery , intended against vs ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.47

and therefore thought to bee better armed at our next comming ashoare .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.48

The 19. day our Long boat went a shore in the morning verie early , to
fill our Caske with water , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.49

and hauing filled the same , within a litle , they espied our sailes out
, being let downe to dry ; COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.50

but they imagined we were going away : wherevpon the companion to the
Kings brother came to our boatswaine , and asked him if wee were going
away ; COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.51

The boat-swaine , as well as he could , both by signes and otherwise ,
told him , it was only to dry our sailes . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.52

And as they were thus talking , they espied our Pinnace comming , being
then very well armed , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.53

and left off making any further inquirie ; which Pinnace had they not
then espied , it was likely they had intended to haue cut off our men ,
and taken our boat ; COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.54

for there was two of these Rogues at the least lying in ambush about the
watering place , readie to haue giuen the onset , if the watchword had
been giuen . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.55

By this time our Pinnace was come to the shore , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.56

and our men standing on their gard vpon the sands , not farre from her ,
then our Master sent <font> Nicholas White <$$font> , one of our gang ,
to tell them of the Iland that our Merchants were come on shoare , who
passing by one of their houses , might perceiue the same to be full of
people , & amongst the rest , six Portugales , in long branched damaske
Coats , lined with blew taffata , and vnder the same , white callico
breeches . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.57

This <font> Nicholas White <$$font> , at his returne , told vs ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.58

and presently came downe the companion to the Kings brother ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.59

and told Master <font> Reuec <$$font> , the Marchants were weary ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.60

and intreated them to go vp to the~ to see the Cattell , which was only
one bullock which <font> Nicholas White <$$font> saw at his going vp ,
and no more . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.61

But Master Reuet craued pardon desiring him to send downe the Bullocke ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,14.62

and their was commodities in the boat to <P_15> make satisfaction for
the same . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.63

With this answer , and seeing vs better armed then we were wont to bee ,
he went away . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.64

The Kings brother being then on the sands , commanded a Negro to gather
Coquonuts to send to our General , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.65

and made choise of <font> Edward Churchman <$$font> one of our men , to
fetch the same , whom we neuer saw after , nor could euer know what
became of him ; COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.66

But when they saw that none of vs would come a shore , but stood vpon
our gard , they gaue the watchword COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.67

and sounded a horne , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.68

and presently set vpon our men at the watering place
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.69

and slew <font> Iohn Harrington <$$font> , the boat-swaines man ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.70

and wounded <font> Robert Buckler <$$font> , Master <font> Ellanors
<$$font> man very sore , with 8. or 10. seuerall wounds ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.71

and had killed him , but that we discharged a Musket or two , which
<paren> as it seemed <$$paren> hurt some of them ;
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.72

for then they retired COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.73

and cried out : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.74

and so <paren> though weake and faint <$$paren> he did at length recouer
our boat . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.75

Also two or three more of our men by creeping , and lying close in the
ditch , vntill they espied our boat , got also safe aboard ;
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.76

and then counting our men , we only missed <font> Edward Churchman
<$$font> , and <font> Iohn Harrington <$$font> , that was slaine :
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.77

and so comming aboard , we certified the company of all our proceedings
on shoare ; COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.78

and our Surgeon dressed <font> Robert Buckler <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.79

and after , did his best for his cure and recouery of his health .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.80

The twentieth day in the morning we went on shoare with our Pinnace and
Long-boat , very wel armed to fetch in our Dauid , <paren> which is a
piece of wood or timber wherewith we hale vp our Ancor <$$paren>
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.81

and a little beyend the same , we found <font> Iohn Harrington <$$font>
dead , and starke naked , whom we buried at another Iland , hard by the
maine Iland . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.82

The naturall people of the Iland <font> Pemba <$$font> , seeme to bee
louing and kind : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.83

for they made signes to me and others , at our first comming , to beware
of our throats cutting : which then we tooke no heede or notice of ,
vntill this their treachery put vs in minde thereof againe .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.84

The same day <paren> being the 20. day <$$paren> we waighed Ancor ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,15.85

<P_16>

and about 12. of the clocke at night , our ship was on ground , on the
shoulds of <font> Meluidee <$$font> , or <font> Pemba <$$font> , which
we certainely knew not : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.87

Yet God of his mercy , <paren> as formerly in the late pretended
treacherie , so in that extreamity <$$paren> did mightily defend and
preserue vs , whose name bee praised and glorified now and euermore .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.88

The 21. day in the morning , wee espied three saile being small boats ,
sleightly wrought together , called <font> Paugaias <$$font> which we
made after and tooke , which they on shore espying , they sent out an
Aduisor being also a <font> Paugaia <$$font> , which perceiued that wee
had taken the other and returned to the shore . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.89

Now of those which we had taken there were some 6. or 8. of the
chiefest that were thought by our company to be <font> Portugals
<$$font> , the rest being certainely known to be <font> Moores <$$font>
, COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.90

and were in all some fourty and odde persons , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.91

and those sixe or eight were pale and white , much differing from the
colour of the <font> Moores <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.92

Yet being asked , what they were , they said , they were <font> Moores
<$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.93

and shewed vs their backes all written with Characters ;
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.94

and when we affirmed them to be <font> Portugals <$$font> , they then
told vs the <font> Portugals <$$font> were not circumcised .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.95

But to conclude ; our Company would not be perswaded but that they were
<font> Portugals <$$font> : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.96

then some of our Co~pany told them of al the intended treacheries with
the losse of two of our men , and wounding of the the third , which made
them fearefull of our reuenge , <paren> as it seemed <$$paren>
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.97

and then they talked together in their owne language , which made vs
also suspect , some villanous and desperat attempt to be pretended by
them , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.98

and therefore , I kept my selfe still vpon the poope ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.99

and looked carefully to the swords which stood nakedly in the Masters
Cabbin , which they also knew and noted , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,16.100

and marked Master <font> Glaskock <$$font> , and my selfe where we set
our swords still expecting to haue the <P_17> place voided , which I
perceiuing , kept good watch , lest greater hurt should ensue thereby ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.101

and being thus alone on the poope they beckoned me three or four
seuerall times to come to them vpon the spare Deck {TEXT:Dck} , which I
denied , lest they should so recouer the swords , whereby far more harme
might haue beene done , then afterwards was done .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.102

Then our Master came vpon the spare decke COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.103

and demanded , which was their Pilot , whom hee tooke downe into his
Cabbin , and shewed him his plat , which he at his comming downe did
very earnestly behold . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.104

But at his going from the rest with our Master , he spake in the <font>
Moores <$$font> language , warning them <paren> as we thought <$$paren>
to looke to themselues and doe their best amongst vs , and to giue eare
when he gaue the watchword , and then to giue the Onset .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.105

Also there were speaches vsed that the Pilot had a knife about him ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.106

and being searched for it , he nimblie conueied the same from the one
side to the other , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.107

and therwith suddenly stabbed the Master into the belly ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.108

& then cried out , which <paren> belike <$$paren> was the Watchword :
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.109

For then they began the onset on the spare decke , where Master <font>
Glascocke <$$font> , Master <font> Tindall <$$font> , our Generall , and
one or two more with them chanched to kill foure or fiue of the white
Roagues , and made such hauocke among the rest , that at length they had
slaine almost fourty of them , and brought the rest in subiection .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.110

Now , a little before our Master thus called the Pilot , he entreated
our Generall , that if they had any garuances or peason <paren> being
their Country food <$$paren> they would let vs haue some , which they
should be paid for , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.111

& what was taken from them should be redeliuered , with free liberty to
go where they would , whereto the General consented ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,17.112

& heereupon our Master called the Pilot , to see if he had any skil in
the Plat , and so to let <P_18> him depart , and all the rest .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.113

But when thus treacherously they offered vs the first abuse , we could
doe no lesse then we did , being in our owne defence , and for the
safegard of our liues . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.114

Yet did some fiue or sixe of these villaines , recouer a <font> Pangaia
<$$font> by their excellent swiftnesse in swimming ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.115

and escaped to the shore , they swimming to windward , faster then our
Pinnis could rowe . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.116

In this skirmish were hurt but three of our Company , namely , Master
<font> Glascocke <$$font> , with two wounds , whereof one was a deepe
wound in his backe , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.117

Master Tindals was aimed at his breast , he hauing nothing in his hand
to defend himselfe , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.118

yet by the assistance of the Almighty he turned himselfe about
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.119

and receiued the stabbe in his arme , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.120

and our Masters was in his belly , as is formerly said , which <paren>
God be thanked <$$paren> they all recouered and were well cured .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.121

The 19. day of January wee espied many Ilands , which the <font>
Portugals <$$font> call by the name of <font> Almaisant <$$font> , being
to the number of nine Ilands , al vnpeopled as the <font> Portugals
<$$font> write and affirme . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.122

The 20. day we sent our Pinnis in the morning to one of those Ilands to
seeke fresh water , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.123

but could finde none : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.124

yet they found there great store of Land Turtles ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.125

and brought some sixe aboard , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.126

then wee sailed to an other Iland , which seemed more likely for fresh
water then the first , where we cast Ancor . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.127

The 21. day about ten of the Clock in the forenoone Riding there at
twelue or thirteene fathome water , and a reasonable good harbour , we
staied there vntill the first day of February , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.128

and then waighed Ancor , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.129

and departed . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.130

Here we refreshed our selues very well with fresh water , Coquonuts ,
fish , Palmitoes , and Doues , great plenty . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.131

The {HELSINKI:They} first day of February , we set saile ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.132

and sailed with a faire winde vntill the 19. day , that wee passed the
Equinoctiall line , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,18.133

and on the fifteenth day in the <P_19> morning betime , we came within
ken of land , which was the coast of <font> Melueidey <$$font> vpon the
maine . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.134

The 16. day we came to an Ancor , about nine of the Clocke in the
morning , at 12. fathome water , and some two leagues from the shore ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.135

and presently wee sent our Pinnis to the shore to seeke some refreshing
, COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.136

but they could by no meanes get on shore ; COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.137

nor would the people of the Countrey <paren> being fearefull <$$paren>
come within parly , which at their returne they certified our Master of
, COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.138

and so in the afternoone we set saile againe , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.139

and departed . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.140

Now about this time it pleased God , <paren> by the confession of <font>
William Acton <$$font> , one of our ship boies <$$paren> to reueale a
foule and detestable sinne committed amongst vs ; which being approued
against him by a Jury , hee was condemned to die ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.141

and was executed for the same on the third day of March <paren> being
Friday <$$paren> in the morning . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.142

The 21. day betimes in the morning , we espied an Iland standing in the
height of 12. Degrees and 17. minutes , being barren and vnpeopled ,
ouer against which Iland , some three leagues distant , stood foure
hillocks or rocks , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.143

& for this Iland we bore vp a whole day , and a night ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.144

and finding it to be barren and vnpeopled , by sending our skiffe on
shore , wee passed by it , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.145

and the same day wee espied three Ilands more about sunne setting
standing in the height of 12. Degrees and 29. minutes , to which
Ilands we came the 29. day of March , 1609 . two of which Ilands were
within a league one of another , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.146

and the third we found to be <font> Sacatora <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.147

and standeth in 12. Degrees and 24. minutes where we Ancored in a fine
Bay the 30. day , in the morning about ten of the Clocke .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,19.148

<P_36>

These are the names of his ten Viceroys , beeing all Heathens , but very
worthy men , and expert in the warres . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,36.150

Hee hath a great number of Noble men to attend on him .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,36.151

An Earle is called a <font> Nawbob <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,36.152

and they are the chiefe men that attend on him , when he goeth <P_37>
abroad : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.153

for at home none attend him but Euenuches or gelded men .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.154

His Lord chiefe Justice is an Euenuch , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.155

and is called <font> Awlee Nawbob <$$font> : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.156

hee is thought to bee woorth twenty English millions :
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.157

Hee keepeth twenty Elephants , one_hundreth_and_fifty Camels and
Dromedaries , and fiue_hundreth Horse to attend on him .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.158

The Lord Treasurer is a mighty man , called Sultan <font> Carowdon
<$$font> : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.159

Hee hath forty Elephants to attend him , two_hundreth Camels and
Dromedaries , and one_thousand Horse at his seruice .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.160

And when he commeth to sit in his place of Justice , hee is brought vpon
an Elephant clad in cloth of gold or siluer , and sometimes in a
Pollankan , carried by foure slaues , he lying in it , as if hee lay in
a cradle , in as great pomp and ease as may bee ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.161

and hath soar maces {COM:sic} of siluer and gilt carried before him ,
and ten banners , and as great attendance , as if hee were a King ;
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.162

yet on Twesdaies and Thursdaies the King himselfe sits in Judgement of
all causes : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.163

He custometh all strangers goods himselfe , the custome beeing but small
at his pleasure , as sometimes , the value of ten shillings , custometh
goods worth two_hundreth pound . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.164

Also if a Merchant stranger , bring wares or merchandize from a farre
Countrey : as from <font> Chyna , Bengalla <$$font> , and thinketh hee
shall make a bad voiage , or lose thereby : if hee acquaint the King
therewith , and that the merchandize bee fit for Kings , Princes , and
Noble men , the King himselfe will take part thereof , and cause his
Nobles to take the rest , at such rates as the Merchant , shall not only
bee a sauer , but a great gainer thereby . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.165

The <font> Mogoll <$$font> , lyueth in as great state and pompe as may
be deuised , both for Maiestie and princely pleasure ;
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,37.166

for hee had brought before him euery day during our abode there , 50.
Elephants royall , clad in cloth of golde and siluer , with drums fifes
and trumpets , whereof , some fight one with another , wounding one
another very <P_38> deadly , and can@ @not be parted but with Rackets of
wilde fier , made round like hoopes , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.167

and so run the same in their faces , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.168

and some of them fight with wilde horses , as one Elephant with 6.
horses , whereof he hath killed 2. instantly by clasping his trunck
about their neckes , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.169

and so pulling them to him , with his teeth breaketh their necks .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.170

Also there are tame Elephants that will take the viceroyes sonnes being
the Kings pages with their truncks , gaping as they would eat them ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.171

and yet verie gently will set them vpon his owne head ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.172

and hauing sitten there a good space , will set them downe againe one
their feet as tenderly as a mother would set downe her owne childe ,
doing them no harme at all . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.173

The Elephant wil not goe out of the sight of his female ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.174

nor will he be ruled if he doe , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.175

this I can speake by experience hauing seene triall made thereof .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.176

Also euery he Elephant , hath 3. or 4. females ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.177

and I saw one that had 4. females and 12. yong ones of his owne
begetting . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.178

There ingendring is strange , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.179

for the female lieth downe on her backe , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.180

and he commeth vpon her , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.181

and so ingender . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.182

But if he perceiue any man to beholde or see him thus ingendring hee
will kill him if he can . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.183

Also the King hath Deare , Rammes , Veruathoes or Beazors , Lyons ,
Leopards , and Wolues , that fight before him .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.184

Also if a Cauilier be condemned for any offence and iudged to die , he
may by the custom of the Country , Craue combate with a Lion for his
life , <paren> which the King denieth to none that crave it <$$paren> as
for example , I saw one , that at the first incounter strooke the Lion
with his fist that he felled him , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.185

but the Lion recouering , returned with great furie and violence ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.186

and caught such hold on him that he rent out his guts , with the heart
and liuer and so tore him in peeces , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.187

and this was performed before the King . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,38.188

Also there are horses that fight with Allegators or Crocodiles in Tancks
or ponds of water where I also <P_39> saw one Allegator kill 2. stone
horses at one time . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.189

There is also a faire Riuer called <font> Indawe <$$font> , running from
thence to <font> Mesopotamia <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.190

& carrieth boats or lighters of 40. tun , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.191

and is replenished with fish of all sorts . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.192

Also there are 4. Basars or markets euery day in the weeke , and great
store of all things to be bought and sold there , and at a very
reasonable rate . As a hen for 2. pence , a Turkey for 6. pence , a
liue deare for a dollar , a sheep for 2. shillings , a goat for 2.
shillings , a couple of oxen for 4. dollars , being 16. shillings
sterling , a good hogge for 2. shillings , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.193

but none buy them but Christians , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.194

and none sell them but the Bannyans , who breed them ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.195

and as much fish for 3. pence as will serue 5. reasonable men at a
meale . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.196

Also great store of fruit , as Limmons , Oranges , Apricocks , Grapes ,
Peares , Apples and Plummes ; COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.197

But with their grapes they make no wines because their lawes forbid it :
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.198

Also Raisons as great and faire as Raisons of Damasko , with great store
of cloth of golde veluets and silkes out of <font> Persia <$$font> , and
silkes and cloth of gold from <font> Chyna <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.199

but those are course and lowe_prised ; COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.200

but abundance are their vended ; COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.201

and Captaine Hawkins thinketh that our Richer silkes , veluets , and
such like would be excellent good commodities there . But especially
our Cloth of light coulors . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.202

For there is no Cloth , but a kind of course Cloth like Cotton , which
is made at <font> Lyhore <$$font> , and at a Towne called <font> Esmeere
<$$font> : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.203

and their finest and best , is a kind of course red cloth , like a
Venice red , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.204

and this is the vsuall wearing for the chiefest Cauiliers ;
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.205

and these are all the places of clothing that I could by any meanes
heare of in all that Country . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.206

The word <font> Mogoll <$$font> , in their language is as much as
{it_is} to say , the great white King ; COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.207

for he is a white man and of the Race of the Tartares .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.208

He is King of many Kingdomes , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.209

and writeth himselfe in his stile , <font> Patteshaw Shelham Shogh
<$$font> , that is , the King of all the great coynes .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,39.210

For there is a seuerall coyne at <font> Lahore <$$font> , another at
<font> Bramport <$$font> <P_40> another at <font> Surrot <$$font> ,
another at <font> Cambaia <$$font> , another at <font> Sabbarton
<$$font> , and another at <font> Awgru <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.211

And for his seuerall Kingdomes , he is King , of the <font> Guzarats
<$$font> , of the <font> Bannians <$$font> of the <font> Bulloits
<$$font> of <font> Callicot <$$font> and <font> Bengolla <$$font> which
are <font> Gentiles <$$font> , of the <font> Indestands <$$font> of the
<font> Mogolles <$$font> , of the <font> Hendouns <$$font> , of the
<font> Moltans <$$font> , of the <font> Puttans <$$font> , of the <font>
Bullochies <$$font> , and of the <font> Alkeysors <$$font> , with some
others , which I can@ @not particularly name . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.212

Also he writeth himselfe the nynthe King from <font> Iamberlaine
<$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.213

And to this his great stile he is also of as great power , wealth and
commande , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.214

yet will he vrge none of what Nation soeuer to forsake their Religions ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.215

but esteemeth any man so@ @much the better , by how much the more he is
firme and constant in his Religion , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.216

and of all other he maketh most accompt of Christians ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.217

and will allow them double the meanes that hee giueth to any other
nation , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.218

and keepeth continually two Christians Friars , to conuerse with them in
the Christian Religion and manners of Christendome .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.219

He hath also the picture of our Lady in the place of his prater or
Religious proceedings , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.220

and hath oftentimes said that he could find in his heart to be a
Christian , if they had not so many Gods : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.221

There was at my being there an Armenian Christian that in hope of gaine
and preferment turned More , which being told the King , he saide , if
he thought to saue his soule thereby , that was a sufficient Recompence
for him , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.222

but he would rather haue giuen him preferment if he had kept himselfe
still a Christian . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.223

The <font> Mogoll <$$font> is also verie bountifull ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.224

for to one that gaue him a little deere he gaue 1000. Ruckees , being
100. pound sterling , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.225

also to another that gaue him a couple of land spannels , he gaue the
like reward , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.226

and to another that gaue him two Cocks he gaue 2000. Ruckees .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.227

Also there be excellent faire Hawkes of all sorts from the Goshauke to
the Sparehauke , and great store of game , as Phesants , Partriges ,
Plouers , Quailes , Mallard , and of all other sorts of fowle in great
plentie . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,40.228

<P_41>

There are no great dogges but a kind of Mungrels , whereof two wil
hardly kill a deare in a whole day , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,41.230

and yet they are so choise ouer them , that they make them coates to
keepe them warme and cleane . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,41.231

Nor haue they any parkes , but Forrests , and Commons , wherein any man
may hunt that will , saue only within 6. miles of <font> Agra <$$font>
round about which is lymitted and reserued for the Kings priuate
pleasure onely . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,41.232

The King hath there begun a goodly monument for his Father , which hath
been already 9. yeeres in building , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,41.233

and will hardly be finished in 5. yeeres more ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,41.234

and yet there are continually 5000. workemen at worke thereon .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,41.235

The substance therof , is very fine marble , curiously wrought .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,41.236

It is in forme 9. square , being 2. English miles about and 9.
stories in height . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,41.237

Also , it was credibly reported vnto me by a Christian Friar <paren> who
solemnly protested he heard the King him selfe speake it <$$paren> that
hee intended to bestow a_hundreth millions of Treasure on that monument
. COVERTE-1612-E2-H,41.238

And hauing viewed and seen this great and rich Citie of <font> Agra
<$$font> with the pleasures and Commodities thereof ; on the 18. day of
<font> Ianuarie <$$font> , my selfe with <font> Ioseph Salcbancke
<$$font> and <font> Iohn Frenchan <$$font> , went to the King
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,41.239

and craued his Passe for <font> England <$$font> , who very courteously
dema~ded of vs if we would serue him in his wars , offering vs what
maintenance we would aske of him ; which wee humbly excused , both in
regard of this our voiage , wherin diuers others besids our selues ,
were partners , as also , in regard we had Wiues and Children in our
owne Countrie , to whom both by Law and Nature wee were bound to make
returne if it were possible ; whereupon most graciously he granted vs
his Passe , vnder his hand and great Seale , for our safe_conduct thorow
al his Kingdomes and Dominions . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,41.240

Then his chiefe Secretary , went with vs to his third Queene <paren> for
it is said that hee <P_42> hath ten Queenes , one_thousand Concubines ,
and two_hundreth Euenuches . <$$paren> COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.241

And this Queene is keeper of his great Seale , where it was sealed and
deliuered vnto vs . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.242

Then I also went to the chiefe Friar , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.243

and craued his letters , as@ @well to the Kings and Princes , whose
Kingdoms and Dominions we were to passe thorow , as also to the Clergy
and places of Religion , which he most willingly granted , beeing a man
of great Credit there , and greatly esteemed and well knowne in other
Kingdomes . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.244

Also hee gaue me his letters of commendations to one <font> Iohn Midnall
<$$font> an English Merchant or Factor , who had lien in Agroe three
yeeres : COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.245

but before I came into England <font> Iohn Midnall <$$font> was gone
againe for the East Indies , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.246

and I deliuered his letter to <font> M=r=. Greenaway <$$font> Deputy
gouernor in London for the Company of the East_Indian Merchants .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.247

The one_and_twentieth day , wee tooke our leaue of Captaine <font>
Hawkins <$$font> , whom wee left there in great credit with the King ,
beeing allowed one_hundreth Rackees a day which is ten pound sterling ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.248

and is intituled by the name of a Can , which is a Knight ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.249

and keepeth company with the greatest Noble men belonging to the King :
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.250

and hee seemeth very willing to doe his Country good .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.251

And this is as@ @much as I can say concerning him .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.252

The 22. day we tooke our iourney towards England , being 5. Englishmen
viz , my selfe , <font> Ioseph Salebencke , Iohn Frencham , Richard
Martin <$$font> , and <font> Richard Fox <$$font> , and <font> Guilliam
Ashlee <$$font> a More our guide , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.253

and trauelled towards <font> Ispahan <$$font> in <font> Persia <$$font>
, COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.254

and so with 5. horses and 2. Camels , we tooke the way to <font> Biany
<$$font> , because <font> Iohn Midnall <$$font> had gone the way to
<font> Lahor <$$font> before , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.255

also this way was but two moneths iourney , though very dangerous
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.256

and that by <font> Lahor <$$font> was 4. moneths iourney and without
danger , {COM:sic} viz. COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.257

From <font> Agra <$$font> we came to <font> Fetterbarre <$$font> being
12. course . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.258

And fro~ thence to <font> Bianic <$$font> being 12. course more .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,42.259

And this is the chiefest place for Indico in all the East Indies ,
<P_43> where are 12. <font> Indico <$$font> Milles .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.260

The <font> Indico <$$font> groweth in small bushes like goosberry bushes
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.261

and carrieth a seede like Cabbege seed . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.262

And being cut down is laid on heapes for half a yeere to rot and then
brought into a vault to be troden with Oxen to tread the Indico from the
stalkes , and so to the Milles to be ground very fine :
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.263

and lastly , is boiled in Furnaces , and very well refined and sorted
into seuerall sorts . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.264

A seere of Indico in <font> Biany <$$font> is worth ten pence , which
seere doth containe twenty ounces at the least .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.265

This I know to be true COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.266

and brought a sample of the Indico home with me .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.267

And for this Indico & the <font> Anneele <$$font> that is made thereof ,
there is much trading of Merchants , from <font> Agro <$$font> and
<font> Lahore <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.268

The 25. day , we came to <font> Hendowne <$$font> , being twenty_fiue
course , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.269

this is an ancient faire City , where is also good store of course
Indico . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.270

The 26. day , we came to <font> Mogoll <$$font> being 14. course .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.271

This is a small market Towne , where are also course Indico and
Callicoes . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.272

The 27. day we went some 12. course to a small Village called <font>
Halstot <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.273

The 28. day , we trauelled 12. course to a small Village called <font>
Chatsoe <$$font> , where are sheepe and goats great store , and very
cheape . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.274

The 29. day , we went 12. course to a small Town called <font>
Laddanna <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.275

and there are great store of Cotton Wools . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.276

The 30. day , we went eight course to a small town called <font>
Mosabad <$$font> , where is great store of corne .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.277

The 31. day we went 12. course to <font> Bandason <$$font> a smal
Village . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.278

The first day of February we came to a faire Riuer called <font> Paddar
<$$font> that runneth to <font> Guzarat <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.279

and this Riuer parteth the Dominions of the <font> Indestands <$$font>
and <font> Hendownes <$$font> COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.280

and falleth into the gulph of Persia . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,43.281

And from <P_44> thence we went to the City of <font> Esmeere <$$font> ,
being twelue course from <font> Bandason <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.282

Heere the great <font> Mogol <$$font> hath a stately house where are
continually kept 600. Elephants , and 1000. Horses , for the warres to
bee ready at the Kings command . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.283

There is great store of wools , and much cloathing for course cloth and
cottens , also Iauelins , Bowes and Arrowes , Armour , Swords , and
other weapons for the Warres , and two Basars or Markets euery weeke .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.284

The <font> Indestands <$$font> are very gallant people , and great
Merchants into most parts of the world . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.285

The second day , wee went into the <font> Hendownes <$$font> Countrey ,
some 12. course , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.286

and came to <font> Richmall <$$font> , where is
{COM:preceding_word_"is"_emended} great wore {COM:sic} of Game , and a
pleasant place for hawking and hunting . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.287

The fourth day , we went 12. course , to <font> Mearta <$$font> , a
faire City , where I saw three faire and ancient Tombes or Monuments of
the <font> Hendownes <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.288

there are three Basars or Markets euery weeke .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.289

Also great store of Indico , cotten wooll , yarne , and cloth .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.290

This City in my iudgement is as big as the City of <font> Exceter
<$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.291

The sixth day we went some twelue course to <font> Hursallo <$$font> , a
small Village . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.292

The seuenth day we went 14. course to <font> Lauara <$$font> , a small
village , where is great store of Corne , Cattell , and Sheepe and very
good cheape . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.293

The eight day , we went 12. course to <font> Towry <$$font> , a Towne
of Garrison of the <font> Hendownes <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.294

The ninth day , we went 11. course to <font> Chummo <$$font> a small
Village . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.295

The tenth day , we went 13. course to <font> Moulto <$$font> a Village
. COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.296

The 11. day , we went 10. course to <font> Pucker <$$font> a small
Village . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,44.297

<P_45>

The 12. day , we went 12. course to <font> Senawra <$$font> a little
Towne . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.299

The 13. day , we went but fiue course to <font> Basonpee <$$font> a
small village . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.300

The 14. day , we went fiue course more to <font> Gislemeere <$$font> ,
a faire City , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.301

and hath in it a strong Castle , where lyeth a grand Cauilier .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.302

Also there is great trading of Merchandize by Land ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.303

and in the Castle are thirty peeces of Ordinance .
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.304

The 18. day , we went from thence some 14. course ouer the sands ,
that part the <font> Hendownes <$$font> and <font> Multans <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.305

and lay in the fields . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.306

The <font> Hendownes <$$font> are naturally discended from the <font>
Gentiles <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.307

yet refuse no manner of meat , flesh , nor fish ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.308

and are many of them very notable theeues . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.309

They pray naked , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.310

dresse and eat their meat naked , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.311

and where they dresse and eat their meat , they make a circle , within
which circle none must enter , during the time of their dressing and
eating their meat . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.312

Their women are brought vp of children with shackles , some of siluer ,
some of brasse , and some of Iron on their legs , and rings in their
eares , all which are still increased or made bigger as they grow in
yeeres and bignesse , so that in time they haue holes in their eares so
great that a man may thrust his hand thorow . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.313

Also they doe were bracelets of Elephants teeth about their armes from
the wrist to the elbow . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.314

The 19. day , wee went eight course COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.315

and lay in the Fields . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.316

The 20. day , wee went 12. course more , COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.317

and lay in the fields . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.318

The twenty_one day , we went 12. course COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.319

and lay by a well some 60. fathome deepe , where water was very scarse
. COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.320

The 22. day , we trauelled 16. course , where wee could get no better
water then was almost halfe Cow pisse . COVERTE-1612-E2-H,45.321

