<BEGIN_cromwell-1534-e1-h>

<P_1.2,100>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXXVII_THOMAS_LORD_CROMWELL_TO_THE_EARL_OF_CHESTER,_FOR_THE_EXTIRPATION_OF_GIPSIES>

<P_1.2,101>

After my right hartie commendations . CROMWELL-1534-E1-H,1.2,101.5

Whereas the Kings Maiestie , about a twelfmoneth past , gave a pardonne
to a company of lewde personnes within this realme calling themselves
Gipcyans , for a most shamfull and detestable murder commytted amongs
them , with a speceall proviso inserted by their owne consents , that
onles they shuld all avoyde this his Graces realme by a certeyn daye
sythens expired , yt <P_1.2,102> shuld be lawfull to all his Graces
offycers to hang them in all places of his realme , where they myght be
apprehended , without any further examynacion or tryal after forme of
the lawe , as in their letter patents of the said pardon is expressed .
His Grace , hering tell that they doo yet lynger here within his realme
, not avoyding the same according to his commaundement and their owne
promes , and that albeit his poore subjectes be dayly spoyled , robbed ,
and deceyved by them , yet his Highnes officers and Ministres lytle
regarding their dieuties towards his Majestye , do permyt them to lynger
and loyter in all partys , and to exercise all their falshods , felonyes
, and treasons unpunished , hathe commaunded me to sygnifye unto youe ,
and the Shires next adjoynyng , whether any of the sayd personnes
calling themselfes Egipcyans , or that hathe heretofore called
themselfes Egipcyans , shall fortune to enter or travayle in the same .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-H,1.2,102.6

And in cace youe shall here or knowe of any suche , be they men or women
, that ye shall compell them to depart to the next porte of the See to
the place where they shal@ @be taken , and eyther wythout delaye uppon
the first wynde that may conveye them into any parte of beyond the Sees
, to take shipping and to passe in_to owtward partyes , or if they shall
in any wise breke that commaundement , without any tract to see them
executed according to the Kings Hieghnes sayd Lettres patents remaynyng
of Recorde in his Chauncery which , with these , shal@ @be <P_1.2,103>
your discharge in that behaulf : not fayling t'@ @accomplishe the tenor
hereof with all effect and diligence , without sparing uppon any
Commyssion , Licence , or Placarde that they may shewe or aledge for
themselfes to the contrary , as ye tender his Graces pleasor which also
ys that youe shall gyve notyce to all the Justices of Peax in that
Countye where youe resyde , and the Shires adjoynant , that they may
accomplishe the tenor hereof accordingly . CROMWELL-1534-E1-H,1.2,103.7

Thus fare ye hertely wel ; CROMWELL-1534-E1-H,1.2,103.8

From the Neate CROMWELL-1534-E1-H,1.2,103.9

the v=th=. day of December CROMWELL-1534-E1-H,1.2,103.10

the xxix=th= yer of his Ma=ties= most noble Regne
CROMWELL-1534-E1-H,1.2,103.11

Yo=r= louyng ffreend Thomas Crumwell . CROMWELL-1534-E1-H,1.2,103.12

To my verye good Lorde my Lorde of Chestre President of the Marches of
Wales . CROMWELL-1534-E1-H,1.2,103.13

