<BEGIN_deloney-1597-e2-h>

<P_69>

<heading>

CHAPTER VIII . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.4

HOW IACK OF NEWBERY KEEPING A VERY GOOD HOUSE , BOTH FOR HIS SERUANTS
AND RELIEFE OF THE POORE , WON GREAT CREDIT THERBY , AND HOW ONE OF HIS
WIUES GOSSIPS FOUND FAULT THERWITH . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.5

<$$heading>

Good morrow Gossip , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.7

now by my truely I am glad to see you in health .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.8

I pray you how dooth Maister <font> Winchcombe <$$font> ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.9

What neuer a great belly yet ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.10

now fie , by my fa your husband is waxt idle . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.11

Trust mee Gossip , saith mistresse <font> Winchcombe <$$font> , a great
belly comes sooner then a new coate , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.12

but you must consider wee haue not beene long married :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.13

but truly gossip you are welcome , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.14

I pray you sit down DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.15

and we will haue a morsell of something by and by .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.16

Nay truely Gossip I can@ @not stay quoth she , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.17

indeede I must be gone : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.18

for I did but euen step in to see how you did . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.19

You shall not chuse but stay a while quoth mistris <font> Winchcombe
<$$font> , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.20

and with that a fayre Napken was layd vpon the little Table in the
Parlour , hard by the fire side , whereon was set a fine cold Capon ,
with a great deale of other good cheare , with Ale and Wine plentie .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.21

I pray you Gossip eate , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.22

and I beshrew you if you spare quoth the one . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.23

I thanke you heartily Gossip saith the other . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.24

But hear you Gossip , I pray you tell mee : doth your husband loue you
well , and make much of you ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.25

Yes truly I thanke God quoth shee . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.26

Now by my truth sayd the other , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.27

it were a shame for him if hee should not : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.28

for though I say it before your face , though he had little with you ,
yet you were worthy to bee as good a mans wife as his .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.29

Trust me I would not change my <font> Iohn <$$font> for my Lord
Marquesse , quoth she : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.30

a woman can be but well , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.31

for I liue at hearts ease , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.32

and haue all things at will , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.33

and truly hee will not see mee lacke any thing .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,69.34

<P_70>

Gods blessing on his heart quoth her Gossip , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.36

it is a good hearing : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.37

but I pray you tell mee , I heard say your husband is chosen for our
Burgesse in the Parliament house , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.38

is it true ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.39

Yes verily quoth his wife . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.40

I wis it is against his will ; DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.41

for it will be no small charges vnto him . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.42

Tush woman , what talke you of that ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.43

thankes be to God , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.44

there is neuer a Gentleman in all <font> Barkshire <$$font> that is
better able to beare it . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.45

But heare you Gossip , shall I bee so bold to aske you one question more
? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.46

Yes , with@ @all my heart quote shee . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.47

I heard say that your husband would now put you in your hood , and silke
gowne , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.48

I pray you is it true ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.49

Yes in truth , quote mistresse <font> Winchcomb <$$font> , but farre
against my mind , Gossip : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.50

my french hood is bought already , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.51

and my silke gowne is a making , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.52

likewise the Goldsmith hath brought home my chayne and bracelets :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.53

but I assure you Gossip , if you will beleeue mee , I had rather go
an_hundred miles then weare them , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.54

for I shall be so ashamed that I shall not looke vpon any of my
neighbors for blushing . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.55

And why I pray you ? quote her Gossip . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.56

I tell you deare woman , you need not be any thing abashed or blush at
the matter , especially seeing your husbands estate is able to maintaine
it : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.57

now trust me truly , I am of opinion you will become it singular well .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.58

Alas quote mistresse <font> Winchcombe <$$font> , hauing neuer beene
vsed to such attyre , I shall not know where I am , nor how to behaue my
selfe in it : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.59

and beside , my complexion is so blacke , that I shall carry but an ill
fauoured countenance vnder a hood . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.60

Now without doubt <paren> quote her Gossip <$$paren> you are to blame to
say so : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.61

beshrew my heart if I speake it to flatter ; DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.62

you are a very faire and well fauored young woman as any is in <font>
Newbery <$$font> . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.63

And neuer feare your behauiour in your hood : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.64

for I tel you true , as old and withered as I am my selfe , I could
become a hood well enough , and behaue my selfe as well in such attyre
as any other whatsoeuer , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.65

and I would not learne of neuer a one of them all :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.66

what woman , I haue beene a prety wench in my dayes , and seene some
fashions . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.67

Therefore you need not feare , seeing both your beauty and comely
personage deserues no lesse then a french hood , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.68

and bee good comfort . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,70.69

At the first <paren> possible <$$paren> folkes will gaze something
<P_71> at you : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.70

but bee not you abashed for that , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.71

it is better they should wonder at your good fortune , then lament at
your miserie : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.72

but when they haue seene you two or three times in that attyre they will
afterward little respect it : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.73

for euery new thing at the first seemes rare , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.74

but being once a little vsed , it growes common .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.75

Surely gossip you say true , <paren> quote shee <$$paren>
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.76

and I am but a foole to bee bashfull : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.77

it is no shame to vse Gods gifts for our credites :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.78

and well might my husband thinke me vnworthy to haue them , if I would
not weare them : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.79

and though I say it , my hood is a fayre one , as any woman weares in
this countrey , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.80

and my gold chaine and bracelets are none of the worst sort ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.81

and I will shew them you , because you shall giue your opinion vpon them
: DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.82

and therewithall shee stept into her chamber DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.83

and fetcht them foorth . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.84

When her Gossip saw them , she sayd : Now beshrew my fingers but these
are fayre ones indeede . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.85

And when doe you meane to weare them Gossip ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.86

At Whitsontide <paren> quote shee <$$paren> if God spare mee life .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.87

I wish that well you may weare them , sayd her Gossip ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.88

and I would I were worthie to bee with you when you dresse your selfe ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.89

it should bee neuer the worse for you : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.90

I would order the matter so , that you should set euery thing about you
in such sort as neuer a Gentlewoman of them all should staine you .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.91

Mistresse <font> Winchcombe <$$font> gaue her great thankes for her
fauour , saying , that if she needed her helpe , she would be bold to
send for her . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.92

Then beganne her gossip to turne her tongue to another tune , and now to
blame her for her great house keeping . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.93

And thus she beganne : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.94

Gossip , you are but a young woman , and one that hath had no great
experience of the World , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.95

in my opinion you are something too lauish in expences :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.96

pardon me good gossip , I speake but for good will ;
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.97

and because I loue you , I am the more bolde to admonish you :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.98

I tell you plain , were I the Mistresse of such a house , hauing such
large allowance as you haue , I would saue 20. pound a yeare that you
spend to no purpose . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.99

Which way might that be <paren> quote mistres <font> Winchcombe <$$font>
? <$$paren> DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.100

indeed I confesse I am but a greene housewife , and one that hath but
small tryall in the world , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.101

therefore I should bee verie glad to learne any thing that were for my
husbands profite , and my commoditie . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.102

Then listen to mee quote shee : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,71.103

You feede poor folkes with the best of the beefe , and finest of the
wheate , which in my opinion <P_72> is a great ouersight :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.104

neither do I heare of any Knight in this countrey that doth it .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.105

And to say the truth , how were they able to beare that port which they
doe , if they saued it not by some meanes ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.106

Come thither , and I warrant you that you shall see but browne bread on
the boord : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.107

if it be wheate and rie mingled together , it is a great matter , and
the bread highly commended : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.108

but most commonly they eate either barlybread , or rie mingled with
pease , and such like course graine : which is doubtlesse , but of small
price , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.109

and there is no other bread allowed , except at their owne boord .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.110

And in like manner for their meate : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.111

it is well knowne that neckes and poynts of beefe is their ordinarie
fare : which because it is commonly leane , they seeth therewith now and
then a peece of bacon or porke , whereby they make their pottage fat ,
and therewith driues out the rest with more content .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.112

And thus must you learne to doe . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.113

And besides that , the midriffes of the Oxen , and the cheekes , the
sheepes heads , and the gathers , which you giue away at your gate ,
might serue them well enough : which would be a great sparing to your
other meat , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.114

and by this meanes you would saue in the yeare much mony , whereby you
might the better maintaine your hood and silke gowne .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.115

Againe , you serue your folkes with such superfluities , that they
spoyle in manner as much as they eate : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.116

beleeue me were I their Dame , they should haue things more sparingly ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.117

and then they would thinke it more daintie . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.118

Trust mee gossip <paren> quote Mistresse <font> Winchcombe <$$font>
<$$paren> I know your wordes in many things to bee true :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.119

for my folkes are so corne_fed , that wee haue much adoe to please them
{COM:sic} in their dyet : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.120

one doth say this is too salt : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.121

and another saith this is too grosse , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.122

this is too fresh , and that too fat , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.123

and twentie faults they will finde at their meales :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.124

I warrant you they make such parings of their cheese , and keepe such
chipping of their bread , that their very ortes would serue two or three
honest folkes to their dinner . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.125

And from whence I pray you proceedes that <paren> quote her Gossip
<$$paren> but of too much plentie ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.126

but yfaith were they my seruants , I would make them glad of the worst
crumme they cast away , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.127

and thereupon I drinke to you , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.128

and I thanke you for my good cheere with all my heart .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.129

Much good may it doe you good gossip , sayd mistress <font> Winchcomb
<$$font> : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.130

and I pray you when you come this way let vs see you .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.131

That you shall verily quote she , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.132

and so away she went . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,72.133

After this , mistresse <font> Winchcomb <$$font> tooke occasion to giue
her folks <P_73> shorter commons , and courser meate then they were wont
to haue : which at length being come to the good mans eare , hee was
very much offended therewith , saying : I will not haue my people thus
pincht of their victuals . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.134

Emptie platters make greedy stomackes , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.135

and where scarcitie is kept , hunger is nourished :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.136

and therefore wife as you loue mee let me haue no more of this doings .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.137

Husband <paren> quote she <$$paren> I would they should haue enough :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.138

but it is a sinne to suffer , and a shame to see the spoyle they make :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.139

I could bee verie well content to giue them their bellyes full ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.140

and that is sufficient , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.141

but it grieues me , to tell you true , to see how coy they are , and the
small care they haue in wasting of things : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.142

and I assure you , the whole towne cryes shame of it ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.143

and it hath bred me no small discredit for looking no better to it .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.144

Trust me no more , if I was not checkt in my owne house , about this
matter , when my eares did burne to heare what was spoken .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.145

Who was it that checkt thee , I pray thee tell mee ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.146

was it not your old gossip , dame dayntie , mistresse trip_and_go ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.147

I beleeue it was . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.148

Why man if it were she , you know shee hath beene an old housekeeper ,
and one that hath known the world ; and that shee told mee was for good
will . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.149

Wife <paren> quote hee <$$paren> , I would not haue thee to meddle with
such light_braind huswiues , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.150

and so I haue told thee a good many times , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.151

and yet I can@ @not get you to leaue her company .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.152

Leaue her company ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.153

why husband so long as she is an honest woman , why should I leaue her
company ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.154

Shee neuer gaue mee hurtfull counsell in all her life ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.155

but hath alwayes been ready to tell me things for my profit , though you
take it not so . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.156

Leaue her company ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.157

I am no gyrle I would you should well know , to bee taught what company
I should keepe : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.158

I keepe none but honest company I warrant you .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.159

Leaue her company keth@ @a ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.160

Alas poore soule , this reward she hath for her good will .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.161

I wis I wis , she is more your friend , then you are your owne .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.162

Well let her be what she will sayd her husband :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.163

but if shee come any more in my house , shee were as good no .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.164

And therefore take this for a warning I would aduise you :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.165

and so away he went . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,73.166

<P_74>

<heading>

CHAPTER IX . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.169

HOW A DRAPER IN LONDON , WHO OWED IACKE OF NEWBERRY MUCH MONEY BECAME
BANKROUT , WHOM IACK OF NEWBERY FOUND CARRYING A PORTERS BASKET ON HIS
NECK , AND HOW HE SET HIM VP AGAIN AT HIS OWNE COST , WHICH DRAPER
AFTERWARD BECAME AN ALDERMAN OF LONDON . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.170

<$$heading>

There was one <font> Randoll Pert <$$font> a Draper , dwelling in <font>
Watling streete <$$font> , that owed <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font>
Newbery <$$font> fiue_hundred pounds at one time , who in the ende fell
greatly to decay , in_so_much that hee was cast in prison , and his wife
with her poore children turned out of doores . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.172

Al his creditors except <font> Winchcomb <$$font> had a share of his
goods , neuer releasing him out of prison , so long as he had one penny
to satisfie them . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.173

But when his tidings was brought to <font> Iack <$$font> of <font>
Newberie@ @s <$$font> eare , his friends counselled him to lay his
action against him . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.174

Nay <paren> quote he <$$paren> if he be not able to pay me when hee is
at libertie , hee will neuer be able to pay me in prison :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.175

and therfore it were as good for me to forbear my mony with_out
troubling him , as to adde more sorrow to his grieued hart , and be
neuer the neerer . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.176

Misery is troden downe by many , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.177

and once brought low they are seldome or neuer relieued :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.178

therfore he shall rest for me vntoucht , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.179

and I would to God he were cleare of all other mens debts , so that I
gaue him mine to begin the world again . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.180

Thus lay the poore Draper a long time in prison , in which space his
Wife which before for dayntinesse would not
{COM:preceding_word_"not"_emended} foule her fingers , nor turne her
head aside , for feare of hurting the set of her neckenger , was glad to
goe about and wash buckes at the Thames side , and to bee a chare-Woman
in rich mens houses , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.181

her soft hand was now hardened with scowring , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.182

and in steade of gold rings vpon her lillie fingers , they were now fild
with chaps , prouoked by the sharpe lee and other drudgeries .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,74.183

At last , master <font> Winchcombe <$$font> being <paren> as you heard
<$$paren> chosen against the Parliament a Burgesse for the towne of
<font> Newbery <$$font> , and comming <P_75> vp to <font> London
<$$font> for the same purpose , when hee was alighted at his Inne , hee
left one of his men there , to get a Porter to bring his trunke vp to
the place of his lodging . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.184

Poore <font> Randoll Pert <$$font> , which lately before was come out of
prison , hauing no other meanes of maintenance , became a Porter to
carry burthens from one place to another , hauing an old ragged doublet
, and a torne payre of breeches , with his hose out at the heeles , and
a paire of olde broken slip_shooes on his feet , a rope about his middle
instead of a girdle , and on his head an old greasie cap , which had so
many holes in it , that his haire started through it : who as@ @soone as
hee heard one call for a Porter , made answere straight : here Master ,
what is it that you would haue caryed ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.185

Mary <paren> quote hee <$$paren> I would haue this Trunke borne to the
spread Eagle at Iuiebridge . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.186

You shall master <paren> quote hee <$$paren> DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.187

but what will you giue me for my paines ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.188

I will giue thee two pence . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.189

A penny more and I will carry it , sayd the Porter :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.190

and so being agreed , away he went with his burthen till he came to the
spread Eagle doore , where on a sudden espying Master <font> Winchcombe
<$$font> standing , hee cast downe the Trunke and run away as hard as
euer hee could . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.191

Master <font> Winchcombe <$$font> wondring what hee meant thereby ,
caused his man to runne after him , and to fetch him againe :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.192

but when he saw one pursue him , he ranne then the faster ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.193

and in running , here he lost one of his slip_shooes , and there another
: euer looking behinde him , like a man pursued with a deadly weapon ,
fearing euery twinkling of an eye to bee thrust thorow .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.194

At last his breech , being tyed but with one poynt , what with the haste
he made , and the weakenesse of the thong , fell about his heeles :
which so shackled him , that downe hee fell in the streete all along ,
sweating and blowing , being quite worne out of breath :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.195

and so by this meanes the Seruing man ouertooke him ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.196

and taking him by the sleeue , being as windlesse as the other , stood
blowing and puffing a great while ere they could speake one to another .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.197

Sirra , quote the Seruingman , you must come to my maister ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.198

you haue broken his Trunke all to peeces , by letting it fall .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.199

O for Gods sake <paren> quote he <$$paren> let me go ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.200

for Christs sake let me goe , or else Master <font> Winchcombe <$$font>
of <font> Newbery <$$font> will arrest me , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.201

and then I am vndone for euer . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,75.202

<P_76>

Now by this time <font> Iack <$$font> of <font> Newbery <$$font> had
caused his Trunke to be carryed into the house ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.204

and then he walked along to know what the matter was :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.205

but when he heard the Porter say that he would arrest him , he wondred
greatly DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.206

and hauing quite forgot <font> Perts <$$font> fauour , being so greatly
changed by imprisonment and pouertie , he said , Wherefore should I
arrest thee ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.207

tell me good fellow : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.208

for mine owne part I know no reason for it . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.209

O Sir <paren> quote he <$$paren> I would to God I knew none neither .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.210

Then asking him what his name was : the poore man falling downe on his
knees , sayd : Good Maister <font> Winchcombe <$$font> beare with me
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.211

and cast me not into prison : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.212

my name is <font> Pert <$$font> , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.213

and I do not deny but I owe you fiue_hundred pound :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.214

yet for the loue of God take pittie vpon mee . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.215

When Maister <font> Winchcombe <$$font> heard this , hee wondred greatly
at the man , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.216

and did as much pittie his miserie , though as yet hee made it not
knowne , saying : Passion of my heart man , thou wilt neuer pay mee thus
: DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.217

neuer thinke being a Porter to pay fiue_hundred pound dept .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.218

But this hath your prodigalitie brought you to , your thriftlesse
neglecting of your busines , that set more by your pleasure than your
profite . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.219

Then looking better vpon him , he said : What neuer a shoo to thy foot ,
hose to thy legge , band to thy necke , nor cap to thy head ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.220

O <font> Pert <$$font> this is strange ; DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.221

but wilt thou be an honest man , and giue me a bill of thy hand for my
mony ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.222

Yes sir , with all my heart , quote <font> Pert <$$font> .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.223

Then came to the Scriueners <paren> quote he <$$paren> and dispatch it ,
and I will not trouble thee . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.224

Now when they were come thither , with a great many following them at
their heeles , master <font> Winchcomb <$$font> said : Hearest thou
Scriuener ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.225

this fellow must giue mee a bill of his hand for fiue_hundred pounds ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.226

I pray thee make it as it should bee . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.227

The Scriuener looking vpon the poore man , and seeing him in that case ,
said to master <font> Winchcombe <$$font> : Sir , you were better to let
it bee a Bond , and haue some sureties bound with him .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.228

Why Scriuener <paren> quote hee <$$paren> doest thou thinke this is not
a sufficient man of himselfe for fiue_hundred pound ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.229

Truly Sir <paren> sayd the Scriuener <$$paren> if you thinke him so ,
you and I am of two minds . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.230

I@ @le tell thee what <paren> quote master <font> Winchcombe <$$font>
<$$paren> DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.231

were it not that we are all mortall , I would take his word as@ @soone
as his Bill or Bond ; DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.232

the honystie of a man is all . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,76.233

<P_77>

And wee in <font> London <$$font> <paren> quote the Scriuener <$$paren>
doe trust Bonds farre better then honestie . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.235

But Sir when must this money bee payd ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.236

Marry Scriuener when this man is Sheriffe of <font> London <$$font> .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.237

At that word the Scriuener and the people standing by laughed heartily ,
saying : In truth Sir make no more adoe DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.238

but forgiue it him : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.239

as good to doe the one as the other . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.240

Nay beleeue mee <paren> quote hee <$$paren> DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.241

not so : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.242

therefore do as I bid you . Whereupon the Scriuener made the Bill to be
payd when <font> Randoll Pert <$$font> was Sheriffe of <font> London
<$$font> , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.243

and thereunto set his owne hand for a witnesse ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.244

and twentie persons more that stoode by set their handes likewise .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.245

Then hee asked <font> Pert <$$font> what hee should haue for carrying
his trunk . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.246

Sir <paren> quote hee <$$paren> I should haue three pence ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.247

but seeing I finde you so kinde , I will take but two pence at this time
. DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.248

Thanks good <font> Pert <$$font> quote he , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.249

but for thy three pence , there is three shillings :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.250

and looke thou come to mee to_morrow morning betimes .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.251

The poore man did so , at what time Master <font> Winchcombe <$$font>
had prouided him out of Birchin lane , a faire sute of apparell ,
Marchantlike , with a faire blacke cloake , and all other thinges fit to
the same : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.252

then he tooke him to {TEXT:missing_"to"} a shop in <font> Canweeke
<$$font> streete , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.253

and furnisht the same shop with a_thousand pounds worth of cloath : by
which meanes , and other fauours that master <font> Winchcombe <$$font>
did him , hee grew againe into great credite , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.254

and in the end became so wealthy , that while maister <font> Winchcombe
<$$font> liued hee was chosen Sheriffe , at what time he payed
fiue_hundred pounds euery pennie , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.255

and after dyed an Alderman of the Citie . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,77.256

<P_78>

<heading>

CHAPTER X . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.259

HOW IACK OF NEWBERIE@ @S SERUANTS WERE REUENGED OF THEIR DAMES TATTLING
GOSSIP . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.260

<$$heading>

Vpon a time it came to passe , when Master <font> Winchcombe <$$font>
was farre from home , and his Wife gone abroad : That Mistris
many-better , dame tittle-tattle , gossip pinte-pot , according to her
old custome came to Mistris <font> Winchcombes <$$font> house ,
perfectly knowing of the good mans absence , and little thinking the
good wife was from home : where knocking at the gate , <font> Tweedle
<$$font> stept out and askt who was there ? where hastily opening the
wicket , he sodainly discouered the full proportion of this foule beast
, who demanded if their Mistris were within . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.262

What , mistris <font> Franke <$$font> <paren> quote he <$$paren> in
faith welcome : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.263

how haue you done a great while ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.264

I pray you come in . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.265

Nay , can@ @not stay quote shee : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.266

Notwithstanding , I did call to speake a word or two with your Mistris ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.267

I pray you tell her that I am heere . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.268

So I will <paren> quote he <$$paren> so soone as shee comes in .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.269

Then said the woman , what is shee abroad ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.270

Why then farewell good <font> Tweedle <$$font> .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.271

Why what haste , what haste , mistris <font> Frank <$$font> <paren>
quote he <$$paren> DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.272

I pray you stay DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.273

and drinke ere you goe , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.274

I hope a cup of newe Sacke will doe your old belly no hurt .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.275

What <paren> quote shee <$$paren> haue you new sacke alreadie ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.276

Now by my honestie I drunke none this yeare , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.277

and therefore I do not greatly care if I take a taste before I go :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.278

and with that shee went into the wine cellar with <font> Tweedle
<$$font> , where first hee set before her a piece of poudred biefe as
greene as a leeke : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.279

And then going into the kitchen , he brought her a piece of rosted beefe
hot from the spit . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.280

Now certaine of the Maidens of the house and some of the young men , who
had long before determined to bee reuenged of this pratling huswife :
came into the Cellar one after another , one of them bringing a great
piece of a gambon of Bacon in his hand : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,78.281

<P_79>

and euerie one bad mistresse <font> Franke <$$font> welcome :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.283

and the first one dranke to her , and then another , and so the third ,
the fourth , and the fift : so that Mistresse <font> Franks <$$font>
braines waxt as mellow as a pippin at Michaelmas , and so light , that
sitting in the Cellar she thought the world ran round .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.284

They seeing her to fall into merry humors , whetted her on in merriment
as much as they could , saying : mistresse <font> Frank <$$font> , spare
not I pray you , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.285

but thinke your selfe as welcome as any woman in <font> Newberie
<$$font> , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.286

for we haue cause to loue you , because you loue our mistris so well .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.287

Now assure you quote shee <paren> lisping in her speech <$$paren> her
tongue waxing somwhat too big for her mouth , I loue your mistresse well
indeed , as if she were my owne daughter . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.288

Nay but hear you quote they , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.289

she begins not to deal well with vs now . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.290

No my Lamb quote shee , why not ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.291

Because quote they , she seekes to bar vs of our allowance , telling our
Master that hee spends too much in housekeeping .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.292

Nay then <paren> quote she <$$paren> your mistresse is an Asse , and a
foole : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.293

and though she goe in her hood , what care I ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.294

she is but a girle to mee : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.295

twittle_twattle , I know what I know : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.296

Go to , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.297

drinke to mee . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.298

Wel <font> Tweedle <$$font> , I drinke to thee with all my hart :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.299

why thou whoreson when wilt thou be maried ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.300

O that I were a young wench for thy sake : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.301

but t@ @is no mater DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.302

though I be but a poore woman , I am a true woman .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.303

Hang dogs , I haue dwelt in this Towne these thirtie winters .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.304

Why then quote they , you haue dwelt here longer than our Maister .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.305

Your Master , quote shee ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.306

I knew your Master a boy , when he was called <font> Iacke <$$font> of
<font> Newbery <$$font> ; DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.307

I <font> Iacke <$$font> , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.308

I knew him called plaine <font> Iack <$$font> : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.309

and your Mistresse , now she is rich DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.310

and I am poor , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.311

but t@ @is no matter , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.312

I knew her a draggle_tayle girle , marke yee ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.313

But now quote they , she takes vpon her lustily ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.314

and hath forgot what shee was . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.315

Tush , what will you haue of a greene thing quote shee .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.316

Heere I drink to you , so long as she goes where she list a gossipping :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.317

and t@ @is no matter , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.318

little said is soone amended : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.319

but heare you my maisters , though mistresse <font> Winchcomb <$$font>
goe in her hood , I am as good as shee , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.320

I care not who tell it her : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,79.321

I spend not my husbands money <P_80> in cherries and codlings ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.322

go to , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.323

go to , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.324

I know what I say well enough : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.325

I am sure I am not drunk : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.326

mistresse <font> Winchcomb <$$font> , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.327

mistresse ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.328

No , <font> Nan Winchcombe <$$font> , I will call her name , plain
<font> Nan <$$font> : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.329

what , I was a woman , when she was se-reuerence a paltrie girle ,
though now she goes in her hood and chaine of gold :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.330

what care I for her ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.331

I am her elder , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.332

and I know more of her tricks : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.333

nay I warrant you I know what I say , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.334

t@ @is no matter , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.335

laugh at me DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.336

and spare not . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.337

I am not drunke I warrant : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.338

and with that being scant able to hold open her eyes , shee began to
nodde and to spill the wine out of the glasse : which they perceiuing
let her alone , going out of the cellar till shee was sound asleepe ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.339

and in the meane space they deuised how to finish this peece of knauery
. DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.340

At last they consented to laie her forth at the backside of the house ,
halfe a mile off , euen at the foote of a stile , that whosoeuer came
next ouer might finde her : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.341

notwithstanding , <font> Tweedle <$$font> stayed hard by to see the end
of this action . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.342

At last comes a notable clowne from <font> Greenham <$$font> , taking
his way to <font> Newbery <$$font> , who comming hastily ouer the stile
stumbled at the Woman , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.343

and fell down cleane ouer her : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.344

but in the starting vp , seeing it was a woman , cryed out , alas , alas
. DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.345

How now , what is the matter quote <font> Tweedle <$$font> ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.346

O quote hee here lies a dead woman . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.347

A dead woman quote <font> Tweedle <$$font> : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.348

that@ @s not so I trow , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.349

and with that hee tumbled her about : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.350

bones of mee quote <font> Tweedle <$$font> , it@ @s a drunken Woman ,
and one of the Towne vndoubtedly : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.351

surelie it is great pittie shee should lie heere .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.352

Why ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.353

do you know her quote the Clowne ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.354

No not I , quote <font> Tweedle <$$font> : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.355

neuerthelesse , I will giue thee halfe a groat DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.356

and take her in thy Basket , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.357

and carry her throughout the Towne DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.358

and see if any body know her . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.359

Then said th'@ @other , let me see the money DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.360

and I will : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.361

For by the Masse che earnd not halfe a groat this great while .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.362

There it is quote <font> Tweedle <$$font> . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.363

Then the fellow put her in his basket , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.364

and so lifted her vpon his back . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.365

Now by the masse shee stinkes vilely of drinke or wine , or some thing :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.366

but tell mee , what shall I say , when I come into the towne , quote hee
? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.367

First quote <font> Tweedle <$$font> , I would haue thee so soone as euer
thou canst go to the townes end , with a lustie voice , to crie O yes ;
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.368

and then say , who knowes this woman , who ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,80.369

And though possible <P_81> some will say , I know her , and I know her ,
yet do not thou set her downe till thou comest to the market Crosse ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.370

and there vse the like words : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.371

and if any bee so friendly , to tell thee where shee dwels , then iust
before her doore crie so againe : and if thou performe this brauely , I
will giue thee halfe a groat more . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.372

Maister <font> Tweedle <$$font> <paren> quote he <$$paren> I know you
well enough , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.373

you dwell with Maister <font> Winchcomb <$$font> , do you not ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.374

Well , if I do it not in the nick , giue mee neuer a pennie :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.375

And so away hee went till hee came to the Townes end ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.376

and there hee cryes out as boldly as anie Baylifes man , O yes , who
knowes this woman , who ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.377

Then said the drunken woman in the Basket , her head falling first on
one side , and then on the other side , Who co mee , who ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.378

Then said hee againe , Who knowes this woman , who ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.379

Who co mee , who <paren> quote shee <$$paren> DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.380

and looke how oft hee spake the one , she spake the other : saying still
Who co mee , who co mee , who ? Whereat all the people in the streete
fell into such a laughing , that the teares ran downe againe .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.381

At last one made answer , saying : goodfellow she dwels in the North
brooke street , a little beyond master <font> Winchcombes <$$font> .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.382

The fellow hearing that , goes downe thither in all haste ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.383

and there in the hearing of a_hundred people , cries : Who knowes this
woman , who ? whereat her husband comes out , saying : Marrie that doe
I too well God helpe mee . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.384

Then sayd the Clowne , if you know her , take her :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.385

for I know her not but for a drunken beast . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.386

And as her husband tooke her out of the Basket , shee gaue him a sound
boxe on the eare , saying : What you Queanes , do you mocke mee ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.387

and so was caried in . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.388

But the next day , when her braines were quiet , and her head cleared of
these foggie vapours shee was so ashamed of her selfe , that shee went
not forth of her doores a long time after : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.389

and if any body did say vnto her , Who co me who ? She would bee so mad
and furious , that shee would bee ready to draw her knife and to stick
them , and scold as if she stroue for the best game at the
cucking_stools . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.390

Moreouer , her prattling to Mistresse <font> Winchcombes <$$font> folks
of their mistresse , made her on the other side to fall out with her ,
in such sort that shee troubled them no more , either with her companie
or her counsell . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,81.391

<P_82>

<heading>

CHAPTER XI . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.394

HOW ONE OF IACK OF NEWBERIE@ @S MAYDENS BECAME A LADIE .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.395

<$$heading>

At the winning of <font> Morlesse <$$font> in <font> France <$$font> ,
the noble Earle of <font> Surrey <$$font> beeing at that time Lord high
Admirall of <font> England <$$font> , made manie Knights :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.397

among the rest was Sir <font> George Rigley <$$font> , brother to Sir
<font> Edward Rigley <$$font> , and sundrie other , whose valours farre
surpassed their wealth : so that when peace bred a scarcity in their
purses that their credits grew weak in the Citie , they were inforced to
ride into the country , where at their friends houses they might haue
fauourable welcome , without coyne or grudging .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.398

Among the rest , <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newbery <$$font> that
kept a table for all commers , was neuer lightly without many such
guests : where they were sure to haue bold welcome and good cheere , and
their mirth no lesse pleasing then their meat was plentie .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.399

Sir <font> George <$$font> hauing lyen long at boord in this braue
yeomans house , at length fell in liking of one of his maidens , who was
as faire as she was fond . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.400

This lustie wench hee so allured with the hope of marriage , that at
length shee yeelded him her loue , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.401

and therwithall bent her whole studie to work his content :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.402

but in the end she so much contented him , that it wrought altogether
her owne discontent : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.403

to become high , she laid her selfe so low , that the Knight suddenly
fell ouer her , which fall become the rising of her belly :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.404

but when this wanton perceiued her selfe to bee with child , shee made
her moane vnto the Knight , saying : Ah sir <font> George <$$font> , now
is the time to perform your promise , or to make me a spectacle of
infamy to the whole world for euer : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.405

in the one , you shall discharge the duty of a true Knight ; but in the
other , shew your selfe a most periured person :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.406

small honour will it bee to boast in the spoyle of poore maidens , whose
innocencie all good Knights ought to defend . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.407

Why thou leud paltrie thing quote hee : commest thou to father thy
bastard vpon mee ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.408

A_way ye dunghill carrion , awaie : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.409

heare you good huswife , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.410

get you among your companions , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,82.411

and lay your <P_83> litter where you list , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.412

but if you trouble me any more , trust mee thou shalt dearely abie it :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.413

and so bending his browes like the angry god of warr , he went his waies
leauing the child breeding wench to the hazard of her fortune , either
good or bad . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.414

The poore maiden seeing her selfe for her kindnesse thus cast off , shed
many teares of sorrow for her sinne , inueighing with manie bitter
groanes , against the vnconstancie of loue-alluring men .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.415

And in the end , when shee saw no other remedie , shee made her case
knowne vnto her mistresse : who after she had giuen her many checkes and
taunts , threatening to turne her out of doores , shee opened the matter
to her husband . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.416

So soone as he heard thereof , he made no more to_do ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.417

but presently poasted to <font> London <$$font> after Sir <font> George
<$$font> , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.418

and found him at my Lord Admirals . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.419

What master <font> Winchcombe <$$font> <paren> quote hee <$$paren> you
are heartily welcome to <font> London <$$font> ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.420

and I thank you for my good cheere : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.421

I pray you how doth your good wife , and all our friends in <font>
Barkshire <$$font> ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.422

All well and merrie , I thank you good Sir <font> George <$$font> ,
quote hee : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.423

I left them in health , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.424

and hope they do so continue . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.425

And trust me sir <paren> quote he <$$paren> hauing earnest occasion to
come vp to talke with a bad debter , in my iourney it was my chance to
light in company of a gallant widow : a Gentlewoman shee is of wondrous
good wealth , whom grisly death hath bereft of a kinde husband , making
her a Widow ere shee had been halfe a yeare a wife :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.426

her land , sir <font> George <$$font> , is as well worth a_hundred pound
a yeare as one penny , being as faire and comely a creature as any of
her degree in our whole countrey : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.427

Now sir , this is the worst , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.428

by the reason that she doubtes her selfe to bee with child , she hath
vowed not to marrie these xii. moneths : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.429

but because I wish you well , and the Gentlewoman no hurt : I came of
purpose from my businesse to tell you thereof : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.430

Now sir <font> George <$$font> , if you thinke her a fit wife for you ,
ride to her , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.431

woo her , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.432

winne her , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.433

and wed her . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.434

I thanke you good Maister <font> Winchcombe <$$font> <paren> quote he
<$$paren> for your fauour euer toward mee : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.435

and gladly would I see this young Widow if I wist where .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.436

Shee dwels not halfe a mile from my house quote Maister <font>
Winchcombe <$$font> , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.437

and I can send for her at any time if you please .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,83.438

<P_84>

Sir <font> George <$$font> hearing this , thought it was not best to
come there , fearing <font> Ioane <$$font> would father a child vpon him
, DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.440

and therefore said , hee had no leasure to come from my Lord :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.441

But quote hee , would I might see her in <font> London <$$font> , on the
condition it cost me twenty nobles . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.442

Tush , sir <font> George <$$font> <paren> quote Maister <font>
Winchcombe <$$font> <$$paren> delay in loue is dangerous ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.443

and hee that will woo a widow , must take time by the forelocke , and
suffer none other to stop before him , least hee leape with_out the
Widowes loue . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.444

Notwithstanding , seeing now I haue toulde you of it , I will take my
gelding and get me home , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.445

if I heare of her comming to <font> London <$$font> I will send you word
, or perhaps come my selfe : till when adieu good sir <font> George
<$$font> . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.446

Thus parted Master <font> Winchcombe <$$font> from the knight :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.447

and being come home , in short time hee got a faire Taffetie gowne , and
a french hood for his maide , saying : Come ye drab ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.448

I must be faine to couer a foule fault with a faire garment ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.449

yet all will not hide your great belly : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.450

but if I finde meanes to make you a Lady , what wilt thou say then ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.451

O Maister <paren> quote she <$$paren> I shall be bound while I liue to
pray for you . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.452

Come then minion <paren> quote her mistris <$$paren>
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.453

and put you on this gown and french hood : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.454

for seeing you haue lien with a Knight , you must needes bee a
gentlewoman . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.455

The maid did so , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.456

and being thus attired , shee was set on a faire gelding , and a couple
of men sent with her vp to <font> London <$$font> :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.457

and being well instructed by her maister and dame what shee should do ,
shee tooke her iourney to the Cittie in the Terme time ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.458

and lodged at the Bell in the Strand : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.459

and mistresse <font> Louelesse <$$font> must be her name ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.460

for so her Master had warned her to call her selfe :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.461

neither did the men that waited on her , know the contrary ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.462

for Master <font> Winchcombe <$$font> had borrowed them of their Maister
, to wait vpon a frend of his to <font> London <$$font> , because he
could not spare any of his owne seruants at that time :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.463

notwithstanding they were appointed , for the Gentlewomans credit , to
say they were her owne men . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,84.464

This being done , Master <font> Winchcombe <$$font> sent sir <font>
George <$$font> a Letter , that the Gentlewoman which hee toulde him of
, was now in <font> London <$$font> , lying at the Bell in the Strand ,
hauing great busines at the Terme . <P_85> With which newes Sir <font>
Georges <$$font> heart was on fire , till such time as he might speake
with her : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.465

three or four times went hee thither , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.466

and still shee would not bee spoken withall : the which close keeping of
her selfe , made him the more earnest in his sute .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.467

At length he watcht her so narrowly , that finding her going forth in an
euening , hee followed her , shee hauing one man before , and another
behinde : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.468

carrying a verie stately gate in the street , it draue him into greater
liking of her , beeing the more vrged to vtter his minde .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.469

And suddenly stepping before her , hee thus saluted her , Gentlewoman
God saue you , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.470

I haue often beene at your lodging DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.471

and could neuer finde you at leisure . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.472

Why sir quote shee <paren> counterfeting her naturall speech <$$paren>
haue you any businesse with me ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.473

Yes faire Widow quote he , as you are a clyent to the law , so am I a
sutor for your loue : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.474

and may I find you so fauorable to let me plead my owne case at the bar
of your beautie , I doubt not but to vnfold so true a tale as I trust
will cause you to giue sentence on my side . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.475

You are a merry Gentleman quote shee : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.476

But my own part I know you not : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.477

neuerthelesse , in a case of loue , I will bee no let to your sute ,
though perhaps I helpe you little therein . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.478

And therefore Sir , if it please you to giue attendance at my lodging ,
vpon my returne from the Temple , you shall knowe more of my minde ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.479

and so they parted . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.480

Sir <font> George <$$font> receiuing hereby som hope of good happe ,
stayed for his dear at her lodging doore : whom at her comming she
frendly greeted , saying : Surely Sir , your diligence is more then the
profit you shall get thereby : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.481

but I pray you how shall I call your name ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.482

<font> George Rigley <$$font> <paren> quote hee <$$paren> I am called ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.483

and for some small deserts I was knighted in <font> France <$$font> .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.484

Why then Sir <font> George <$$font> <paren> quote shee <$$paren> I haue
done you too much wrong to make you thus dance attendance on my
worthlesse person . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.485

But let mee bee so bold to request you to tell mee , how you came to
know mee : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.486

for my owne part I can@ @not remember that euer I saw you before .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,85.487

Mistris <font> Louelesse <$$font> <paren> sayd Sir <font> George
<$$font> <$$paren> I am well acquainted with a <P_86> good neighbour of
yours , called Maister <font> Winchcombe <$$font> , who is my very good
friend , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.488

and to say the truth you are commended vnto mee by him .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.489

Truly sir <font> George <$$font> sayd shee , you are so much the better
welcome : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.490

Neuerthelesse , I haue made a vowe not to loue any man for this
tweluemoneths space . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.491

And therefore Sir , till then I would wish you to trouble your selfe no
further in this matter till that time be expired :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.492

and then if I finde you bee not intangled to any other , and that by
triall I finde out the truth of your loue , for Master <font>
Winchcombes <$$font> sake your welcome shall bee as good as any other
Gentlemans whatsoeuer . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.493

Sir <font> George <$$font> hauing receiued this answere was wonderous
woe , cursing the day that euer he meddled with <font> Ioane <$$font>
whose time of deliuerance would come long before a tweluemoneth were
expired , to his vtter shame , and ouerthrowe of his good fortune :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.494

for by that meanes should hee haue maister <font> Winchcombe <$$font>
his enemie , and therewithall the losse of this faire Gentlewoman .
Wherefore to preuent this mischiefe he sent a Letter in all haste to
maister <font> Winchcombe <$$font> , requesting him most earnestly to
come vp to <font> London <$$font> , by whose perswasion hee hoped
straight to finish the marriage . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.495

Maister <font> Winchcomb <$$font> fulfilled his request ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.496

and then presently was the marriage solemnized at the Tower of <font>
London <$$font> , in presence of many gentlemen of Sir <font> Georges
<$$font> friends . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.497

But when hee found it was <font> Ione <$$font> whome hee had gotten with
child , hee fretted and fumed , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.498

stampt , DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.499

and star'd like a diuell . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.500

Why <paren> quote M. <font> Winchcomb <$$font> <$$paren> what needs all
this ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.501

Came you to my table to make my maid your strumpet ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.502

had you no mans house to dishonor but mine ? DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.503

Sir , I would you should well know , that I account the poorest wench in
my house too good to be your whore , were you ten knights :
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.504

and seeing you tooke pleasure in making her your wanton , take it no
scorne to make her your wife : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.505

and vse her well too , or you shall heare of it .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.506

And hould thee <font> Ione <$$font> <paren> quote he <$$paren> there is
a_hundred pounds for thee : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.507

And let him not say thou comst to him a begger .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,86.508

Sir <font> George <$$font> seeing this , and withall casting in his
minde what friend Maister <font> Winchcombe <$$font> might bee to him ,
taking his wife by the hand gaue her a louing kisse , and Master <font>
Winchcombe <$$font> great thankes . Whereupon hee willed him for two
yeres space to take his diet and his Ladies at his house : which the
Knight accepting rode <P_87> straight with his wife to <font> Newbery
<$$font> . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,87.509

Then did the Mistris make curtsie to the Maid , saying : you are welcome
Madam , giuing her the vpper hand in all places .
DELONEY-1597-E2-H,87.510

And thus they liued afterward in great ioy : DELONEY-1597-E2-H,87.511

and our King , hearing how <font> Iacke <$$font> had matcht Sir <font>
George <$$font> , laughing heartily thereat , gaue him a liuing for euer
, the better to maintain my Lady his Wife . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,87.512

FINIS . DELONEY-1597-E2-H,87.513

