<BEGIN_dplumpt-1507-e1-h>

<P_202>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLXV>

To the right worshipfull and my most entyerly beloved , good , kind
father , Sir Robart Plompton , knyght , lying at Plompton in Yorkshire ,
be thes delivered in hast . DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,202.4

Ryght worshipfull father , in the most humble manner that I can I
recommend me to you , and to my lady my mother , and to all my brethren
and sistren , whom I besech almyghtie God to mayntayne and preserve in
prosperus health and encrese of worship , entyerly requiering you of
your daly blessing ; letting you wyt that I send to you mesuage , be
Wryghame of Knarsbrugh , of my mynd , and how that he should desire you
in my name to send for me to come home to you , DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,202.5

and as yet I had no answere agane , the which desire my lady hath gotten
knowledg . Wherfore , she is to me more better lady then ever she was
before , insomuch that she hath promysed me hir good ladyship as long as
ever she shall lyve ; DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,202.6

and if she or ye can fynd a@ @thing meyter for me in this parties or any
other , she will helpe to promoote me to the uttermost of her puyssaunce
. Wherfore , I humbly besech you to be so good and kind father unto me
as to let me know your pleasure , how that ye will have me ordred , as
shortly as it shall like you . DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,202.7

And wryt to my lady , thanking hir good ladyship of hir so loving and
tender kyndnesse shewed unto me , beseching hir ladyship of good
contynewance therof . DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,202.8

And therfore , I besech you to send a servant of yours to my lady and to
me , DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,202.9

and shew now by your fatherly kyndnesse that I am your child ;
DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,202.10

for I have sent you dyverse messuages and wryttings ,
DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,202.11

and I had never answere againe . Wherfore , yt is thought in this
parties , by those persones that list better to say ill than
{it_list_them_to_say} good , that ye have litle favor unto me ; the
which error ye may now quench , yf yt will like you to be so good and
kynd father unto me . DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,202.12

Also I besech you to send me a fine hatt and some good cloth to make me
some kevercheffes . DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,202.13

<P_203>

And thus I besech <font> Jesu <$$font> to have you in his blessed
keeping to his pleasure , and your harts desire and comforth .
DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,203.15

Wryten at the Hirste , the xviii day of Maye . By your loving daughter
, Dorythe Plompton . DPLUMPT-1507-E1-H,203.16

