<BEGIN_edmondes-1599-e2-h>

<P_393>

<heading:edcomment:CLI>

It maie please yor honor . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,393.4

I haue according to yor honors Comandement used all endevor and
industrie to fynd out a meanes for yor honor to receiue aduertisementes
out of Spaine , EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,393.5

but being verie hard to meet wth one to send exp~slie thither , that is
faithfull and sufficient , and can be able to serue yor honor as were
fitt , I haue therefore aduised howe to wourke the same by those of the
best sorte here that haue correspondencie in Spayne ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,393.6

And aboue all others one Monsr Anthoine Balbany , an Itallian marchant
of the Principall of this Towne , hauing the most frequent & best
aduertisementes from thence because of his great trade there , and wth
the chief p~sone of that Countrie I sought to haue it p~pounded to him ,
whether he would be content to emploie his frends to aduertise him of
that wch should passe there , and that yor honor might receiue
information thereof , wch curtesie yor honor would alwaies kindlie
acknoweledge towardes himselfe & anie his frendes as they should haue
anie neede to use yor honors fauor . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,393.7

There was some difficultie made at the first to deale wth him therin ,
because being a sup~stitious papist , and not to be swayed by the
consideration of benefittes , in respect of the greatnes of his estate ,
it was doubted the ouuerture would not be agreable to him , but for that
he wth Monsr Zamatt doe shippe great quantetie of Corne to transport out
of the Realme into Spayne , EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,393.8

and arguying wth me , whether the same be in danger to be staied if the
said vessells be mett by anie englishe shippes I did thereof assure him
, EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,393.9

yett afterwardes I did cause it to be signified to him , that if for his
better assurance he would be strengthned wth anie pasportes from my lord
Admyrall that I durst p~sume yor honor would gratifie him wth anie that
he should neede for his p~ticuler and fauor him in all other his
occasions so as he would requyte it in the other curtesie to p~cure yor
honor to receiue information of that which shall passe in Spayne .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,393.10

He hearkned to this offer , EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,393.11

and assured me that he will geiue yor honor all satisfaction in yor
desier , EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,393.12

and hereuppon prayed me to send in dilligence <P_394> to yor honor to
beseech you to be pleased to assist him with the said pasportes ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.13

but for that the nombr wch he demandeth is great , being twelue , I
feare it wil@ @be an unpleasant motion to yor honor
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.14

yett I thought good to p~sent it to yor honors consideration first for
that it is a spetiall meanes to p~cure yor honor to receiue verie goode
& frequent aduertisements , and wthout anie charge to you , and
secondlie for that I fynd these people are resolued to mainteyne that
librtie to Carrie Corne into Spayne , and thereuppon haue geiuen
assurance to Zamett & the rest to staie all englishe mens goodes for
their recompence , if staie be made of their shippes by her maties
subiectes , EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.15

To auoyde the sendinge of so greate nombr of pasportes , as since he
reqeyred of me , I undertook that yor honor would be pleased to p~cure
the release of anie of his shippes that should be staied , wch although
he acknowledged to be a fauor yett it did not content him , for that he
feareth that being subiect to that staie , it will make him to loose the
benefitt of his markett & hazard the p~ishing of the Corne .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.16

He hath alreadie sent awaie some shippes EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.17

& desireth these pasportes for those vessells wch are yett behind , wch
he saieth are not aboue the burthen of threescoore tonnes
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.18

but thereof I can@ @not geiue assurance , EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.19

and doe humbly submitt the iudgement of the conveniencie , or not , of
his request , to yor honors best consideration ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.20

And where happelie it may be thought that I seeke thereby to p~cure some
p~fitt to myself I beseech yor honor to beleeue my poor p~testation wch
I will not falsifie to you , that I haue not therein anie desseing or
interest of privatt benefitt , but onlie a superstious desire to serue
yor honor in that wch you haue so much in recommendacion , and is of so
great importance . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.21

It is desired that the pasportes may runne in the name Peter Bernardin
Massey and Anthonie Balbany and blanckes to be left for the names of the
shippes , and of the Masters . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.22

I hope also to p~cure that the Ambr of Venice shall drawe often
aduertisementes from their Ambr. in Spayne and send them from tyme to
tyme to yor honor , EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.23

and will emploie all other meanes possible , that by the plurallitie of
advices yor honor maie be {HELSINKI:by} the better serued and make the
truer iudgement of thinges . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.24

I doe contynuallie sollicitt the paiement of the 20000 Crownes as yor
honor demandeth me , EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.25

and am still confidentlie assured by Monsr de Rhosny who is the fac
totum here for monie matters that wthout faile it shal@ @be answeared
out of this yeares receipt , but that it can@ @not be soone leuyed .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,394.26

He toulde me that he understoode her matie had geiuen the said <P_395>
monie unto some aboute her EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.27

but I assured him , that it is a false information .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.28

Monsr de Villeroy did verie kindlie take yor honors letter
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.29

and will by the Ambr. retourne yor honor answeare thereunto .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.30

I did also acquaynte him , in other discourse , that the Ambr had not
yett made anie privatt acquaintance wth yor honor , touching the wch he
sayd that he would wryte unto him , being a faulte wch his frendes here
doe accuse in him , that he doth too formallie hould himself on his
grauitie , but being otherwise a verie honest gent , and of great
integritie . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.31

He doth complaine greatlie in all his dispatches that he can@ @not
receiue satisfaction from my lord Admyrall in matters of iustice . That
yor honor doth order & direct verie well , but that his l. doth not
answeare it in p~fourmance & execution EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.32

I assure yor honor if it be not p~vyded by some good establishement to
redresse the disorders of both sides , our poore marchantes wil@ @be
undonne by these differences , EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.33

and yor honor will forthwth see the effectes thereof .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.34

I haue comunicated wth one Smyth the answeare wch yor honor sent me from
M=r=. Kelley touching the wch he hath thought good to wryte againe to
yor honor . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.35

There is no likelyhood to compound so discordant allegations , unlesse
they were together , or that they will agree to whom to referre their
differences , EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.36

and these expostulations in the mean tyme serve to litle pourpose .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.37

It is verie earnestlie desired that it will please yor honor either to
send the pasportes wth expedition or ells answeare that they can@ @not
be getten for that they stay the dep~ture of their shippes thereuppon ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.38

and therefore yor honor shall greatlie satisfie them to geiue a speedie
resolution wch I beseech yor honor to be pleased to doe .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.39

And craving also p~don for hauing troubled yor honor wth so tedious a
letter I most humbly take my leaue ffrom Paris the second of Januarie
1598 . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.40

I send yor honer the memoriall delyuered me for the said pasportes .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.41

Yor honors most humblie bounden Tho: Edmondes .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.42

1598 2 Jan . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.43

M=r= Edmondes to my M=r= . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.44

His endevor to setle some intelligence wth Spaine
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,395.45

<P_396>

Twelue paspor=t=~ to be procured from y=e= l. Adm=ll= for ffrenche
merchan=t=~ to carry Corne for Spaine . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,396.47

Rc. the ixth at Whithall . EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,396.48

To the right honorable S=r=. Robrt Cecyll knight Principall Secretarie
to the Queenes Mat=ie= and chancelor of the Duchee of lancaster .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-H,396.49

