<BEGIN_ehatton-1666-e3-h>

<P_II,50>

<heading:edcomment:LADY_HATTON>

Sept. 22 1666 {COM:preceding_word_"1666"_emended} .
EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.4

My dearst Dear , Since y=r= father tells me y=t= your stay att London is
by my L=ad= Thenit and Sicelea command to wait one y=m= into y=e= contry
, I must not chid you , though I can@ @not but tell you , and y=t= truly
, that I am very much troubled y=t= I doe not see you , and the more
because I fear y=r= father will not give me leave to goe up w=th= him
w=n= he goes . EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.5

I presume you were shewed y=e= fine things y=r= father brought me :
farrender for a gowne , and 6 pair of gloves , and a paire of stockens ,
w=ch= is more y=n= I hoped for ; EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.6

and so sensible I am of y=e= kindnes y=t= I desir you to help me to
thank him for it . EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.7

He is pleased to speak kindly to me , EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.8

and is more cheerfull y=n= he was when he was last in the contry ;
EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.9

and I shall be as carfull not to say any thing y=t= may displease him ,
w=ch= puts me to a great stand in respect of other necessarys , both for
myself and y=r= poor sister Mary , who he has not given y=e= worth of
one penny to , nor till to_day has not spoak one word to her , w=ch= is
a very great trouble both to her and me . EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.10

I thank you for y=r= letter by y=e= carrier last week .
EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.11

I did not writ again by him , because I had writ so lately by y=e= boy
y=t= carried up y=r= father's horses . EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.12

My humble service to y=e= Lady Thanet and my Lady Cicelea .
EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.13

Y=r= sister disir y=e= same to you and to the L=a= Cicelea .
EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.14

She is so troubled att y=r= fathers not looking one her as upon others ,
that really you must excuse her not writting to you .
EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.15

My dear , though I doe not see you , I hope you think often of me .
EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.16

I assure you I do of you w=th= as great kindnes as any mother can doe
for a childe , EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.17

and trust God will hear the prayers y=t= are made day and night for you
by Y=r= most truly affectionat mother , y=e= afflicted Elizabeth
{COM:preceding_word_"Elizabeth"_emended} Hatton
EHATTON-1666-E3-H,II,50.18

