<BEGIN_eliz-1598-e2-h>

<P_387,B>

<heading:edcomment:CXLVIII>

By the Queene . Elizabeth ELIZ-1598-E2-H,387,B.4

R. Trusty and welbeloved , wee greet you well , ELIZ-1598-E2-H,387,B.5

wee haue seen y=r=. l~re , to our Secratary , and th'@ @enclosed from
the Master of Gray , w=ch= bringeth to vs , at one instant , two strange
{SIC:stange} wonders , first that he is resuscited , whome we held by
this tyme intombed , Secondly , that <paren> being all this while
vnburied <$$paren> , he could passe ouer so many yeares in silence .
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,387,B.6

But seing wee do find , that his retired affection towards vs , returnes
to his former place of confidence , you may do well , to assure him
hereby , that whatsoever he shall do , for our seruice , in any thing ,
shal@ @be performed to those , who~ he knowes well , to haue ever
resolved of this position , ELIZ-1598-E2-H,387,B.7

Si ingratam dixeris , omnia dixeris . ELIZ-1598-E2-H,387,B.8

For the other parte of his <P_388,B> motion , that wee would write some
l~re to his frend , for whome he vndertaketh , it is a Course , that wee
haue never vsed to any , but such , whose meritt hath first purchased
trust and favour , ELIZ-1598-E2-H,388,B.9

Lett him therefore know this , that as wee do thanck , both him , and
th'@ @other , <paren> whosoever he be <$$paren> , for his good
disposition , so when any effect shall followe of his honest purposes ,
our requytall , <paren> in what is fytt for a Prince <$$paren> , shall
not be long behinde . ELIZ-1598-E2-H,388,B.10

Some other things we haue imparted to our Secretary , wherein you may
beleeue him ; ELIZ-1598-E2-H,388,B.11

From our Palace of Westminster , ELIZ-1598-E2-H,388,B.12

the 4=th= of Decembr. 1598 . ELIZ-1598-E2-H,388,B.13

M=r= Edmunds 4=th= December 1598 ffrom her ma=tie= .
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,388,B.14

To our trusty and welbeloued servant , Thomas Edmunds , our Agent w=th=
the French kinge . ELIZ-1598-E2-H,388,B.15

<P_400,B>

<heading:edcomment:CLIII>

Elizabeth ELIZ-1598-E2-H,400,B.18

R. Trusty and welbeloued , Wee receaued by the french Embassadour , not
many daies past , a kind and carefull advertisement and advise from our
good Brother the french king ; wherein he hath lett vs know , what he
hath heard , of great preparations , by sea , in Spayne ; and wished vs
carefully to stopp , the transportation of warlick provisions ;
affirming <P_401,B> to haue geuen the lyke caution , to those of Holland
, by his Agent there . An Ouverture very wellcom to vs , because it
confirmed his constant frendship , to whome wee had Leaft no good office
vnperformed ; and assured vs further <paren> howsoe`uer the courss and
revolution of humane things , haue altered the face of his affaires
<$$paren> that he can not but Judge , That our prejudice , may , in
consequence , proue his danger . ELIZ-1598-E2-H,401,B.19

When wee further replied , that wee ded heare , of diuers Ships in
france , w=ch= were destined to Spayne , w=ch= wee , could not ,
w=th=out great Inconvenience , lett pass ; he ded assure vs , that he
would write to the king : ELIZ-1598-E2-H,401,B.20

and w=th=in few dayes after , ded acquaint vs , that the king his Master
would haue an honorable care , at this tyme , and had sent into france
to discover in what Ports , these preparations were .
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,401,B.21

But now of late , when he pursued a Remonstrance , concerning the
trafficq ; he handled two principall poincts w=th= our Counsaill ,
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,401,B.22

the one , To haue Justice for things past , ELIZ-1598-E2-H,401,B.23

The other , To haue an Order established , for prevention of lyke
supposed spoiles in future . ELIZ-1598-E2-H,401,B.24

How properly these ded fall into the Center of our desires <paren> as
being both essentiall parts of all kingly gouuernement ; the one , for
administration of Justice the other , to conserve and augment Liberties
and fortunes of our subiects , w=ch= draweth their loue and obedience
<$$paren> may appeare if we be rightly reported , and censured .
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,401,B.25

For seing Princes by Institution must vse the Judgements of subaltern
Ministers , in distribution of gouuernement ; wee ded immediately
enjoine all those to whome such aucthority and execution belongeth , to
receaue w=th=out delay , all Cahiers of complaints ; and to bethinke ,
how wee might speedily reforme all past disorders , that should fall out
to be proved , and how wee might settle a course of quiet commerce
hereafter . ELIZ-1598-E2-H,401,B.26

Herein what hath followed , shall appeare by this Memoriall , whereof
wee haue geuen his Embass=r= a double , to w=ch= wee referre you , as
being the substance of diuers Consultations , between the Embass=r= and
our Counsaill , and other personnes of quality and vnderstanding ,
appointed to attend and assist them , in matters incident to questions
of this Nature ; wherein although it shall appeare , by the aunswer in
writing , that wee insist vpon nothing , but that , w=ch= the Law of
Nations , and former Treaties between Princes , may warrant ; yet wee
command you , to tell him plainely , that wee could never haue expected
<paren> at this tyme when wee are so full of trouble and expectations of
danger to our state <$$paren> wee should haue ben by him denyed any such
matter <paren> though it were more vnproffitable to his <P_402,B>
subiects <$$paren> considering how many of ours , wee haue sacrificed
for his sake ; and how little wee haue weighed Vtilety , when there hath
ben question of his safety . ELIZ-1598-E2-H,402,B.27

This do wee command you , to deliure vnto him , not as vpbraiding our
former helps , or as sorry for their effects in his fortune ; but as a
Prince that is sensible of the strang proposition of his Embassad=r=
w=ch= wee can not devise how to match w=th= his first Introductions into
this cause : ELIZ-1598-E2-H,402,B.28

for as wee haue for settling of Justice agreed of the forme of Tryalls ,
by accomodating ourselfes , in any course , that may not make a Renverse
of all our formes of Justice , wee must needs say this , That now that
he is informed , that an Army is making , and that it is evident , that
a particuler portion of Corne is expected from Nantes , to furnish that
expedition into Ireland , If he should yeald no further , then ordinary
rules would tye him , although we had not plainely shewed the contrary
to his Embassad=r= as wee haue don , yet wee must surely conclude , that
we are requited w=th= vneven measure ELIZ-1598-E2-H,402,B.29

and must leaue it to himself , if his case were ours , what he would
think , when in such an instant of preparations , our best frends
releeue our adverse party in their necessities .
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,402,B.30

For the other poinct concerning the prohibition intended against our
Cloath , and stayed vpon y=r= remonstrance <paren> for so his
Embassad=r= confesseth <$$paren> we can not but well interprete his owne
particuler proceeding , having vnderstood , that it was rather carryed
on so farr by his ministers , then resolued by his direction .
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,402,B.31

But yet wee must say plainely , That it appeareth strange vnto vs , when
wee were able to shew it , that since the comming to our Crowne , it was
never denyed vs by any of his predecessors ; and that in tyme of Charles
the ix=th= a direct Treaty was concluded for it in 1572 ;
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,402,B.32

his Embassad=r= should make this replication , That in the former kings
tymes , it was but a Tolleration ; and that when that Treaty was made ,
it was never fully executed . ELIZ-1598-E2-H,402,B.33

This seemeth to vs surely a very hard proceeding , when if other kings
had suffred it , betweene whome there had passed often breaches ; wee
might not haue ben secure of him , betweene whome and vs , had passed so
straight obligations ; or now that it is knowen , that by a Treaty , it
was accorded , that it should be sought to be altered , because the
execution was interrupted when it is well knowen , that the Massacre of
France following , and so dayely troubles arrising , it was not our
default , that it was not in all circumstances executed .
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,402,B.34

This injurious Cours , we can never imagine to proceede from y=e= king
our brother , but from some other omissions of his Ministers ;
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,402,B.35

for what could more haue foretould <P_403,B> the world of alteration of
kindnes <paren> if you had not remembered it , and the king suspended it
<$$paren> then so apert a declaration of hard measure to our people ?
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,403,B.36

Thus farr and w=th= this rondeur haue wee proceeded w=th= a desire to
cleare all manner of scruples , w=ch= might weacken ether the reputation
, or essence of our perfect frendship ; w=ch= wee were desirous to
intimate to himself , from whome wee promise our self , all such effects
, as are agreeable to Princely Judgement and Moderation , both being
vertues properly annexed to the ranks , w=ch= Princes hold vnder God ,
whome he hath chosen , to rectify the errors and partialities of
Inferiors , howsoeuer wee may be pressed dayly w=th= Importunities , to
w=ch= vulgar spiritts are subiect . ELIZ-1598-E2-H,403,B.37

You shall in the end assure him , that as wee may not condemne our
Subiects , onely because they are accused , so whosoeuer can be
convicted , shall duely paye the price of his cryme .
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,403,B.38

Wee haue commanded our secretary , to acquaint you , what hath passed
between the french Ambassad=r= and him , in whome wee find more acrimony
, then wee expected , especially in this , wherein he sheweth merely a
spiritt of Choller and pride , when he gaue the first cause himself ,
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,403,B.39

obserue what impressions he seeketh to worke there ,
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,403,B.40

and obviate them , according to y=r= discretion ,
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,403,B.41

and acquaint vs by y=r= letter to our Secretary of all particulars ,
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,403,B.42

and take notice from vs hereby , that as well by y=r= letters , as other
testimonies geuen vs by our Secretary of y=r= diligence that wee do very
gratiously accept y=r= honest and faithfull endevoirs .
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,403,B.43

Returne thanks from vs to the Duke of Buillon , to whome wee would haue
written thanks for his kind Letter , but that a Flux in our Eye hindered
vs , from {COM:sic} writing to the french king , to haue prepared his
minde not to mistake , vpon an vntrue reporte , the good will of our
Tablettes , who hath euer ben ready to do him good offices .
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,403,B.44

At our Palace of Westminster , ELIZ-1598-E2-H,403,B.45

this 20=th= day of Januar. 1598 of our Raigne the 41=th=
ELIZ-1598-E2-H,403,B.46

