<BEGIN_eoxinden-1665-e3-h>

<P_308>

<heading:edcomment:CXCVI_ELIZABETH_OXINDEN_TO_KATHERINE_OXINDEN>

<font> Feb: <$$font> 16 1665-6 D: M. EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,308.4

Yours I recived by Mr Jull ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,308.5

I give you many thankes for my haire ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,308.6

I hope to have {COM:preceding_word_"have"_emended} a noble paire of
locks made of it to were for your sake : EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,308.7

as to the oysters I have used my utmost indeavour to get som in order to
your command EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,308.8

but can@ @not posible get any as yet , they being so very rare , by
reason the seamen being all prest , that there is none left to get them
. EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,308.9

I have eate none but once since I were with you
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,308.10

and those were sent a Friend of mine for a present ;
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,308.11

but you may be confident of me as soon as posible I can procure them .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,308.12

Dick , I thank God , continueth free from any infectious disease
notwithstanding since Michalmas there hath dyed in the town seaven_score
and the greatest part of the small pox , more
{COM:preceding_word_"more"_emended} then hath been in London considering
<P_309> the bignes of the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} citie
{COM:preceding_word_"citie"_emended} . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.13

I must beg your pardon if you doe not heare of me soe often as you may
expect EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.14

and beseech you not to impute it to my sweet Deares hindering me ,
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.15

for they are all scrint , to the button for a cap and less ;
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.16

but I am about a peec of work that I am very earnest upon to have it
done by Easter ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.17

I doe not know what to tearm it untill I have your aprobation of it ,
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.18

but it is a Jump for my nick . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.19

Pray doe me the favour to acquaint Mr Dickinson when you send to town
that I have a gown to make that if he think it worth his time I would
have him come over to me ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.20

I did thinke never to imploy him , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.21

but he being all your tailors I have altered my resolution ;
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.22

beleev I must not have a gown againe this seaven yeare this cost soe
much ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.23

four pound four shillings the outside cost me ready mony , and fourteen
shillings a sute of ribbon ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.24

this I have provided to wait one you toward Easter ;
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.25

but when my stays are to be tryed one I intend to come to Canterbury ,
where I should take it for a great favour if you would be pleased to
give me a meeting EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.26

and I shall acquaint you the time , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.27

for I earnestly long to kiss your hand . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.28

I am really sorry my sister W: servant came noe more of the family of
the Johnsones ; it coming to nothinge EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.29

it is looked one as my one own {COM:preceding_word_"own"_emended}
invention to draw the other one ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.30

heare is mighty fleering and askeing whither she be married .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.31

Mis betty Southouse hath been at the pasonage {COM:sic} ever since
Christmast , to sutor Mr Durell as I thinke , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.32

for I never knew her there before . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.33

There is not any of the batcholers in this country are inclineing to
marry this yeare that I heare of . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.34

Mr M. continueth keeping house with his maid EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.35

and Mr. Reader doth the same . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.36

The Master and the maid and Dick and Marie Reader are all the family .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.37

We are all well heare , praised be God , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.38

and the respects of the family salute you all .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.39

There is one remarkable thinge that I had almost forgot ;
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.40

there is a Lady Sidny , a earl's daughter , that hath formerly lived
about Canterbury , one of the great gallants of our time ,
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.41

she hath five_thousand pound , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,309.42

she hath marryed her self to a minister that hath nothinge <P_310> but a
bare liveing of forty pound a yeare . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,310.43

I have not more at present only my humble duty and endeared love where
it is due EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,310.44

I am Obeidently yours EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,310.45

<P_320>

<heading:edcomment:CCIV_ELIZABETH_OXINDEN_TO_KATHERINE_OXINDEN>

<P_321>

<font> Feb 25=th= <$$font> 1666-7 EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.49

Deare Mother , Yours I received directed to goodwife Wilson :
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.50

I have now sent for Dick , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.51

but had it not {COM:preceding_word_"not"_emended} been to fullfill my
promise that I would send for him this mounth , I had trespased one your
patience a while longer , because his master is very ill and hath
continued soe a week . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.52

He came down in a very bad tide from London EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.53

and was seaven houres upon the water EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.54

soe I beleev he hath got his bane . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.55

My cosin Upton and her Daughter and my self were yesterday to see him
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.56

and for my one part were scared at his lookes .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.57

The monday night after that I came from Denton EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.58

my three cosins , Mr Reader and my self suped together
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.59

and I beleev it was very chargable . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.60

We had a dish of such fish as we eat at Canterbury when I had the honor
to meet you there . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.61

Wee had a loine of veale , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.62

we had wild Duck , teele and whinde , two great dishes of pickeld
Oyesters and two of anchovies and a very lovely tart .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.63

If my Father had soe great influence upon Sir Tho Tiddyman's
{COM:preceding_word_"Tiddyman's"_emended} son as to wish him to my Cosin
Maragret I should take it as a perticuler obligatione doen to my self ,
and I really beleev more advantageous to me then anythinge that could be
done for me ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.64

Betty love is sent for {COM:preceding_word_"for"_emended} by Sir henry
Ox to come and live there , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.65

and if she doe not like {COM:sic} there they will gett her a place ;
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,321.66

this is the kindess of her <P_322> unkle coronel to her without speaking
to . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.67

Deare mother I give you humble thankes for all your favours to me and
Dicke EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.68

and beg your pardon for all amisses that I have committed either in
neglegence or any other way . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.69

For upon serious thoughts I have ever honour'd you
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.70

and have had a perticuler respect for you beyound any of my one
relations , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.71

and really I should loath my self should I harbour the least thought of
dishonor or unkinds toward you . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.72

All that I desire is that I might be capable of serveing you in action
in a greater measure then I am able to exspres in words .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.73

All the disasters that is posible to fall one any doth come one me .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.74

All that I bought at the faire I lost , which was an elle of hollond
cost four shillinges EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.75

and much mischife is done to my house by the high wind one St Paule .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.76

The Docter sent over his man with a letter to me to acquaint me of it as
soone as I came from Denton . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.77

I have sent you a cake which I desire you would be pleased to accept .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.78

I wish my mony would have extended itself into a larger maner ,
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.79

for if it may be beleft I have but three shillinges to keep me untill
our Lady day . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.80

I have now great reason to blame M=is= Smithitt
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.81

for I sent her a letter three weekes since EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.82

but have not heard one word from her . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.83

Pray doe me the favour to present my humble duty to my father and
thankes for all his favours EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.84

and recive the same yourselfe from her that is Your Obeident Daughter
Elizabeth Oxinden EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.85

I shall not expect them home untell to_morrow .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,322.86

<P_331>

<heading:edcomment:CCIX_ELIZABETH_OXINDEN_TO_KATHERINE_OXINDEN>

<P_332>

<font> July 20=th= <$$font> 1667 De Mo , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.90

This is the second sent since I recived any , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.91

this come to bring you an account of the wedding which was one thursiday
last . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.92

The bride had three very good great cakes , one from M=is= Master
{COM:preceding_word_"Master"_emended} another from M=is= Knowler of this
parish whos Daughter was heare , another from M=is= Culling whos
Daughter was heare . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.93

One Dosin of glovs was disposed of to the relations , as the two fathers
and her Mother , Mr. Lees and his wife , Mr. Gilbert and his wife
which were related to him and he brought them with him : Mr. Ridley and
myself and Mr. butler he brought with him , a minister he brought with
him , his father , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.94

and these are those which had gloves . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.95

Mr. Cullinge wold not be perswaded to touch a glove nor favour ;
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.96

he rids at the strangest rate that ever man did ;
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.97

he hath no so much as Joyed her ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.98

if she come in the room where he is he runs as if he were scared .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.99

Her two {COM:preceding_word_"two"_emended} bride
{COM:preceding_word_"bride"_emended} men that led her to church have
white garters a quarter of a yard deep with siller lace at ends .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.100

The favours were topeny broad pinke_couler satten ribbon eyed with
narrow blake . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.101

There were five maiden ladys and four young gentlemen ,
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.102

and the rest of the company were married people , all relations and
friends of his and hers . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.103

They were very sivilly merry : EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.104

it was as hansome a wedding they all say as ever they were at :
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.105

and his father soe {COM:preceding_word_"soe"_emended} highly pleased as
is posible with his Daughter and her company , to see what great
{COM:preceding_word_"great"_emended} esteem she is in and how she is
beloved , that you can@ @not imagin of the fondnes of the old man to her
and her mother . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.106

He said his son might have had wives with five_hundred pound
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.107

but indeed , he said , he had hindred them ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.108

but he had heard a generall commendation of my cosin
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,332.109

and he percived she {COM:preceding_word_"she"_emended} should not fall
short of what he heard <P_333> of her . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.110

The old man dotes one her : EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.111

she must not set neare a doore when she was hot with dancinge
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.112

and tell her he shall give her somethinge ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.113

it is not his way to brag EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.114

but he will not take five_hundred pound for what he is worth ;
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.115

and many expretions of kindness to her and her mother .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.116

The old man is a presbiterian EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.117

but he was highly pleased ; EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.118

such mirth and sivill gentlemen he liked he said .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.119

The M=is= Master {COM:preceding_word_"Master"_emended} made the rarest
bride veil that ever was seen , EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.120

she is much behoulding to them Ladys . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.121

Mr. Master was one of her brid men and his trigrimate the other , who
hath stayed in the country one purpose to be at her wedding .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.122

He not knowen where to have a cake to send , sent twenty shilling worth
a wine , six bottles of sack which is seaven groats a quart and six of
french wine , which was much excepted of . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.123

It cost Mr Cater I beleeve above three pound .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.124

One Monday they goe home EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.125

and this day one of her brid men is gon to meet a fellow of their
colledg EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.126

and soe one their Journey for Cam: : EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.127

I have given you in folio concerning the wedding
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.128

and now I must bewail my one own {COM:preceding_word_"own"_emended}
misfortune in parting with one that I soe dearly love as I doe her
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.129

but I doe much hope she will be very happy in a good husband .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.130

Could I imagine other wise it would ade much to my trouble
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.131

and that which is my comfort she goeth not far ,
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.132

for it is not posible for me to live without seeing her .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.133

For ought I know I will continue with her in the winter
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.134

and in the meantime I can see her often . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.135

Goodwife power is dead EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.136

and Sir William Delane is dead , he being sick but a few daies .
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.137

This is all the news that I heare our parts afford ,
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.138

but it is possible I may send you word of another wedding when I write
next . EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.139

Our family saluts you all with their humble service
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.140

and I desire to have my humble Duty and service given where it is due
EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.141

I am obeidently yours EOXINDEN-1665-E3-H,333.142

