<BEGIN_essex-1600-e2-h>

<P_8>

The E. of Essex replyed againe that he was far from any daungerous
thought towardes his Lo=p= or any of the rest w=th= him , whome he had
before tyme esteemed as his speciall freindes . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,8.3

he sawe indeede that the comaundm=t= of Allegiaunce could not p~tecte
the E. of South: from the late iniurye done him by my Lo. Greye ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,8.4

and therefore resolved to stand vppon his guard , havinge y=e= same
adu~tisem=t= <P_9> on the Sat=er=day night y=t= his private enemyes were
in armes against him & the same seconded on the Sondaye morninge by
p~sons worthye the beleevinge , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.5

but <paren> quoth he <$$paren> for any intent of treason towarde her
Ma=tie= or the State , I am cleare ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.6

and I can avowe as@ @much for the rest there p~sent .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.7

But my Lo. Steward and the rest of yo=r= Lop=s= , I wold not that yo=u=
shold mistake me in this , as if I went aboute to saue my Lyfe :
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.8

no , I despise it ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.9

and am at peace w=th= god ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.10

and have forgott the world , beinge more desirous to dye then to live .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.11

That w=ch= I speake is rather in satisfacon of this nobleman that
standeth by me and the rest that are engaged w=th= me , whose hartes are
purely affected and whose bodyes are able to serve theire sou~aigne and
their countrye . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.12

But to confirme in me the doubte of beinge s=r~=prised in my house ,
S=r= Walter Raleighe persuaded S=r= fferdinando Gorges to leave vs
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.13

or he was lost , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.14

tould him that he came owte of a sinkinge ship . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.15

And the advises on Saterday night and Sunday morninge , came not from
light and vayne reportes but from an honorable adu~tisem=t= .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.16

But my Lordes <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> I haue had very uniust courses
vsed against me , Papists soughte owte to accuse , as Tho. Blunt , and
one Sudall a Preiste , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.17

Allsoe Bales a Scrivener confessed to me and others that he
counterfeited my hand twelve tymes . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.18

What measure might I then expect from such begininge ?
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.19

To that M=r= Attorney spake that it was true y=t= Bales was hired
therevnto by a s~vant of th'@ @earles , one John Danyell to th'@ @intent
that if afterwardes the E. owne hand were p~duced to accuse him he
mighte have somewhat to allege for him selfe . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.20

Heere the Lo. Greye stoode vp ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.21

and p~tested he did not nowe mallice the E. of South:
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.22

ffor he delighted not to presse an abiecte ffortune .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.23

That w=ch= he offered him in the streete was in respect of a newe
iniurye w=ch= <paren> q=th= the E. of South: <$$paren> was never ment
yo=u= . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.24

The Lo. Steward comaunded an ende of that speeche , tendinge but to
private expostulacon . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.25

Then was redd the deposicon of S=r= fferdinando Gorges to this effect ,
viz. that he received a l~re from the E. in January last , either to
come vp to London or to meete in some place the 2 of ffebruary .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,9.26

At his cominge the E. told him he <P_10> stoode vppon his guard , that
he ment to trust no longer , but he resolved to defend himself from
restrainte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.27

Tould him further that he was confident in London ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.28

and liked not that the Lordes shold be his int=r=cess=rs= , allsoe that
he resolved to call a Parliam=t= havinge once gayned secure access at
Courte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.29

That he had a stronge p~ty in Wales , but first ment to try London .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.30

That he the sayd S=r= fferdinando
{COM:preceding_word_"fferdinando"_emended} Gorges
{COM:preceding_word_"Gorges"_emended} came from his charge at Plymouth
w=t=hout leave , w=ch= beinge knowne to S=r= Walter Raleighe his kinsman
and frend , S=r= Walt=er= sent for him to come speake w=th= him :
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.31

they appointed to meete vppon the water on Sunday morninge , the verie
day that the E. of Essex began to stirr . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.32

And there meetinge , S=r= Wa. Ra: told him that he wished him to dep~te
the towne p~sently , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.33

or otherwise he wold be layde in the fleete , whereto he replyed , tush
S=r= Wa. this is not a tyme of goinge to the fleete ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.34

gett yo=u= backe to the Courte and that w=th= speede ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.35

for yo=u= are lyke to haue a bloody day of y=t= , wherevpon S=r= Walter
againe advised him to come forth of that company .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.36

And then S=r= fferd. Gorges shoved of the Boate wherein S=r= Wa. Ra:
was ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.37

and bad him hye him there , w=ch= he did p~ceavinge a boate to come off
{COM:preceding_word_"off"_emended} at Essex house stayres , wherein were
3 or 4 of the E. of Essex s~vantes , with peeres who had in charge
either to take or kill S=r= Wa. Ra: vppon the water .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.38

ffor the first p~te of theire meetinge vppon the water S=r= Wa. Ra: was
deposed in Courte to the same effecte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.39

The E. of Essex desired to heare S=r= fferd. Gorges face to face ,
wherevppon he was sent for , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.40

and there delivered as much , addinge further that he desired the E. of
Essex at his retorne , to goe and submitt himself ; whereat the E.
excepted w=th= this speeche or to the like effecte .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.41

S=r= fferd. Gorges I wish yo=u= shold speake any thinge that shold do
yo=r= self good , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.42

but remember that yo=u= are a gent . and that yo=r= reputacon oughte to
be deare vnto yo=u= . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.43

I pray yo=u= answere , did yo=u= advise me to cease my enterprise ?
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.44

My Lo. <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> I thinke I did .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.45

Nay <paren> quoth E. <$$paren> it is no=w= not tyme to answere vppon
thinkinge , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.46

did yo=u= indeede so counsell me ? ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.47

he answered I did . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.48

The E. pausing as it were in a wond=er= replyed thus .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,10.49

Well , let his lyfe and my death witnes <P_11> howe truely he speakes .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.50

Then was agayne vrged the Consultation at Drewery house , at w=ch= was
p~sent the E. of South: whereto the E. of South: replyed w=th=
p~testation of all loyaltie in his harte towarde her Ma=tie= .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.51

And in that he had offended her , he was hartely sory ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.52

and did in all humblenes beseeche her p~don . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.53

But touchinge the consultation at Drewery house , many thinges were
indeede p~pounded but nothinge resolved , all beinge lefte in the ende
to the E. of Essex himself . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.54

But <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> put the case as yo=u= wold haue it , that
it was advised both to attempt the Courte and Towre att once ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.55

neither of the two was done : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.56

how can it then be made treason ? ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.57

It is true we did consult at Drewry house , about securinge the E. of
Essex his access free from impeachm=t= ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.58

and that for noe other end , but to p~strate o=r= selves at her mat=e's=
ffeete , humblie submittinge o=r= selves to her m=er=cye , and laying
forth our greifes to her self , whereof we thought she had noe true
informacon from others . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.59

this was the end of o=r= meetinge , and not w=th= any treasonable
thought of my p~te . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.60

I take god to record , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.61

and <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> I desire the opinion of the Judges ,
whether one thinge consulted vppon and an other executed be Treason ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.62

ffor we talkte of goinge to the Courte , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.63

the Towre allso was talked vppon , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.64

but the counsell was reiected , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.65

and this yo=u= will haue to be treason . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.66

ffor my p~te I knewe nothinge in the morninge when I came to Essex house
of o=r= goinge into London . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.67

when I was in London I hard not the p~clamacon , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.68

I was not neare by the lengthe of the streete . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.69

Let my Lo. Burleigh speake <paren> I knowe him hon=or=able <$$paren>
whether he sawe me in London or not . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.70

I never drewe my sword all the daye . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.71

I am charged to carry a pistoll : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.72

I had none when I went owte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.73

when I came into London I sawe one havinge a pistoll .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.74

I desired it of him ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.75

and had it . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.76

But it had never a stone ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.77

nor cold it have hurte a flye . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.78

At my retorne into Essex house I did there what I could to hind=er= the
shootinge , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.79

and for that ende sent Capt. White about the house .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.80

ffrom this kinde of behavio=r= can be gathered noe thoughtes of Treason
, ESSEX-1600-E2-H,11.81

and therefore I beseech yo=u= my Lordes , to censure me not accordinge
to the letter of the <P_12> Lawe but as in yo=r= trewe consciences yo=u=
are p~swaded of me , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.82

And in that I was too {COM:preceding_word_"too"_emended} farr carryed
w=th= love to my Lo. of Essex I confesse to haue offended , that before
rehersed beinge the onely drift and scope of my purpose in this busines
. ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.83

Hereto M=r= Attorney replyed y=t= it was palliata Conclusio .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.84

Is this <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> not Treason to force the Queene in
her owne house , to sett guardes at her gates in her Chambers and all
p~tes of house , to th@ @intent that havinge her in yo=r= power yo=u=
mighte doe what yo=u= listed . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.85

Good M=r= Attorney <paren> q=th= the E. of South: <$$paren> let , let
me aske yo=u= what yo=u= thinke in yo=r= conscience , we wold haue done
w=th= the Queene yf we had gayned the Courte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.86

I p~test vppon my soule and conscience <paren> q=th= M=r= Attorney
<$$paren> I do beleeve she shold not have longe lived after she had bene
in yo=r= power . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.87

Note but the p~sidentes of former ages , how longe lived Rich. the 2.
afte=r= he was surprised in the same manner . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.88

the p=re=tence was alike , for removinge of c=er=taine counsellor=es= ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.89

but it shortely after cost him his lyfe . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.90

such is the vnquenchable thirst of Ambition , w=ch= never can be
satisfied so longe as any greatnes is left vnatchived .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.91

but know this for certaine , that to make the Courte or Tower a defence
for private enemyes is playne Treason . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.92

The E. of South: replied that the Towre was reiected as a matter of
ridiculous to be thought vppon : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.93

neither was it ment to fortifie at courte , but onely to cast them
selves at her Ma=te's= feete . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.94

The Judges were required theire sev~rall opinions for the Question
before p~pounded by the E. of South: who argued it sev~ally , and
agreed that it was Treason . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.95

My Lo. Admyrall desired to be resolved whether the instructions for a
consultacon to be had at Drewry house were under the E. of Essex owne
hands : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,12.96

Then was p~duced and redd in Courte the examinacon of S=r= Charles
Davers to this effect , that the Earle of Essex deliberated before
Christmas , to secure his accesse to her Ma=tie= from possibility of
resistance , to posses himselfe of the Courte , the p~iect of the Earle
of Essex , his owne hand , to surprise the Capt. of the guard , the
Courte beinge taken to send to satisfye the Cittye , to call a p~liam=t=
, and to bringe his enemyes to an honorable tryall : That he wished
<P_13> the E. to flye w=th= 2 or 3 gent. and for his owne goinge to
the consultacon at Drewrie house , he was drawne there vnto , by the
love he bare to the E. of South: to whome he ought his lyfe .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.97

he confesseth that he advised to seize the halbertes in the Guarde
Chamber , w=ch= done they shold w=th= ease enoughe posses that place ,
beinge p~swaded to fynde many indifferent havinge bene the E. of Essex
his s~vantes in tymes past . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.98

Then was red the Ex. of S=r= Christ. Blunt , to this effect ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.99

At the first his wounde hindred him , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.100

but p~mised that when he was able to speake he wold tell all trewlye ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.101

And beinge then Ex. before my Lo. Admyrall and M=r= Secretarie , he
confessed the p~iecte to be as hath bene before described .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.102

he affirmed that the E. of Essex had a purpose to alter the gou~m=t= ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.103

and in communicacon w=th= him , the E. said that he liked not that any
man shold be troubled for Religion , That the E. sent Wiseman to his
wife w=th= a letter of Complaint into the Countrye , requestinge him
allso to come to London the xx=th= of Januarye accordinge to appointm=t=
. ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.104

The E. of Essex answered , yo=u= p~duce heere Ex. of wittnesses
against me , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.105

they are in like state as I am , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.106

they speake like men desirous to live , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.107

they testifye against me . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.108

What reward doe they hope for ? ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.109

Lyfe . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.110

I wish that w=ch= they speake may purchase that vnto them .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.111

ffor I never ment to Endaunger any of theire lives , howsoever I speede
this daye . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.112

it is to me a thinge indifferent . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.113

I am not in Love w=th= my Lyfe , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.114

nor have bene a longe tyme . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.115

I could haue bene contented to haue dyed in my house when I was besett :
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.116

But I thancke Allmightie God , that he hath reserved me to this daye's
tryall : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.117

But I was driven to this hazard by those that have the Queene's care and
doe abuse it , inforcinge againste me many vntruthes , w=ch= knowinge I
choose rather to hazard her Ma=te's= mercy : then to abide the
daungerous courses that shold run against me . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.118

Beinge demaunded who were those p~sonnes at w=ch= he cheiflye aymed , he
answered M=r= Secretarie Cecill , the Lo. Cobhm~ and S=r= Walt=er=
Raleighe , against whome he had iust cause of exceptons , as wold haue
diverted her Ma=te's= favor from them . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,13.119

ffor the matter of his goinge into London , he knewe not <P_14> th'@
@int=er=p=r~=tacon of the same , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.120

but his owne harte he knewe to be cleare of the leaste stayne of
disloyaltie to his sou~aigne . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.121

The Lo. Cobhm~ arose ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.122

and excused himself of any mallice to the E. ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.123

and p~tested to have onely dislyked his ambitious courses , w=ch= could
not but breede daunger to the State , in w=ch= respect he ought to
hind=er= there growthe . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.124

The Lo. Steward cut off {COM:preceding_word_"off"_emended} his speeche
, affirmyng that the matter alledged by the E. was imp~tinent ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.125

and willed them to p~ceede to the Judgm=t= that was in hand .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.126

The E. of Essex not_w=th=standinge replied that in his opinyon he was
not alone , but he was fortified by the opinion of honorable p~sons .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.127

Then M=r= Bacon spake to this effect : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.128

I expected not <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> that the matter of defence
shold have bene alledged for excuse , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.129

therefore I must allter my speeche from that I entended .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.130

To Rebell in Defence , is a matter not hard of ; ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.131

in case of Murder , defence is a good Plea , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.132

but in this case , to doe all that was done that daye , and then to goe
abowte to blamich it , I can@ @not allowe : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.133

I speake not nowe to simple men , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.134

I speake to them that can drawe p~se owte of the nature of the thinges
themselves . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.135

It is knowne by bookes , by experience and by common talke , that noe
Lawfull intendimt=es= are bent directlie againste the Prince ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.136

but there is a walteringe of gou~m=tes= <paren> as the phrase is in
Scottland <$$paren> . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.137

thes goe noe way but by p~ticular Iniuries . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.138

My Lo=rs= , I can@ @not resemble yo=r= p~ceedinges more rightlie then to
y=t= of Pisistratus in Athens , who launched himself to th'@ @intent
that by the sighte of bleedinge woundes , the people might beleve he was
set vppon : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.139

Yo=r= Lop. gave owte that yo=r= lyfe was soughte by the Lo. Cobham and
S=r= Wa. Ra: ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.140

and carried allwayes such a shewe of religion in yo=u= that mens eyes
were not able throughe suche a myste to behould the deceipte .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.141

But yo=u= imprisonne the Counsell : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.142

what reference hath that facte to my Lo. Cobhm~ or the rest .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.143

yo=u= alledged the matter to have resolved vppon on the soddaine .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.144

No , yo=u= weare three monthes in deliberacon . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.145

My Lo. descend into yo=r= self , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.146

and strip yo=u= of excuse : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.147

the p~ties yo=u= shott att <paren> yf yo=u= could haue rightly
vnd=er=stood <$$paren> were yo=r= best ffreindes .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,14.148

here the E. of <P_15> Essex interrupted him ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.149

and sayde , that the speeche of M=r= Bacon , gave him occasion to
alledge him selfe against him selfe . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.150

ffor <paren> saith he <$$paren> M=r= Bacon beinge a daylie Courtier ,
and havinge accesse to her Ma=tie= vnd=er=tooke to goe to the Queene in
my behalf , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.151

and for that ende drue a letter very artificiallye , w=ch= was
subscribed w=th= my name , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.152

allso another letter was drawne , to occasion that letter , w=ch= other
came from his brother M=r= Anthony Bacon , both w=ch= he shold shewe the
Queene . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.153

Gosnole broughte me both the letters , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.154

and in my letter he did pleade for me , as feelingly against those
enemyes ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.155

and pointed them owt as plainely as was possible .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.156

M=r= Bacon answered that thes digressions were not fitt , neither wold
be suffered , but that the hono=r= and patience of this assemblie was
greate : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.157

he confessethe he {COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} had spent more
howeres to make him a good s~vante to her Ma=tie= then ever he des~ved .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.158

for any thinge conteyned in those letters they wold not blushe in the
clearest light . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.159

But <paren> saithe the E. <$$paren> lett it be indifferently iudged
whether I had cause of greife or not , when I was informed by those of
good Credditt , that an honorable , grave , and wise Counsello=r= did
with teares lament the co=r=ses they were takinge , that besides for
that I spake in London , that the <font> Infanta <$$font> of Spayne was
intytled to the succession : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.160

I had reason , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.161

ffor it was tould me that M=r= Secretarye so sayde to one of his fellow
Counsello=rs= , that the <font> Infanta's <$$font> tytle Compativelie ,
was as good as any other in the succession . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.162

Allso I sawe soe many oppressions in the State , y=t= I was desirous to
sacrifice my selfe in the redresse thereof by doinge any thinge that a
Loyall subiecte mighte doe Herewith . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.163

M=r= Secretarye beinge present besought the Lo. Steward vppon his knee
to give him leave to answere the E. of Essex , w=ch= he seemed loathe
to doe as not beleevinge what the E. had taxed him w=t=hall :
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.164

and the Peeres made one semblance of givinge light credditt thereunto .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.165

M=r= Secretarye began to this effecte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.166

My Lo. ffor witt I give yo=u= the p~eminence , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.167

yo=u= have it aboundantlie . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.168

ffor birthe I give yo=u= place . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.169

I am not noble , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.170

yet I am a gent: ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.171

neither am I a sword man . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.172

Yo=u= haue therefore the oddes of me . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,15.173

Butt I have inocencye to p~tect me <P_16> from yo=r= malicious slander ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.174

and I stand here in the p~son of an honest man : yo=u= there in the
p~son of a Trayto=r= . Wherefore I do here challenge yo=u= yf yo=u=
dare , to name vnto this honorable assembley , that Counsell=r= to whome
I shold speake those wordes . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.175

The E. replyed w=th= a kynde of frowne to be dared , that they all
knewe he had not named one man , that daye for an other ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.176

neyther wold he . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.177

Then <paren> q=th= M=r= Secret: <$$paren> it must be beleeved to be a
ficcon . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.178

No <paren> q=th= the Earle <$$paren> it is not , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.179

for the noble man that standeth by me hard it : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.180

and it was told ioyntile to vs both . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.181

Then M=r= Secretary said to the E. of South: in effecte , as followeth
, ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.182

if it be so then , my Lo. I coniure yo=u= by all the love and
frendshipp that hath bene betwixte vs , and as yo=u= are a Christian :
by the hono=r= of yo=r= name and howse and whatsoever else yo=u= hold
honorable , as I p~test I holde yo=u= severed from him in impudencye ,
that yo=u= name here the Counsell=r= to whome I shold speake it .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.183

The E. of South: answered , that he referred himself to that honorable
Courte , whither it were fytt for hym , in the case he nowe stoode , to
name him . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.184

I refer me <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> to yo=r= self S=r= ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.185

and if you will say vppon yo=r= hono=r= y=t= it were fitt I did name him
, I will . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.186

I p~test <paren> q=th= M=r= Secret : <$$paren> before you and heaven ,
that yow should do {COM:preceding_word_"do"_emended} yo=r= Prince and
Countrye a most acceptable s~vice , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.187

for I were a verie vnworthye man to hold that place I doe in the State
if I were to be touched in that sorte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.188

Then the Earle of South: named S=r= Willm. Knolles to be the
Counsello=r= to whome he shold so speake . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.189

Then <paren> M=r= Secret: <$$paren> vppon his knee besoughte the Lo.
Steward that S=r= Willm Knollis might be sent for , w=ch= was graunted .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.190

And M=r= Secretarie p~ceeded in an open p~testacon , that he never hated
the p~son of the E. but his ymodderate aspiring . That he had told the
Queene since my Lo. restreinte at my Lo. Keep=r= , y=t= he hoped y=t=
this late affliccon wold fitt hym to her Ma=tes= service , and did but
attend a fitt tyme , to move her Ma=tie= to call him agayne to the
Courte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.191

Then the Q. Counsell p~ceeded to the Evidence , obiectinge to the E.
of Essex his cold hipocrisie , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,16.192

for_as_much as havinge in his house contynuall preachinge , he yet was
contented <P_17> to S=r= Christ. Blunt: to p~mise a tolleracon of
Religion . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.193

To that the E. answered , y=t= he knewe S=r= Christ. Blunt to be a
<font> Papist <$$font> ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.194

and had often sought his con~ion ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.195

and <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> beinge in speeche together aboute those
matters , oh <paren> q=th= S=r= Chr. Blunt <$$paren> , my Lo. you are
in passion against those of my p~fession : whereunto I answered , did
you never knowe y=t= at such tyme as I had power in the State , I was
willinge noe man shold be trobled for his conscience .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.196

the E. of South: besought leave to speake , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.197

and spake to this effecte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.198

I was ignorant <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> of the Lawes ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.199

therefore mighte easely transgress the bondes thereof .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.200

The first and onely motive that <em> led to <$$em> my stirr w=th= my Lo.
was my love to my Lord , tyed vnto him both by the bondes of Allegiance
and his manifold des~tes towardes me . In respect whereof I was content
to indure w=th= him the utmost hazard : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.201

for I sawe his case verie desp~ate for fav=or= ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.202

& therefore I consulted w=th= others to steere his passage to her
Ma=tie= . I p~test before allmightie God for noe other end then to
p~strate o=r= selves at her ffeete , wherein was never mencon made of
sheddinge one drop of blood , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.203

And if in this my affection , I have bene transported beyond the
Limittes of the Lawe , and that her highenes is displeased therew=th= ,
I doe in all humblenes crave her p~don and mercye , wherein I will never
dispaire . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.204

I hope her Ma=tie= , beinge Gode's Leivetenante vppon earthe , will
imytate him in Lookinge to the Earle and not condemne me for that ,
wherein onely through ignoraunce of her Lawes I have offended .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.205

heere M=r= Secre: beinge moved w=th= a deepe touche of ymputacon layde
vppon hym by the Lo. of Essex , humbly desired leave to move the Courte
, w=ch= graunted , he spake as followeth . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.206

S=r= Willm. Knollis <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> is sent for .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.207

I knowe not by what messenger , neither whether he will come or not .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.208

I therefore beseech yo=r= grace y=t= some sure gent. may be sent as
hath free access to her Ma=te's= p~son , and y=t= may p~sent vnto her my
humble desire that it wold please her to comaunde him to come ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.209

and in my opinion this gent. that standes here , M=r= Knyvett , a gent.
of her Ma=te's= preivy Chamber , were a verie meete man .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.210

The Lo. Steward , and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} the 7 Peeres
consented . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,17.211

then M=r= Secretarie turned <P_18> his speeche to M=r= Knyvett to this
effecte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.212

M=r= Knivet goe ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.213

and deliver faithfullie this messuage to her Ma=tie=
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.214

& I further coniure yo=u= as yo=u= are a gent. and do tend=r= yo=r=
reputacon , by all o=r= Love and by y=e= dutye yo=u= owe to o=r=
Sou~aigne and Conterye , that yo=u= add this further from me to her
Ma=tie= , That if either owt of want of care of me , or content to her
self , she shall deny to send him , I doe here vowe vppon my salvacon ,
that I will never s~ve her as a Counsello=r= or Secretarie , but will
live and dye her subiect and vassaile . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.215

I pray you forgett not to deliver it w=th= this p~viso , that I will dye
her vassayle and subiect . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.216

Then they p~ceeded againe to the Evidence . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.217

And it was demaunded by M=r= Attorney of the Judges to resolve the
Courte whether to offer by force to remove anye of her Ma=te's= Counsell
be Treason or not ? ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.218

And it was answered to be treason . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.219

Allso , whether for a subiecte to make his passage to the presence of
his prince by force vppon her Courte or Counsell were Treason , or not ?
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.220

It was likewise adiudged treason . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.221

Then it was vrged by M=r= Attorney , that it was playne , that force was
vsed , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.222

for foure of the Queene's subiectes were slayne , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.223

allso the attempt of the Courte was resolved at Drewry house . Whereto
the E. of South: replyed , That the resolucon was not testified by S=r=
Charles Davers . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.224

No <paren> q=th= M=r= Attorney <$$paren> . But S=r= John Davis
witnesseth a plain resolucon , wherevppon was redd the examinacon of
S=r= John Davies , to that effect , and in the rest agreeinge w=th= the
others . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.225

Then the Lo. Admirall stoode vp ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.226

and tooke witnesse of the Lo=res= there present that there was noe losse
of men till seven of the Clocke , on the Sondaye , at w=ch= tyme they
vnd=er~=stoode at Courte howe thinges passed at Essex house , And
therefore it was not likelye the E. of Essex shold stir vp any such
doubte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.227

The E. of Essex w=th= p~testacon that not to save his owne lyfe , w=ch=
he cared not for , but to deliver a trouth , for theire sakes that were
ingaged w=th= him , Affirmed againe that he was twice informed of a
force levied , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.228

and for the matter of force obiected in killinge the Q=ues= subiectes ,
he p~tested it was much against his mynde . And that the bloode of his
Count=er=ye men was verie deare vnto him . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,18.229

Neither <paren> sayd <P_19> he <$$paren> did I ever drawe my sworde ,
till I was charged at Ludgate , where I was shott twice in the hatt .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.230

I was told my Lo. of Cumberland was there . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.231

I desired to speake w=th= him and to make my self be vnd=er~=stoode of
him . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.232

And for that end willed the Company that was w=th= me to stay .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.233

Then was S=r= John Luson deposed , to whome was comitted the charge of
Ludgate , that no messuage came to him from the E. after the first
shott , w=th= many other circumstances of the E. behavio=r= , of the
killinge of the waytes there &=c= . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.234

In this meane while S=r= W=m= Knollis was come . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.235

And there in open courte did release M=r= Secretarye of the speeches ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.236

and to put the matter quite owte of doubte , he said that there was a
sedicous booke sett out , vnder the name of one Dallman , w=ch= very
corruptly disputed the tytle of the succession , derivinge it as Lawfull
vppon the <font> Infanta <$$font> , as any other .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.237

And M=r= Secretarye and he beinge in talke aboute that booke , M=r=
Secret: spake to this effecte , Is it not a straunge impudency in that
Dallman to give equall righte in the succession of England , to the
Infanta as to any other . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.238

herevppon <paren> q=th= M=r= Comptroller <$$paren> was grownded the
sclaunder of M=r= Secretarye , whereof he is as cleare as any man here
p~sent . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.239

The Earle of Essex replied , that it was tould them in an other sence .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.240

noe my Lo. <paren> q=th= M=r= Secretarye <$$paren> yo=r= Lo. owt of
yo=r= mallice to me desires to make me odious , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.241

and of yo=r= mallice haue noe other ground , then the breath betwene vs
of the peace w=th= Spayne , w=ch= I labored for the good and quyett of
my Countrye , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.242

as for my affection to advaunce a Spanyshe tytle to England , I am so
far from y=t= , that I hate to think of it . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.243

And I pray god to consume me where I stande , If I doe not hate the
Spanyard as much as any man lyvinge . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.244

But w=th= yo=u= it hath ever bene a <font> Maxime <$$font> , to pr~fer
warr before peace , in respecte of the consequence to yo=r= followers ,
and dependers . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.245

Divers other speeches passed betweene them , w=ch= I remember not .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.246

Then they p~ceeded agayne to the matter , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.247

And there were red the Examinacons of the E. of Rutland , Lo. Cromwell
and Lo. Sandes . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,19.248

The E. of Rutlande@ @s was to this effecte That he came to Essex house
one the Sonday <P_20> morninge and it was then told him that the E. of
Essex lyfe was soughte by the Lo. Cobh~m and S=r= Wa. Ra: that the E.
of Essex told him that the Cittye stoode for hym , and that Sheriffe
Smithe had p~mised to rayse him as many men as he could . That in
London the E. of Essex made a speeche to the Townesmen , and in the end
thereof told them , that they shold arme them , for that the Kingdome
was offered to be sold to the Infanta . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.249

And said , they did him harme in comynge forthe naked .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.250

The E. of Essex interrupted the Clerk of the Crowne , beseechinge the
Peeres , to note the weaknes of the E. of Rutlande@ @s tale , who named
neither tyme nor place ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.251

and w=t=hall p~tested that he sent for noe man . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.252

Then was alledged , that he wrought for the E. of Sussex vnder p~tence
to come and meete w=th= a number of his ffreindes <paren> as the E.
himselfe there p~sent confessed <$$paren> . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.253

The E. of Essex answered , that he had a desire to satisfye all the
honorable spirittes of England <paren> in w=ch= number he tooke his
Lo=p= <$$paren> that the messuage to the Lo. Mayor was either to come
or to send to Sheriffe Smithe's , into whose handes they wold put
themselves , to be cutt in peeces , if they shold attempt any thinge
vnlawfullie . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.254

And make me <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> as wicked as owte of any hum=r=
of yo=r= harte yo=u= wold make me , yet yo=u= shall not make me absurd
to goe into the Cittye after such a fashion as yo=u= describe yf I had
not apprehended an ymminent daunger . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.255

Then was farther vrged , that the E. of Rutland had confessed that the
E. of Essex was spurred forwards by the E. of South: <paren> who
whispered him in the eare <$$paren> ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.256

It was allso obiected to the E. of South: by M=r= Attorney that he was
a <font> Papist <$$font> : and had had conversation w=th= Preistes :
whereto the E. of South: answered that for the first matter , the E.
of Rutland might mistake , affirmynge that he onely wished my Lo. of
Essex to goe vp into a chamber : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.257

And for the last it was very uniustly vrged , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.258

for he tooke vppon his salvacon that he never knewe Preiste , but only
one Wright , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.259

and w=th= hym he never conversed in all his Lyfe ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.260

and yf it could be otherwise p~ved he desired to dye .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,20.261

The Lo. Cromwell@ @'s Ex. was he knewe nothinge tyll Sunday morninge ,
<P_21> when seeinge the E. of E. pass by his lodginge in ffleete
streete , he followed hym into London . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.262

he hard the E. of Essex cry for all yo=r= good my maisters , that the
Realme shold be soldd &=c= . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.263

Nay my Lo. <paren> q=th= M=r= Attorney <$$paren> howsoever yo=u= goe
aboute to cloake matters , and to make a p~tence of an innocente harte ,
these Deposicons of men of yo=r= owne companye admytt noe contradiction
: ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.264

And I wond=er= not at yo=r= denyall , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.265

for yo=u= will appeare to be of all religions , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.266

one while Papist , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.267

an other while a Puritaine , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.268

and that but to gayne vnto yo=r= selfe all sortes of people .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.269

It will allso be p~ved that yo=u= have practized w=th= Tyrone :
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.270

To that the E. answered he could not p~ve it : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.271

he defyed all the world for y=t= matter . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.272

Yes <paren> q=th= M=r= Attorney <$$paren> yo=u= sent Lea to him as he
hath confessed . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.273

The Earle againe denied it , affirminge that it was far from him to
trust Lea in such a busines . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.274

yes <paren> q=th= M=r= Attorney <$$paren> and it shall appeare , that
Lea had direction from you to attempt the Queene , for the w=ch= he was
executed as a Trayto=r= the other daye . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.275

The E. answered that he never sett him a worke , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.276

nor never heard that he was apprehended till M=r= Warburton told it him
. ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.277

And to the former obiection of M=r= Attorneye touchinge his relligion ,
he p~tested that he never was sectarie , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.278

and then excused himself of havinge delte against the Bishops : havinge
beene in his younge tyme ledd theretoe by some hott spirittes , w=ch=
since are growne to a better temper . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.279

And for Papistrie , he doubted not but all the worlde wold cleare him
from that ymputacon . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.280

The Lo. Sandes his Examinacon was redd to this effecte , vz. that he
came to Essex house aboute vi. a clocke in the morninge , And went
w=th= the E. of Essex to Sheriffe Smithe's house , and stayde w=t=houte
till he was sent for in by the Earle . where the E. told him he wold
go backe to his house , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.281

for there was a blacke bagg that shold tell noe tayles . wherevppon
M=r= Attorneye tooke occasion to speake : That yf that black bagge could
have bene lighte vppon , there wold haue bene found much good stuffe .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,21.282

ffor <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> Bothe S=r= John Davies and S=r= Charles
Davers doe depose that yo=u= said vnto them that black bagg could tell
that yo=u= were betrayed in London . W=ch= allso is witnessed by <P_22>
Bussell , who was very forward w=th= yo=u= . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.283

But yo=u= were confident in London , havinge beene p~swaded by yo=r=
sicophantes that all the Cittie was of yo=r= p~te ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.284

and in yo=r= pride and overweeninge of theire p~takinge , yow contemned
the Q=ne's= Royall authoritye , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.285

her herraldes wold not be harkened vnto . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.286

To this the E. of Essex replyed , as for Bussell , he was never inward
w=th= him , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.287

he was his servante ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.288

and wayted one hym att his table , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.289

and that was all the greatnes . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.290

And for the herralde , he beleved not that he had authoritye to doe that
he did , beinge a man of noted dishonestie , and was burnt in the hand :
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.291

I never <paren> q=th= the E. <$$paren> conferred nor attempted any
thinge but to th'@ @ende to serve my Countrie and sou~aigne , by makinge
her Ma=tie= vnd=e~=stand vs , w=ch= we cold not doe for the potencye of
o=r= enemyes , that were aboute her . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.292

And therefore I do laye a charge vppon yo=u= all my Lo. and those that
be hearers that notw=t=hstandinge all Eloquence vsed to make me seeme a
Trayto=r= , a Papiste , a Sectarie and an Atheiste , and to haue vsurped
the Crowne , yo=u= will yet witnes w=th= me and so I doubte not but to
manifest , by goinge w=th= a courage and cherefully vnto my death , that
I dye a good Christian , and never soughte to exceede the degree of a
subiecte : howsoever I have bene delte w=t=hall .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.293

I euere soughte to appease all humo=r= of revenge ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.294

and for confirmacon thereof was resolved to receave the Sacram=t= till
the attempt vppon the E. of South. ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.295

I am far from Atheisme , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.296

and doe desire to dye as a Christian and an Earle , that haue
faithfullie s~ved my Prince and Countrye , whatsoever others have
testified , out of the weaknes of theire hartes against me ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.297

or to seeme to haue said enoughe I desire it may not lye heavye vppon me
. ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.298

I never thoughte of a p~liam=t= . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.299

Then M=r= Attorney told him that it was not possible but his purpose
must be to sett the Crowne vppon his owne heade : ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.300

ffor <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> yo=u= drewe manye Earles , Barons and
gent. of greate houses into the busines w=th= yo=u= .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.301

howe shall it be though=t= yo=u= could haue rewarded them owte of yo=r=
maymed estate . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.302

The E. answered noe other waye then vppon o=r= knees to her Ma=tie= .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.303

Then M=r= Bacon spake to this effect . I doubte the varietie of the
matter , ESSEX-1600-E2-H,22.304

<P_23>

and digressions haue sev=er~=ed the Judgm=t= of the Lo.
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,23.306

And therefore I hold it necessarie to recyte the Judges opinyons .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,23.307

That done he p~ceeded to this effecte . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,23.308

Nowe put case <paren> q=th= he <$$paren> the E. of Essex intent were as
he wold have it beleeved , to goe as a Sup=lt= to her Ma=tie= ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,23.309

yet shall their peticons be armed peticons , w=ch= allwayes p~cede losse
of libertie to the Prince . ESSEX-1600-E2-H,23.310

Neither is it a nyce poynt of Lawe <paren> as my Lo. of South: wold
have it beleved <$$paren> that condemnes them of treason .
ESSEX-1600-E2-H,23.311

But even Comon sence to Consulte to execute and run together in numbers
, in these doblettes and hose , armed w=th= weapons , what can be the
excuse ? ESSEX-1600-E2-H,23.312

Warned by the Lo. Keep: by a herrald , and yet p~sist , Will any simple
man take this for les then Treason ? ESSEX-1600-E2-H,23.313

