<BEGIN_evelyn-1689-e3-h>

<P_896>

23 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.3

Our Lecturer at Deptford: on: 1. Mark: 3: 24 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.4

The King passes into France , whither the queen & child wer gon a few
days before . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.5

25 Christmas day , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.6

our Lecturer on his former Text ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.7

The holy Communion followed , at which I received :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.8

26 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.9

The Peeres & such Commons as were members of the Parliament at Oxford ,
being the last of Charles the first : meeting , desire the Pr. of
Orange to take on him the Government , & dispose of the publique Revenue
'til a Convention of Lords & Commons should meete in full body ,
appointed by his Circulary Letters to the Shires & Borrowghs
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.10

22. Jan: I had now quartered upon me a Lieutenant Coll: & 8 horses :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.11

30 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.12

Our Lecturer on 122. <font> Psal: <$$font> 6: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.13

Pomerid: a Stranger on 6. Eccles: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.14

This day Prayers for the Prince of Wales were first left off in our
Church pew & pulpet . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.15

Greate preparations of all the Princes of Europ , against the French &c:
the Emp: making peace with the Turke : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.16

1688/9 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.17

Jan: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.18

I Dined with me severall friends . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.19

3 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.20

I went to Lond: about buisinesse , & to visite divers friends :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.21

6 . Epiphany , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.22

Dr. Tenison at St. Martins on 2: Psal: 8: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.23

The holy Communion followed , at which I received &c:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.24

<bracket> Lord make me worthy : <$$bracket> EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.25

7 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.26

I returned home : on foote , it having ben a long frost & deepe snow ,
so {COM:preceding_word_"so"_emended} as the Thames was almost quite
frozen over . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.27

13 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.28

Our Lecturer on 6 Matt. 21. 15 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.29

I went to visite my Lord Archbish of Cant : where I found the Bishops of
St. Asaph , Ely , Bath & Wells , Peterborow & Chichester ; The Earle of
Alesbery & Clarendon , Sir Geo: Makenzy Lord Advocate of Scotland ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.30

& then came in a Scotch Archbishop : &c. EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.31

After prayers & dinner , were discoursed divers serious matters
concerning the present state of the publique : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.32

& sorry I was to find , there was as yet no accord in the judgements of
those who both of the Lords & Commons were to convene :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.33

Some would have the princesse made Queene without any more dispute ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.34

others were for a Regency , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.35

There was a Torie part <paren> as then called so <$$paren> who were for
inviting {COM:preceding_word_"inviting"_emended} his Majestie againe
upon Conditions , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.36

& there were Republicarians , who would make the Prince of Orange like a
Stateholder : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,896.37

<P_897>

The Romanists were also buisy among all these severall parties to bring
them into Confusion ; most for Ambition , or other Interest , few for
Conscience and moderate resolutions : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.39

I found nothing of all this in this Assembly of Bishops , who were
pleas'd to admitt me into their Discourses : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.40

They were all for a Regency , thereby to salve their Oathes ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.41

& so all publique matters to proceede in his Majesties name , thereby to
facilitate the calling of a Parliament according to the Laws in being ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.42

this was the result of this meeting : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.43

My Lord of Cant: gave me greate thanks for the advertisement I sent his
Grace in October , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.44

& assur'd me they tooke my counsel in that particular , & that it came
very seasonable : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.45

I found by the Lord Advocate of Scotland that the Bishops of Scotland ,
who were indeede very unworthy that Character & had don much mischiefe
in that Church , were now coming about to the True Interest , more to
save themselves in this conjuncture , which threatned the abolishing the
whole Hierarchy in that Kingdome , than for Conscience :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.46

& therefore the Scotish Archbish: & Lord Advocate requested my L. of
Cant: to use his best endeavors with the Prince , to maintaine the
Church there in the same state as by Law at present settled :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.47

It now growing late , I after some private discourse , tooke my leave of
his Grace , most of the Lords being gon : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.48

I beseech God of his infinite mercy to settle truth & peace amongst us
againe : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.49

It was now that the Triall of the Bishops was published in print :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.50

20 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.51

Our Lecturer proceeded on his former text : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.52

In the Afternoone {COM:preceding_word_"Afternoone"_emended} I went to
the French Congregation at Greenewich , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.53

The Preachers Text was 17: <font> Matt: <$$font> 9:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.54

I visited the Marquis de Ruvignie : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.55

23 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.56

I went to Lond. EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.57

The greate Convention being assembled the day before , falling upon the
greate Question about the Government , Resolved that K. <font> Jam:
<$$font> 2d , having by the advise of Jesuites & other wicked persons ,
endeavored to subvert the Lawes of church & state , and Deserting the
Kingdome <bracket> carrying away the Seales &c <$$bracket> without
taking any care for the manegement of the Government , had by demise ,
abdicated himselfe , and wholy vacated his right :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,897.58

& They did therefore desire the Lords Concurrence to their Vote , to
place the Crowne upon the next heires : The Prince of Orange for his
life , <P_898> then to the Princesse his wife , & if she died without
Issue to the Princesse of Denmark , & she failing to the heires of the
Pr: Excluding for ever all possibility of admitting any Ro: Cath:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,898.59

27 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,898.60

Dr. Tenison preached at St. Martines , on 6: <font> Gen: <$$font> 5:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,898.61

I din'd at the Admiralty , where was brought , a young Child not 12
yeares old , the sonn of one Dr. Clench , of the most prodigious
maturity of memorie , & knowledge , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,898.62

for I can@ @not call it altogether memory , but <bracket> something more
<$$bracket> extraordinary ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,898.63

Mr. Pepys & my selfe examining him not in any method , but <bracket> by
<$$bracket> promiscuously {COM:sic} questions , which required judgement
& wonderfull discernement , to answere things so readily & pertinently :
There was not any thing in Chronologie , Historie , Geographie , The
several systemes of Astronomers , Courses of the starrs , Longitudes ,
Latitudes , doctrine of the Spheares , Sourses & courses of Rivers ,
Creekes , harbors , Eminent Citties , staples , boundaries & bearings of
Countries , not onely in Europe but any other part of the Earth , which
he did not readily resolve & demonstrate his knowledge of , readily
drawing out , with his pen any thing that he would describe :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,898.64

He was able not onely to repeate the most famous things which are left
us in any of the Greeke or Roman histories , Monarchie , Repub , Warrs ,
Colonies , Exploits by sea & land ; but readily , besides all the Sacred
stories of the Old & New Test: the succession of all the Monarches ,
Babylonish , Persian , Gr: Roman , with all the lower Emperors , Popes ,
Heresiarches , & Councils ; What they were cald about , what they
determined , <bracket> & <$$bracket> in the Controversie of Easter , The
Tenets of the Gnostics , Sabellius , Arius , Nestorius ; The difference
twixt St. Cyprian & Stephen about rebaptization ; The Schismes ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,898.65

we leaped from that to other things totaly different : To Olympic yeares
, & Synchronismes ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,898.66

we asked him questions which could not be resolved without considerable
meditation & judgement : nay , of some particulars of the Civil Lawes ,
of the Digest & Code : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,898.67

He gave a stupendous account of both Natural , & Moral Philosophie , &
even in Metaphysics : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,898.68

Having thus exhausted our selves , rather than this wonderfull Child ,
or Angel rather , for he was as beautifull & lovely in Countenance , as
in knowledge ; we concluded , with asking him , if in all he had read ,
or heard of , he had ever met with any thing which was like , this
Expedition of the Pr: of Orange ; with so small a force , to obtaine 3
greate <P_899> Kingdoms {COM:preceding_word_"Kingdoms"_emended} ,
without any Contest : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.69

He after a little thought , told us , that he knew of nothing did more
resemble it , Than the coming of Constantin the Greate out of Brittane ,
thro: France & Italy , so tedious a March , to meete Maxentius , whom he
overthrew at ponte Milvij , with very little conflict ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.70

& at the very gates of Rome , which he entered & was received with
Triumph , & obtained the Empire , not of 3 Kingdomes onely , but of all
the then known World : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.71

He was perfect in the Latine Authors , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.72

spake french naturaly , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.73

& gave us a description of France , Italy , Savoy , Spaine , Antient &
modernly divided ; as also of the antient Greece , Scythia
{COM:preceding_word_"Scythia"_emended} , & Northern Countries & Tracts ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.74

in a word , we left questioning farther with astonishment :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.75

This the child did without any set or formal repetition ; as one who had
learned things without booke , but , as if he minded other things going
about the roome , & toying with a parat there , & as he was at dinner
<bracket> tanquam aliud agens as it were <$$bracket> seeming to be full
of play , of a lively & spiritfull temper , allways smiling , &
exceedingly pleasant without the least levity , rudenesse or
childishnesse : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.76

His father assur'd us , he never imposed any thing to charge his memorie
, by causing him to get things by heart , no , not the rules of Grammer
; but his Tutor {COM:preceding_word_"Tutor"_emended} <paren> who was a
French-man <$$paren> reading to him , in French first , & then in Latine
: That he usualy plaied , amongst other boys 4 or 5 hours every day &
that he was as earnest at play , as at his study :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.77

He was perfect in Arithmetic , & now newly entered into the Greek :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.78

In sum <bracket> Horesco referens <$$bracket> I had , read of divers ,
forward & praecoce , Youthes , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.79

& some I have known ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.80

but in my life , did never either heare or read of any like to this
sweete Child , if it be lawfull to call him Child , who has more
knowledge , than most men in the world : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.81

I counseled his father , not to set his heart too much upon this Jewell
, Immodicis brevis est aetas , et rara senectus , as I my selfe learn'd
by sad experience in my most deare child Richard many yeares since , who
dying before he was six years old , was both in shape & Countenance , &
pregnancy of learning , next to prodigie even in that tender-age , as I
have given ample account in my praeface to that Golden book of St.
Chrysostome , which I published on that sad occasion &c:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.82

28 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.83

The Votes of the House of Comm: being Carried up , by their chaire-man
Mr. Hamden , to the Lords , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,899.84

29 {COM:preceding_word_"29"_emended}

I got a station by the <P_900> Princes lodgings at the doore of the
Lobby to the House , to heare much of the debate which held very long ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.86

The Lord Danby being in the chaire <paren> for the Peres were resolved
into a grand Committee of the whole house <$$paren> after all had spoken
, it comming to the question : It was carried out by 3 voices , against
{COM:preceding_word_"against"_emended} a <font> Regency <$$font> , which
51 of 54 were for , aledging the danger of dethroning Kings , &
scrupuling many passages & expressions of the Commons Votes ; too long
to set downe particularly , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.87

some were for sending to his Majestie with Conditions , others , that
the K. could do no wrong , & that the maladministration was chargeable
on his Ministers . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.88

There were not above 8 or 9 Bish: & but two , against the Regency ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.89

The <font> Arch_bishop <$$font> was absent : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.90

& the Cleargie now began a_new to change their note , both in pulpet &
discourse , upon their old passive Obedience : so as people began to
talke of the Bishops being cast out of the House :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.91

In short , things tended to dissatisfaction on both sides ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.92

add to this the morose temper of the Pr: of Orange , who shewed so
little Countenance to the Noblemen & others , expecting a more gracious
& cherefull reception , when they made their Court :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.93

The English Army likewise , not so in order , & firme to his Interest ,
nor so weaken'd , but that it might , give interruption :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.94

Ireland in a very ill posture , as well as Scotland ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.95

nothing yet towards any settlement : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.96

God of his infinite mercy , Compose these things
{COM:preceding_word_"things"_emended} , that we may at lastt be a Nation
& a church under some fixt and sober establishment :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.97

30 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.98

Was the Anniversary of K: Ch: the I@ @s Martyrdome ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.99

but in all the publique Offices & pulpet prayers , The Collects
<bracket> & Litanys <$$bracket> for the King & Queene , were curtailed &
mutilated : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.100

Dr. Sharp preached before the Commons
{COM:preceding_word_"Commons"_emended} ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.101

but was disliked & not so much as thanked for his sermon :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.102

I went to St. Martin , where a stranger preached on <font> 2: Apoc: 10
<$$font> much against popery , with a touch at our Obligation of Loyalty
to the King &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.103

I came home afternoone , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.104

& at our church <paren> the next day {COM:preceding_word_"day"_emended}
being appointed a Thanksgiving for deliverance by the P: of Orange ,
prayers purposly composed <$$paren> our Lecturer , preached on 97: Psal:
1. a very honest Sermon , shewing our duty to God for the many signal
deliverances of his Church , without entering into the politics .
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,900.105

Feb: 3 {COM:preceding_word_"3"_emended}

Our Lecturer on his former Text , shewing how all power <P_901> flowes
from God , & how absolutely necessary it is , that he should constitute
{COM:preceding_word_"constitute"_emended} his Vicegerents here , & how
responsible they are that they governe justly ; The fatal ends of those
who have in all ages abused their power , & the hapinesse of religious
Princes &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.107

The holy Communion follow'd , at which I received :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.108

Blessed be God . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.109

6 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.110

The Kings Coronation day was ordred not to be observed , as hitherto it
yearely had . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.111

The Convention of L: & Comm: now declare the Pr: & princesse of Or: Q: &
K of England , Fr: & Ireland <paren> Scotland being an Independent
Kingdome <$$paren> The Pr & Princesse to enjoy it jointly during their
lives , but the executive Authority to be vested in the Prince during
life , though all proceedings to run in both names : & that it descend
to the heires of both , & for want of such Issue to the Princesse Ann of
Denmark , & in want of such to the heires of the body of the Pr: of Or:
if he survive , & for defect , to devolve to the Parliament to choose as
they think fit : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.112

These produc'd a Conference with the Lords , when also there was
presented heads of such <bracket> new <$$bracket> laws as were to be
enacted : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.113

& upon those Conditions they t@ @is thought will be proclaim'd :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.114

There was much contest about the Kings abdication , & whether he had
vacated the Government : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.115

E. of Notingham & about 20 Lords & many Bishops , entred their protests
&c , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.116

but the Concurrence was greater against them - EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.117

The Princesse hourely Expected : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.118

Forces sending to Ireland , that Kingdome
{COM:preceding_word_"Kingdome"_emended} being in great danger , by the
E. of Tyrconnell@ @s Armie , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.119

& expectations from France : which K. is buisy to invade Flanders , &
encounter the German Princes comming now to their Assistance : so as
this is likely to be one of the most remarkable summers for action , as
has happed for many Ages : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.120

10 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.121

Our Lecturer preached on 26. Matt: 11: Pomerid: Curate on
{COM:preceding_word_"on"_emended} 119 Psal: 105: 16
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.122

I went to Lond: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.123

17th EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.124

Dr. Tenison <bracket> at St. Martin <$$bracket> on 19 Psal: 12: 21
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.125

At St. James's church preached Dr. Burnet , on 5. <font> Deut:
<$$font> 29 relating to the obligation lying upon the nation , to walke
worthy of Gods particular & signal deliverances of this Nation & Church
: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.126

22 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.127

Dr. Stillingfleete <paren> Deane of S Paules <$$paren> on 1. <font>
Pet: <$$font> 4. 18: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,901.128

I saw the new Queene & King , so proclaim'd , the very next day <P_902>
of her coming to White-hall , Wednesday 13. Feb. with wonderfull
acclamation & general reception , Bonfires , bells , Gunns &c:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.129

It was believed that they both , especialy the Princesse , would have
shewed some <paren> seeming <$$paren> reluctancy at least , of assuming
her Fathers Crowne & made some Apologie , testifying her regret , that
he should by his misgovernment necessitat the Nation to so extraordinary
a proceeding , which would have shewed very handsomly to the world ,
<paren> and according to the Character given
{COM:preceding_word_"given"_emended} of her piety &c <$$paren> &
consonant to her husbands first Declaration , that there was no
intention of Deposing the King , but of Succoring the Nation ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.130

But , nothing of all this appeared ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.131

she came into W-hall as to a Wedding , riant & jolly , so as seeming to
be quite Transported : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.132

rose early on the next morning of her arival , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.133

and in her undresse <paren> as reported <$$paren> before her women were
up ; went about from roome to roome , to see the Convenience of
White-hall : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.134

Lay in the same bed & appartment where the late Queene lay :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.135

& within a night or two , sate downe to play at Basset , as the Q. her
predecessor us'd to do : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.136

smiled upon & talked to every body ; so as no manner of change seem'd in
Court , since his Majesties last going away , save that the infinite
crowds of people thronged to see her , & that she went to our prayers :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.137

This carriage was censured by many : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.138

she seemes to be of a good nature , & that takes nothing to heart whilst
the Pr: her husband has a thoughtfull Countenance , is wonderfull
serious & silent , seemes to treate all persons alike gravely : & to be
very intent on affaires , both Holland , & Ireland & France calling for
his care : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.139

Divers Bishops , & Noble men are not at all satisfied with this so
suddain Assumption of the Crown , without any previous , sending &
offering some Conditions to the absent King : or , upon his not
returning & assenting to those Conditions within such a day : to have
proclaim'd him Regent &c. EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.140

But the major part of both houses , prevailed to make them King & Q:
immediately , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.141

and a Crowne was tempting &c - EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.142

This was opposed & spoke against with such vehemency by my L. Clarendon
<paren> her owne Unkle <$$paren> as putt him by all preferments , which
must doubtlesse , have {COM:preceding_word_"have"_emended} been as
greate , as could have ben given him : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,902.143

My L: of Rochester his bro: overshot himselfe by the same carriage &
stiffnesse , which , their friends thought , they might have well spared
, when they saw how it was like to be over-ruled , & that it had ben
<P_903> sufficient to have declared their dissent with lesse passion ,
acquiescing in due time : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.144

The AB of Cant , & some of the rest , upon scrupule of Conscience , & to
salve the Oathes they had taken , entred their protests ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.145

& hung off : Especially the Arch-Bishop , who had not all this while so
much as appeared out of Lambeth : all which incurred the wonder of many
, who observed with what zeale they contributed to the Princes
Expedition , & all this while also , rejecting any proposals of sending
againe for {COM:preceding_word_"for"_emended} the absented King : That
they should now boggle & raise scrupuls , & such as created much
division among people , greatly rejoicing the old Courtiers , & Papists
{COM:preceding_word_"Papists"_emended} especialy :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.146

Another objection was the invalidity of what was don , by a Convention
onely , & the as yet unabrogated Laws : which made them on the 22 , make
themselves a parliament , the new King passing the act with the Crowne
on his head : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.147

This lawyers disputed ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.148

but necessity prevailed , the Government requiring a speedy settlement :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.149

And now innumerable were the Crowds who solicited for & expected Offices
, EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.150

most of the old ones turn'd out : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.151

Two or 3. White Staves were disposed of some days before , as L:
Steward to the E. of Devonshire , Tress: of the Household to L: Newport
, L. Cham: to the K , to my L: of Dorset &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.152

but there were yet none in offices of the Civil government , save : Pr:
Seale to the Marq: of Halifax : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.153

A Council of 30 was chosen , L. Danby Presedent : but neither
Chancellor , Tressurer , Judges &c not yet declared ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.154

A greate seale not yet finished : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.155

Thus far went things when I returned home <paren> having visited divers
of my old acquaintance &c <$$paren> which was 23
{COM:preceding_word_"23"_emended} on the Saturday :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.156

24 St. <font> Matthias <$$font> , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.157

our Viccar preached on 12. <font> Luke. <$$font> 21: <font> Mar.
<$$font> 2 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.158

To Lond: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.159

3d EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.160

Dr. <font> Tenison <$$font> at St. Martins on: 16: Matt 26:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.161

The holy Communion follow'd , of which I participated .
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.162

6 : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.163

Dr. at White-hall before the new Queene : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.164

2. Thess: 5. 8. Dr. Tillotson deane of Cant :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,903.165

an excellent discourse on 5. Matt: 44: exhorting to charity and
forgivenesse of Enemies ; I suppose purposly , The new Parliament now
being furiously about Impeaching those who were obnoxious : & as their
custome has ever ben going on violently , without reserve or moderation
: whilst wise men were of opinion that the most notorious Offenders
being named & excepted , an Act of Amnesty were more seasonable , to
paciffie the <P_904> minds of men , in so generall a discontent of the
nation , especialy of those who did not expect to see the Government
assum'd without any reguard to the absent King , or proving a
spontaneous abdication , or that the Pr: of Wales was an Imposture , &c:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.166

5 of the Bishops also still refusing to take the new Oath :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.167

In the interim to gratifie & sweeten the people , The Hearth Tax was
remitted for ever : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.168

but what intended to supply it , besids present greate Taxes on land :
is not named : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.169

The King abroad furnished with mony & officers by the French King going
now for Ireland , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.170

Their wonderfull neglect of more timely preventing that from hence , and
disturbances in Scotland , gives men apprehension of greate difficulties
before any settlement can be perfected here : <bracket> whilst
<$$bracket> The Parliament men dispose of the greate Offices amongst
themselves : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.171

The Gr: Seale , Treasury , Admiralty put into commission , of many
unexperienc'd persons to gratifie the more : So as , by the present
prospect of things <paren> unlesse God Almighty graciously interpose , &
give successe in Ireland , & settle Scotland <$$paren> more Trouble
seemes to threaten this nation , than could be expected :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.172

In the Interim , the New K. referrs all to the Parliament in the most
popular manner imaginable : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.173

but is very slow in providing against all these menaces , besides
finding difficulties in raising men to send abroad ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.174

The former army <paren> who had never don any service hitherto , but
received pay , and passed the summers in an idle scene of a Camp at
Hounslow <$$paren> unwilling to engage , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.175

& many of them dissaffected , & scarce to be trusted :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.176

9 : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.177

I returned home : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.178

10 {COM:preceding_word_"10"_emended} : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.179

our <font> Viccar : <$$font> on his former subject 21. Matt:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.180

The <font> Curate <$$font> 90 Psal: 12: 24: Palme-Sonday :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.181

I went early to Lond: according to my custome , to passe the Holy-Weeke
in Lond: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.182

At St. Martines preached Dr. Tenison on: 2. Cor: 4. 8.
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.183

25 Lady-day , preached a Young man : at St. Martin on: 1. Luke: 30.
31: 27: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.184

At White-Hall , Dr. Jeane , Regius professor at Oxon: before the new
Queene : &c: on 1. <font> John: <$$font> 5. 4:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.185

<bracket> 28 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.186

I visited Mr. Boile where an Italian Traveller described how farr he
had ben in the desert of Africa and saw a Creature , bodied like an ox ,
head like a pike fish , taile like a peacock : <$$bracket>
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,904.187

<P_905>

29 Good friday Morning EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.189

at St. Martin , Dr. Tenison : on: 53. Isah: ver: 3:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.190

The Holy Sacrament follow'd at which I received :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.191

Pomeridiano at W. hall , before the Princesse of Denmark :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.192

The Bish: of St. <font> Asaph <$$font> Almoner: on: 12 Zech: 10: with
exceeding patheticalnesse : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.193

I returned home after this: sermon : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.194

The new King , much blamed for neglecting Ireland , now like to be
ruined by the L. Tyrconnel , & his popish party ; too strong for the
Protestants ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.195

wonderfull uncertainty where King James was , whether in France or
Ireland : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.196

The Scotts seeme as yet to favor King William , rejecting K James letter
to them : yet declaring nothing positively : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.197

Souldiers in England , discontented : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.198

Parliament preparing the Coronation Oath : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.199

Presbyterians & Dissenters displeased at the vote to preserve the
protestant Religion as established by Law ; without mentioning what they
were to have as to Indulgence : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.200

The Arch-Bishop of Cant , & the other 4 : refusing to come to Parliament
, it was deliberated whether they should incurr premunire :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.201

but this was thought fit to be let fall , & connived at , for feare of
the people , to whom {COM:preceding_word_"whom"_emended} these prelates
were very deare , for their opposing popery
{COM:preceding_word_"popery"_emended} : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.202

Court Offices , distributed among the Parliament men :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.203

no Considerable fleete as yet set forth : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.204

in summe : Things far from the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended}
settlement was expected by reason of the slothfull sickly temper of the
new King : and unmindfullnesse of the Parliament , as to Ireland , which
is like to prove a sad omission . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.205

The Confederats , beate the French out of the Palatinate , which they
had most barbarously ruined : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.206

31 Easter day : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.207

Our Viccar on 22 Matt: 29: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.208

The holy Communion follow'd , at which I received .
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.209

The Curate on 1. Cor: 15. ver: 56. 57. EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.210

Aprill 7: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.211

Having taken cold after some preventing physick : I was not at Church
this day , to my greate sorrow : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.212

10 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.213

I went to Lond: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.214

was at the R. Society , where the very ingenious Mr. Waler brought in
his Tables of knowing plants by a peculiar method :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.215

There was an extraordinary greate scorpion , sent the Society out of
Africa , whose Eyes were in his back , like to spiders , but not so
prominent : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,905.216

<P_927>

<font> July <$$font> 6 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.218

I went to Lond: to heare Mr. Stringfellow preach at St. James's Church
as Dr. Tenison desired he would do , for trial , whether his voice &c
were fit for a Church he design'd him the cure of upon my recommendation
: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.219

But I went first in the morning to St. Martines , where the Doctor
preached on: 10: <font> Deut: <$$font> 12. 13: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.220

The holy Sacrament followed of which I communicated :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.221

I dined at my Sons : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.222

Afternoone Mr. Stringfellow on 19 <font> Act: <$$font> 25: -
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.223

& then I returned home : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.224

The whole Nation now exceedingly alarm'd by the French fleete braving
our Coast even to the very Thames mouth : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.225

our Fleete commanded by debauched young men , & likewise inferior in
force , giving way to the Enemy , to our exceeding reproch :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.226

God of his mercy defend this poore church & nation :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.227

<bracket> Hollanders fleete beaten at sea : <$$bracket>
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.228

K: William in Ireland taking a passe , wounded in the shoulder with a
Cannon bullet : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.229

greate expectations from thence : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.230

13 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.231

Mr. Stringfellow preached {COM:preceding_word_"preached"_emended} at
our Church both morning & afternoone , very excellently , on: 1 <font>
Gen: <$$font> 26: & 2d EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.232

& 15th: King William having vanquished K James in Ireland , there was
much publique rejoicing : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.233

It seemes K. J: army would not stand , namely the Irish ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.234

but the English Irish & French made greate resistance :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.235

Shomberg was slaine , and Dr. Walker
{COM:preceding_word_"Walker"_emended} , who so bravely defended L._derry
: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,927.236

K. W: received a slight wound by the grazing of a cannon bullet on his
shouldier , which yet he endured with very <P_928> little interruption
of his pursuit : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.237

Hamilton , who brake his word , about Tyrconells , was taken :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.238

K. J. is reported gon back to France : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.239

Droghedah & Dublin surrendered : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.240

and if K. W. be returning , one may say of him as of Caesar , Veni ,
vidi , vici , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.241

for never was such a Kingdome won in so short an Expedition ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.242

But to alay much of this the French fleete having exceedingly beaten the
Dutch fleete , & ours not daring to interpose , ride at present in our
Chanell , threatning to Land , which causes an extraordinary alarme &c:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.243

16 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.244

The publique fast : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.245

our Viccar preached on 18 Jer: 7. 8: 17 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.246

I went to London to visite some friends in the Toure , where asking for
my Lord Clarendon <paren> now with divers other Noble persons imprisoned
upon suspicion of a plot <$$paren> by mistake they directed me to the E.
of Torrington who about 3 days before had ben sent for from the Fleete ,
was put into the Toure for his Cowardize and not fighting the French
Fleete , which having beaten a Squadron of the Hollanders <paren> whilst
Torrington did nothing <$$paren> did now ride masters at sea with that
power as gave terror to the whole nation , in daily expectation of a
descent , which God Almighty avert : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.247

I returned in the Evening &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.248

20 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.249

Our Viccar preached on 11: <font> Heb: <$$font> 7:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.250

In the afternoone our Curate on <bracket> 11. 1. <font> Cor: <$$font>
24: <$$bracket> EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.251

Major Birch now quartered with his Regiment <paren> newly come out of
Flanders <$$paren> dined with me ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.252

& this afternoone {COM:preceding_word_"afternoone"_emended} began to
incamp on Black-heath : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.253

I went this Evening to condole the Marq: de Ruvigny & his Mother , upon
the death of his Brother , slaine in Ireland . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.254

27 . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.255

Our Viccar & Curate proceeded on their former Text .
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.256

30 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.257

I went to Lond: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.258

Dined with Mr. Pepys now suffered to returne to his house in reguard of
his Indisposition : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.259

I return'd home calling in at the R. Society , where Mr. Hook read a
discourse of the cause of most hills & mountaines to be from
subterranean eruptions &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.260

Aug: 1 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.261

Came the Duke of Grafton to visite me , going now to his ship at the
mouth of the River : <bracket> to transport him to Ireland where he was
slaine . <$$bracket> EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.262

3 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.263

The Schole Master of Lewsham preached on 1 Joh 2. 15:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.264

The holy Sacrament follow'd of which my Wife & I were participants ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.265

praised be God . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,928.266

<P_929>

The Afternoone our Curat preached on his former Text ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.268

I was exceedingly drowsy : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.269

The French domineering still at sea , landed some souldiers at Tinmoth
in Devon : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.270

& burned some poore houses : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.271

10 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.272

Our Viccar on 3: <font> Amos <$$font> 6: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.273

Afternoone Curate on 8. Joh: 34: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.274

The K: William having taken in Waterford , Duncannon & other places
marches to Limrick , which Tyrconell seemes with 4000 french &c to hold
out ; &c. EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.275

The French Fleete {COM:preceding_word_"Fleete"_emended} still hovering
about the Western Coast , <paren> we having 300 saile of rich Merchant
Ships in the bay of Plimoth , <$$paren> our Fleete begin to move towards
them under 3 Admiralls in Commission : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.276

The Country in the West all on their Guard , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.277

A camp of about 4000 still on Blak-heath : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.278

The Germans and especialy that in Flanders very strong waiting to give
battell to the French who are this yeare on the defence ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.279

The Duke of Savoy , waites joyning with some German troopes to block up
Catenate the Fr: Gen: there : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.280

<bracket> A very extraordinary fine season . <$$bracket>
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.281

12 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.282

So greate and long a storme of Thunder & lightning as had seldome ben
seene in these countries . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.283

13 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.284

I went to Lond: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.285

The season now much changed to wett & cold : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.286

The French fleete returned to Brest & from our Coast ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.287

the Militia of the Trained Bands horse & foote which were up through_out
England now dismiss'd : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.288

The French King having newes that King William was slaine , and his Army
defeated in Ireland , causes such a Triumph at Paris & all over France ,
as was never heard of or almost read in any history , when in the midst
of it , the unhappy K. James being vanquished , brought himselfe
<paren> by a speedy flight & escape <$$paren> the sad tidings of his
owne defeate , to the greate reproch of the French who made such
unseasonable boasting : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.289

15 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.290

I was desired to be one of the Baile of the Earle of Clarendon for his
Lordships release out of the Tower , with divers other noblemen :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.291

<bracket> Bishop of St. Asaph expounds his Prophesys to me & Mr. Pepys
&c: <$$bracket> EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.292

16 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.293

I returned home : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,929.294

<P_930>

17 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.296

our Viccar proceeded on his former Text & subject :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.297

In the Afternoone , the Curate of Greenewich
{COM:preceding_word_"Greenewich"_emended} on: 7: Matt: 21:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.298

Some greate designe in hand , by our preparation at Sea , now the Fr:
fleete is gone home : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.299

Limrick not yet reduc'd : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.300

Our Camp at Blakheath marching to Portsmouth . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.301

That Sweete & hopefull youth Sir Charles Tuke , <paren> after hopes of
his recovery <$$paren> dead of the wounds he receiv'd in the fight of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} Boine , to the greate sorrow of all
his friends , being <paren> I think <$$paren> the last male of that
noble family : to which my wife is related : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.302

A more virtuous young Gent: I never knew , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.303

he was learned for his age , having had the advantage of the choicest
breading abroad , both as to Arts & Armes , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.304

had much Traveld ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.305

but was so unhappy to fall , in that unhappy side of an unfortunate King
: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.306

24 : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.307

Our Viccar & Curate proceeded on their former subject :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.308

25 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.309

I went to Lond: about my Concerne with Sir C: Porter :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.310

Limrick still holds out , we having received some losse very
{COM:preceding_word_"very"_emended} considerable by the negligence of
Sir W: Poultnys son , who was to guard the Cannon :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.311

Galloway Entered by stratagem by the French who quitted Limric :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.312

The weather very wett , & stormy , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.313

our Fleete at sea : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.314

30 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.315

I came home : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.316

Our Merchant ships came safe from Plimouth : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.317

31 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.318

Both Viccar & Curate proceeding on their former Texts .
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.319

No news from the Armys in Germany , but some uncertaine reports of
Catinates having worsted the D. of Savoy : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.320

nothing yet from Ireland : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.321

September 7 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.322

Our Viccar & Curate still on the same Text : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.323

The holy Sacrament followed of which I was partaker ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.324

the Lord make me thankfull : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.325

Limrick proves yet a difficult piece ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.326

The unseasonable & most tempestuous season happning , the Naval
expedition is hindred : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.327

No successe in Savoy , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.328

Catinates having <paren> as reported <$$paren> worsted the Duke , still
in doubt : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.329

14 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.330

Our Viccar & curat proceede : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.331

Extremity of wet , cause the siege to be raised before Limrick : so as
K. W. Returnes to England : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.332

re infecta` as to that plan : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.333

Lord Sydney {COM:preceding_word_"Sydney"_emended} &c left chiefe
governors in that Kingdome as far as Conquered , which is neere three
parts : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,930.334

<P_931>

17 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.336

The publique fast , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.337

our Viccar preach'd on 13 Luke , 6 &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.338

An extraordinary cold sharp Easte Wind , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.339

part of our fleete on some extraordinary designe .
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.340

21 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.341

Our Viccar preached on 3: <font> Heb: <$$font> 12:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.342

In the afternoone the Minister of Leusham at Greenewich
{COM:preceding_word_"Greenewich"_emended} excellently on: 1. Cor: 10:
12: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.343

The French Fleete againe on the Irish Coast : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.344

ours going to meete them : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.345

28 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.346

Our Viccar on the same Text : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.347

& Curate on 9: Dan: 7. Octo: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.348

5 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.349

Our Viccar on his former Text . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.350

The holy Communion followed at which I received
{COM:preceding_word_"received"_emended} , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.351

the Lord make me mindfull & thankfull . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.352

Our Curate on 1 Cor: 15. 55. 56 ver: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.353

Corke surendred to K: William's {COM:preceding_word_"William's"_emended}
forces upon discretion , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.354

the Duke of Grafton desperately wounded &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.355

12 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.356

The Minister of Newington on 3: Phil: 10: both Morning & afternoon ,
very well : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.357

The French Generall , with Tyrconell & their forces gon back to france ,
beaten out by K. William . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.358

Corke Delivered : upon discretion ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.359

The Duke of Grafton mortaly wounded : dies
{COM:preceding_word_"dies"_emended}

Churchil : before Kingsale , <bracket> which he takes , <$$bracket>
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.361

our Ships <paren> most of them <$$paren> come into Harbor :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.362

The Parliament siting EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.363

& voting vast summs for the next yeares Warr : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.364

Tekelyes successe in Transylvania : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.365

The Swisse call a Dyet , press'd by the French :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.366

The Emperor Indiscreetely ingag'd by the Monks & Jesuites , to pursue
the Warr against the Turks , neglected to make peace , whilst
{COM:preceding_word_"whilst"_emended} France still gaines on & Indangers
the Empire , & has Swallowed Savoy : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.367

Very greate stormes of Wind : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.368

The 8th of this moneth my Lord Spencer writ me word from Althorp out of
N. hampton-shire that there happened an Earthquake the day before in
the morning , which , tho short , sensibly shook the house :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.369

The like , & at the same very moment , <paren> which was betweene 7 & 8
in the morning , viz , halfe an houre after 7 : <$$paren> the Gazette of
this weeke aquainted us it so happned at Barnstable , Holy-head , &
Dublin in Ireland : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.370

we were not at all sensible of it EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.371

at Lond: The Parliament voted the King 4 millions :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,931.372

<P_932>

19 was held a day of Thanksgiving for the successe of K. Williams armes
, & his owne escape in Ireland &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.374

Our Viccar preached on 144. psal: ult: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.375

Pomeridia I went to the French Church at Greenewich where a young man
preached on 123 psal 2 . Advising to attend on & looke up to God for
deliverance , after all their sufferings , & accknowledging the succour
God had so providentialy assisted & comforted them with , by the Charity
of the Nation , and favour of the King , all of it greate arguments for
their more than ordinary Gratitude , &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.376

I then tooke leave of the Marquis de Ruvigny and his Mother , being
myselfe leaving the Country to winter in London , with my family :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.377

26 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.378

Our Viccar still on his former subject : 3. <font> Heb: <$$font> 12:
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.379

The weather detain'd me at home in the afternoone :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.380

KingSale at last surrendred ; EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.381

meane while K. James party burne all they have in their power of houses
, & amongst them that stately palace of the Lord <font> Orories <$$font>
which lately cost as reported 40000 pounds : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.382

By a disastrous accident a 3d_rate ship <paren> the Breda <$$paren>
firing blew up & destroied all the passengers in which wer 25 prisoner
of War to set saile for England the very next day :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.383

Many excellent ships have we thus unfortunately lost this yeare beside
aboundance taken by the Enemy : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.384

The Turks retake Belgrade by storme putting all to the sword ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.385

& repassing the bridge at Esseck , with the successe of Tekely ,
threaten a reverse of their hitherto unprosperousnesse ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.386

& this , as too apparent by the tretchery of the Jesuites , who hindred
the Emperor to make a most advantagious peace , by which France would
have ben forc'd to abate of his so insolent progresse :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.387

poore Duke of Grafton , who came to take his leave of me , just as he
imbarked for Ireland , is now dead of his wounds .
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.388

29 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.389

I came up to Lond: <font> Dover-streete <$$font> with part of my family
, to Winter with my son : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.390

31 EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.391

My Birth-day , being now full 70 yeares of Age :
EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.392

Blessed be the Lord for the continuance of my health . & of all his
mercies , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.393

hitherto hast thou brought me , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.394

To Thee alone be the accknowledgements from my Soule & all that is
within me , which thou hast {COM:preceding_word_"hast"_emended}
preserved : EVELYN-1689-E3-H,932.395

Grant deare father the increase of thy Grace , with the yeares of my
<P_933> life , 'til in compassion thou bring me to the consummation of
Glory in the life to come , EVELYN-1689-E3-H,933.396

Amen . EVELYN-1689-E3-H,933.397

