<BEGIN_everard-1629-e2-h>

<P_58>

<heading:edcomment:31_JOAN_EVERARD,_24_FEBRUARY_1629,_TO_HER_MOTHER>

Most deere mother Your great love and many favors to mee maks me ashamed
of my self that I can express my thankfullness no more .
EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.4

Good madam , Mr Everarde would have acquainted you with this new newes
when he was att Hatfeild , EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.5

but knew not the sertainty of it EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.6

nor had no letter that any such thinge was before Tuesday with senight ,
EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.7

and then my Lord of Warwicke wright to his father EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.8

and the pattent came dowen . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.9

My child has bene very ille againe which maks me fearfull to stir from
hir EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.10

but , and pleas God , if the weather hold faire , I purpose to come and
se you the next weeke , EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.11

and then nurse Mitchell shall see that there is littell hope of me as
yet . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.12

Thus beseching your ladyship to remember my love to my sisters and
brother , I humbly take my leave EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.13

and rest Your most obeydient daughter to commande Johan Everard
EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.14

Langleyes , EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.15

24 February , 1628 EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.16

I desire that you would be pleased to send Isac for me , if he may be
spared , about the latter end of next weeke . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.17

{COM:endorsed} To hir Honourable mother the Lady Barrington give these
EVERARD-1629-E2-H,58.18

<P_100>

<heading:edcomment:76_LADY_JOAN_EVERARD,_10_NOVEMBER_1629,_TO_HER_MOTHER>

Most deere mother I thinke Essex to be a very solitarye place now ,
beinge bard not only your companye but alsoe of hearinge from you so oft
as I mighte doe when you were at Hattfilde . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.21

I should be very glad to wright offener , but that I know not which way
to send a letter saife . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.22

It would much rejoyce me to here of your good health this winter , which
I much disire and praye for . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.23

I thank God I and my children are well . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.24

We have no good newes hear , but ill ; EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.25

Mr Beard is gone from us EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.26

and we are left in a petifull condition EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.27

and may well say with Johoshaphat , we know not what to doe but our eyes
are upon the lord , EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.28

for the means that we have is very pore EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.29

and we have litel hope of any other . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.30

Thus desiringe your praers for us I ever remaine Your most obeydient
dauther Johan Everarde EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.31

November 10 , 1629 EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.32

My father and mother remember ther service unto you and all your good
companye EVERARD-1629-E2-H,100.33

<P_101>

{COM:endorsed} : To my honourable mother the Ladye Barrington give these
EVERARD-1629-E2-H,101.35

<P_115>

<heading:edcomment:93_LADY_JOAN_EVERARD,_25_DECEMBER_1629,_TO_HER_MOTHER>

Most deere mother I am very glade to heere so good newes , that you have
your health so well this winter ; EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.38

I praye God to continue it longe . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.39

I thanke God I and my children are very well now againe ,
EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.40

ther was not any in the house that had the measels but they .
EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.41

Good mother I give you many thanks for your good counsel ,
EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.42

I beseech the lord to give me a hart so to seeke him that I may be harde
and that I may make a holy and sanctified use of all his fatherly
chastisments , knowinge that all things shall worke together for good to
his children . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.43

I should be glad to hear when my sister Garard looks hir , because of
nursh Michiel . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.44

I doe not looke me tell the begining of May . EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.45

Thus desiringe you to pardon my rude lynes , I ever remaine Your
obedient daughter Johan Everard EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.46

Langleys , EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.47

December 25 , 1629 EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.48

I desire to be remembred to my brother and sisters .
EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.49

{COM:endorsed} : To my much honored mother the Ladye Barrington senior
give these EVERARD-1629-E2-H,115.50

