<BEGIN_fabyan-1516-e1-h>

<P_564>

<OLD_P_167V.C2>

<heading>

HENRY {SIC:CHARLYS} THE .IIII. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,564.5

<$$heading>

Henry the .iiii. of that name and sone of Iohn~ of Gaunt late duke of
Lancaster tooke possessyon of the domynyon of the Realme of Englonde |
as before in the ende of the Story of the seconde Rycharde is shewyd |
Vpon the laste daye of Septembre in the yere of our Lorde
a_thousande_.CCC._lxxx_.xix. and in y=e= .xix. yere of Charlys the
.vii. tha~ Kynge of Fraunce | After whiche possessyon soo by hym taken
anon he made newe Offycers | as the Erle of Northumberlande | he made
Constable of Englonde | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,564.7

the Erle of Westmerlande was made Marshall | syr Iohn~ Serle
<OLD_P_168R.C1> Chaunceler | Iohn~ Newebery esquyer Tresorer | and syr
Rycharde Clyfforde Knyght keper of the pryuey Sygnet
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,564.8

and that done prouysyon was made for his Coronacyon agayne the Daye of
the Translacyon of Seynt Edwarde the confessour next than co~mynge |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,564.9

and the Parlyament was prolongyd <P_565> tyll y=e= tuysday folowynge the
sayd day of coronacyon | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.10

Than vpon the Euyn of the sayde daye of Coronacyon the Kyng w=t= in the
Towre of Lo~don made .xli knyghtys of the Bathe | whereof .iii. were
his owne Sonnys | and .iii. Erlys | & .v. Lordys |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.11

and vpon monday beynge the sayd day of seynt Edwarde | and the .xiii.
day of october he was crowned at Westmynster of the Archebysshop of
Cau~torbury after which Solempnyte fynysshed an honorable feest was
holden within the great Halle of Westmynster | where the Kynge beynge
set in the mydde See of the Table | the Archebysshop of Cauntorbury with
.iii. other prelatys were set at the same Table vpon the right hande of
the Kynge | and the Archebysshop of yorke with other .iiii. prelatys
was sette vpon that other hande of the Kynge | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.12

& He~ry y=e= Kynges eldest sone stoode vpo~ the right hande w=t= a
poyntlesse swerde holdynge vp_right | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.13

& the Erle of Northumberlande newely made Constable stode vpo~ the lefte
hande with a sharpe swerde holde~ vp_right FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.14

and by eyther of those swerdys stode .ii. other Lordys holde .ii.
Cepters | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.15

& before the Kynge stode all y=e= dyner whyle the dukys of Amnarle of
Surrey | and of Exetyr with other .ii. Lordys | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.16

and the Erle of Westmerlande tha~ newely made Marshall rode about the
Halle w=t= many typped staues about hym to see the roume of the Halle
kepte that Offycers myght with ease serue y=e= Tables | of the whiche
Tables the chefe vpon the ryght syde of the Halle was begunne with the
Barons of the .v. portys FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.17

and at the Table next y=e= Cupborde vpo~ <OLD_P_168R.C2> the lefte hande
sate the Mayer and his bretherne the Aldermen of Lo~do~ | which Mayer
that tyme beynge Drewe Barentyne Goldsmyth | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.18

for seruyce there by hym that daye done | as other Mayers at euery
Kynges and Quenys coronacion vse for to do had there a standynge cuppe
of Golde | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.19

Than after the seconde course was seruyd syr Thomas Dymmoke Knyght
beynge armyd at all peacis | and syttynge vpon a good Stede | rode to
the hygher parte of the Halle | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.20

& there before y=e= Kyng caused an herowde to make Proclamacyon that
what man wolde saye that Kynge Henry was not rightfull enherytoure of
the Crowne of Englonde | and rightfully Crownyd he was there redy to
wage with hym Batayll | tha~ or suche tyme as it shuld please the Kynge
to assygne | whiche proclamacion he causyd to be made after in .iii.
su~dry placys of y=e= Halle in Englysshe and in Frenshe with many moo
obseruauncis at his solempnytie exercysyd & done whiche were longe to
reherse | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.21

Than this feest with all honoure endyd | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.22

vpon the morne beynge tuysday the Parlyament was agayne begunne |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.23

and vpon wednysdaye syr Iohn~ Cheyny y=t= before that tyme hadde
occupyed as speker of that Parlyament by his owne laboure for cause of
such Infyrmyties as he tha~ had was dischargyd | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.24

and a Squyer namyd wyllyam Durwarde was electe to that roume for hym |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.25

And then was the Parlyament and the Actys therof laste callyd by Kynge
Rycharde adnullyd & set at nought | and the parlyame~t holden in the
.xi. yere of his Reygne holden for ferme and stable |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.26

and the same day Henrye the Kynges eldest sone was chosen & admytted
Prynce of Walys and Duke of Cornewall | and Erle of Chester | and Heyre
apparaunt to the Crowne | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.27

vpon the Thursdaye folowynge was put in to the comon House a byll
deuysed by syr Iohn~ Bagot than Prysoner in the <OLD_P_168V.C1> Towre |
whereof the effecte was that y=e= sayde syr Iohn~ confessyd that he
harde Kynge Rycharde saye dyuerse tymes | and at sundry Parlyamentys in
his tyme holde~ | that he wolde haue his entent and pleasure concernynge
his owne matiers | what so euer betyde of the resydue and if any
withstode his wyll or mynde he wolde by one meane or other brynge hym
out of lyfe . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.28

Also he shewyd farther that Kynge Rycharde shuld shewe and saye to hym
at Lichefelde in the .xxi. yere of his Reygne that he desyred no le~ger
to lyue | than to see his Lordes & commons to haue hym in as great awe
and drede as euer they hadde any of his progenytours | so that it myght
be Cronycled of hym that none passyd hym of honour and dygnyte | with
condycion that he were deposyd and put from his sayd dygnyte the morowe
after | and if euer it came soo to | that he shulde resygne his Kyngelye
mageste | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,565.29

he sayde his mynde was to resygne to the Duke of Herforde as to hym that
was moost <P_566> abeleste to occupye that honour |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.30

But one thynge he feryd lest he wolde do tyrannyse agayne y=e= Churche
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.31

More_ouer he shewyd by y=e= sayd byll | y=t= as y=e= sayde syr Iohn~
Bagot rode behynde the Duke of Norfolke towarde Westmynster | y=e= sayd
duke layed to his charge y=t= he with other of the Kynges Counceyll
hadde murdred the Duke of Gloucetyr | the whiche at that tyme to the
sayde Duke he denyed | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.32

and sayde at that Daye he was on lyue | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.33

But within .iii. wekys after | the sayd syr Iohn~ by the Kynges
commaundement was sent with other p~sones vnto Calays | where for fere
of his owne lyfe he sawe the sayd murder put in execucion |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.34

And farthermore he shewyd | that there was no man of honour at that
dayes more in fauoure with Kynge Rycharde tha~ was the Duke of Amnarle |
and that by his cou~ceyll he toke the Lordes and wrought many other
thynges after the sayd Dukys aduyce . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.35

<OLD_P_168V.C2>

Also he shewyd that he harde the Kynge beynge tha~ at Chyltrynlangley
swere manye great Othes that the Duke of Herforde nowe Kynge | shulde
neuer retourne into Englonde | and rather then he shulde agayne enheryte
his fathers Landys | he wolde gyue theym vnto the heyres of the Duke of
Gloucetyr | and of the Erlys of Arundell | and of Warwyke at the laste
Parlyament adiuged | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.37

And farther he shewyd that of all theyse matiers he sent the sayde Duke
knowlege into Fraunce by one named Roger Smert admonastynge hym to
prouyde by his wysedome to withsta~de the Kynges malyce | which shewyd
hym to be his mortall enemye | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.38

And lastlye he shewyd in the sayde Byll that he harde the duke of
Amnarle say vnto syr Iohn~ Busshey | and to syr Henrye Grene | I hadde
leuer than .xx._thousande pounde that this man were dede |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.39

and wha~ they hadde axyd of hym which man | he sayde the duke of
Herforde | not for drede that I haue of his persone | But for sorowe and
rumours that he is lykelye to make within this Realme | Whiche byll was
tha~ borne vnto the Kynges Parlyame~t Chaumbre & there radde | after
redynge whereof the sayde Duke of Amnarle stoode vp and sayde as
touchynge such Artycles as in that byll were put agayn hym they were
false and vntrewe | & that he wolde proue vpon his body | or otherwyse
as the Kynge wolde commaunde hym | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.40

Vpon Fryday the sayde syr Iohn~ Bagot was brought into the sayde
Parlyament Chambre | and examyned vpo~ euerye Artycle of his byll | all
the whiche he there affermyd | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.41

Then it was axyd of hym what he coulde saye of the Duke of Excetyr |
whereunto he answeryd and sayed that he coulde laye nothyng to his
charge | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.42

But there is he sayd a yoman in Newgate callyd Halle y=t= can say
somewhat of you | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.43

than sayde the Duke what soeuer he or ye can or lyste to saye of me |
<OLD_P_169R.C1> this is trouthe that I shall here expresse
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.44

trouthe it is that the laste tyme that the Kyng was at woodestoke | the
Duke of Norfolke and ye had me with you into the Chapell | and closyd
the dore vpo~ vs FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.45

and there ye made me to swere vpon the Sacrament there present to kepe
suche counceyll as there ye shulde then shewe vnto me | where after ye
shewyd to me y=t= ye coulde neuer brynge youre purpose about whyle syr
Iohn~ of Gaunt late Duke of Lancaster lyued | wherfore ye were aduysed
for to haue shortly after a counceyll at Lychefelde | by the whyche ye
co~dyscendyd that the sayd syr Iohn~ shuld be arestyd in suche maner
that he shuld haue occasyon to disobey that areste | by reason whereof
by chaunce medley he shuld be there slayen | wherunto my cou~ceyll than
was | that the Kynge shulde calle his secrete Counceyll | and if they
agreed thereunto | I for my parte wolde agree vnto the same | to whiche
sayinge syr Iohn~ Bagot gaue none answere | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.46

& vpo~ Saterday the sayd Bagot & Halle were bothe brought into the
Parlyame~t Chaumbre | and there examyned | ond after countyrmau~dyd to
Prysone | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.47

and as soone as they were departyd the Lorde Fits Water stoode vp
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,566.48

and sayde | moost redoughtyd souerayne Lord where as the duke of Amnarle
hath before tymes and nowe lately excusyd hym of y=e= dethe
<OLD_P_169R.C2> of the Duke of Gloucetyr | I saye & wyll Iustyfye it
that he was cause of his deth and that I shall proue opon his body if
your grace be so contentyd | to the co~trary whereof the Duke with
sharpe wordys answerid so that gaugys of batayll were <P_567> offerid of
both parties | and sealyd and delyueryd vnto the Lorde marshall
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.49

Tha~ partyes began to be taken amo~ge the Lordes | In so moche that the
Duke of Surrey toke partye with the Duke of Amnarle |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.50

& sayde that all that by hym was done | was done by constraynt of
Rycharde than beynge Kynge | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.51

and he hym selfe and other consentyd parforce to the same | where agayn
y=e= said Lorde fyts Water and other replyed | wherfore sylence was
commaundyd | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.52

and forthwith the forenamed Halle for y=t= he had co~fessyd before the
Lordes that he was one of them that put to deth the Duke of Gloucetyr at
Calays | he therefore was Iuged to be drawen from the Towre of London
vnto Tybourne | and there to be hanged and quarteryd | the whiche
execucion was done vpon the mondaye folowynge FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.53

Thus with theyse causes & many other this Parlyament contynued tyll a
newe Mayer namyd Thomas Knollis grocer was admytted & sworne vpon the
day folowyng the feast of Symonde and Iude . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.54

<OLD_P_169R.C1>

<heading>

ANNO DN~I .M.CCC.LXXX.XIX. ANNO DN~I .M.CCCC. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.57

GROCER THOMAS KNOLLYS . WYLLYAM WALDERNE . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.58

ANNO .I. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.59

WYLLYAM HYDE . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.60

<$$heading>

In this firste yere of Kyng Henry the .iiii. yet lastyng the foresayd
Parlyament vpon the Wednysday next folowynge the feest of Symonde and
Iude | the Lorde Morley appealyd the Erle of Salesbury of Treason |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.62

<OLD_P_169R.C2>

And caste his hoode for a gauge to trye with hym by Bataylle | the
whiche sayinge he replyed | and caste from hym his Gloues for a gauge to
proue his sayinge false | and vntrewe | whiche were there Sealyd | and
delyueryd vnto the Lorde Marshall | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.64

& vpon the mondaye <OLD_P_169V.C1> passyd an Acte that no Lorde nor
other persone of no degre shuld after that day lay for his excuse any
constraynt or coartynge of his Prynce in executynge of any wronge
Iugement | or other Crymynous | and vnlefull dedys | sayinge that for
fere they durste none otherwyse doo | For suche execuse after that Daye
shall stande hym in none effecte | And also that all Sheryffys maye
yelde accompte in the Exchekyr vpon theyr Othys | And that they be
chaungyd in all Shyres yerely | And also that no Lorde nor other man of
myght , {HELSINKI:missing_comma} gyue any Gownys or lyuereys to any of
theyr Tenau~tys or other persones excepte onely theyr housholde and
meynyall Seruauntys FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.65

And {HELSINKI:Ans} also than was enactyd that all Repiers and other
Fisshers co~mynge with Fysshe from Rye | and Wynchylsee | and other
Coostys of the Sees syde shulde sell it themselfe in Cornhyll | and
Chepe | and other stretys of London to all men that wolde of them by it
| excepte Fysshe mongers and other that wolde bye the sayde Fysshe to
make Sale of it agayn FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.66

And vpon the Wednysdaye folowynge was enactyd that Rycharde late Kynge
of Englonde shulde for his myssegouernaunce of the Realme be holdyn in
such Prysone as the Kynge wolde assygne durynge his naturall Lyfe |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.67

And than y=e= Kynge graunted to all persones generall pardons | so that
they were sette out of the Chauncerye by Alhalowentyde nexte folowynge |
excepte such persones as were present at the murder of the Duke of
Gloucetyr | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.68

And in this whyle was {COM:sic} the Archbysshop of Cauntorbury | and
Doctour Roger whiche there was sette by Kynge Rycharde | was {COM:sic}
remoued & sette in the See of London | w=t= the which he was right well
contentyd | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.69

And than was the Erle of Arundellys sone restoryd to all his Fathers
Landys with dyuerse other before by Kynge Rycharde <OLD_P_169V.C2>
dysheryted | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.70

And shortlye after was the sayd Parlyament dyssoluyd |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.71

and euery man had lycence to departe to his owne FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.72

And than was Rycharde late Kyng had vnto the Castell of Ledys in Kent
and there kepte | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.73

and prouysyon was made at Wyndesore for the Kyng to kepe there his
Cristemasse | In whiche passe_tyme the Dukys of Amnarle | of Surrey |
and of Exetyr with the Erlys of Salesbury and of Gloucetyr with other of
theyr affynyte | made prouysyon for a Dysguysynge or a mummynge to be
shewyd to the Kynge vpon Twelfethe nyght | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.74

and the tyme was nere at hande & all thynge redy for the same |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.75

vpon the sayd .xii. day came secretlye vnto the Kynge the duke of
Amnarle | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,567.76

<P_568>

and shewyd to hym that he with y=e= other Lordys aforenamyd were
appoyntyd to sle hym in the tyme of the fore_said dysguysynge shewynge |
wherfore he aduysyd hym to prouyde for his owne suretye | At whose
warnynge the Kynge secretlye departyd from wyndesore | and came the same
nyght to London | whereof the sayde Lordys beynge ware | and that theyr
Counceyll was bewrayed | fledde in all haste Westwarde
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.78

But the Kynge causyd hasty pursute to be made after them | So that
shortly after the Duke of Surrey | and the Erle of Salysburye were taken
at Syrcetyr | where they were streyght behedyd | and theyr Heddys sent
to London and sette vpon the Brygde | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.79

& at Oxenforde were taken syr Thomas Blont | and syr Benetsely Knyghtys
| and Thomas Wyntercell Esquyer | the whiche were there Hedyd and
Quarteryd | and theyr Heddys sent to Lo~don Brydge |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.80

and at Prytwell in Essex was takyn syr Iohn~ Holande Duke of Exetyr | &
after brought to Plassby a place fast by where he was behedyd |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.81

and after his hede was sent to Lo~don & sette there with the other vpo~
y=e= Brydge pyght vpo~ a stake | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.82

& nere about y=e= same tyme at Bristowe was taken the <OLD_P_170R.C1>
Lorde Spencer than Erle of Gloucetyr and there behedyd | and his Hede
sent vnto London Brydge | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.83

and in the same yere syr Barnarde Brokeys | syr Iohn~ Selley | syr Iohn~
maundeley | and syr Iohn~ Fereby Knyghtys and Clerkys were takyn as
Prysoners in the Towre of London | and soone after foriugyd ha~ged and
hedyd | and theyr Heddys also sette vpon London Brydge | In whiche
passe_tyme | Rycharde late Kynge was remoued frome the Castell of Ledys
in Kent and sent vnto Pounfreyt Castell In this yere
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.84

also as before is towchyd in the .xix. yere of the .vii. Carlys |
Kynge Henrye sent vnto Calays Isabell late Quene of Englonde | and wyfe
vnto Richarde lately Kyng | and with hyr great Treasoure and many ryce
Iewyllys as testyfyeth the Englysshe Cronycle | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.85

and there receyued by Frenshmen vnder safe cunduyt passynge | and by
them conueyed vnto hyr father into Fraunce | and after maryed vnto
Charlys sone and heyer to the Duke of Orleaunce | as before I haue
shewyd in y=e= .xxii. yere of hyr sayd Fathers Reygne |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.86

Than it foloweth in the story of Kynge Henry | whan he had fermelye
consyderyd the great conspyracy agayne hym by the forenamyd Lordys and
other persones entendyd and Imagenyd to his dystruccyon | & agayn
releuynge Rycharde late Kynge | he in avoydynge of lyke daunger |
prouydyd to put the sayd Rycharde out of this present Lyfe |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.87

and shortlye after | the Opynyon of moost wryters he sent a Knyght named
syr Piers of Exton vnto Pounfreyt Castell | where he with .viii. other
in his companye | fell vpon the sayde Rycharde late Kynge | and hym
myserably in his Chaumbre slewe | but not without reuengement of his
deth | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.88

For or he were <OLD_P_170R.C2> fellyd to the grou~de he slewe of the
sayd viii .iiii. men with an Axe of theyr owne |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.89

But lastely he was woundyd to deth by the hande of the sayde syr Piers
of Exton FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.90

& so dyed | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.91

After execucyon of which dedely dede y=e= sayd syr Piers toke great
repentaunce | Inso_moche that lamentably he sayd alas what haue we done
| FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.92

we haue now put to deth hym that hath ben our Soueraygne and drad lorde
by the space of .xxii. yeres | by reason whereof I shall be reprochyd
of all honoure where so I after this daye become |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.93

and all men shall redounde this dede to my dyshonour and shame |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.94

other opynyons of the dethe of this noble Prynce are lefte by wryters as
by waye of Famyne & other FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.95

But this of moost Wryters is testyfyed & alleged |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.96

Whan the deth of this Prynce was publysshed a_brode | he was after
opyn_vysaged layed in the Mynster of Pounfrayt | so y=t= all men myght
knowe an see that he was dede | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.97

and the .xii. daye of Marche folowynge he was w=t= great solempnyte
brought thoroughe the Cytie of London to Paulys | & there layed
open_visaged agayn to the ende that his Dethe myght be manyfestlye
knowen | whiche was doutfull to many one | and speciallye to suche as
oughte to hym fauoure | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.98

And then after a fewe dayes the sayd Corps was caryed vnto the Freris of
Langley and there enterryd | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,568.99

But after he was remouyd by Kynge Henry y=e= v. In the firste yere of
his Reygne | and with great Honoure and Solempnyte conueyed vnto the
Monastery <P_569> of Westmynster | and there within the Chapell of Seynt
Edwarde honourably buryed vpon the south syde of seynt Edwardys Shryne
with this Epytaphy vpon his Toumbe as foloweth .
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.100

{COM:verse_omitted} <OLD_P_170V.C1> Whan this mortall Prynce was thus
dede and grauen Kynge Henry was in quyet possessyon of the Realme
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.101

& fande great Rychesse y=t= before tyme to Kynge Rycharde belonged |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.102

for as wytnessyth Polycronycon he fande in kyng Richardys Tresoury
thre_hundreth_thousande pounde of redy coyne besyde Iuellys & other
Ryche vessellys whiche were as moche in value or more |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.103

And ouer that he espyed in the kepynge of the Tresourers <OLD_P_170V.C2>
handys an_hundreth_&_l._thousande nobles & Iewellys & other stuffe y=t=
cou~tyruayled the sayd value | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.104

and so it shuld seme y=t= Kyng Rycharde was ryche wha~ his money &
Iewellys amountyd to .vii._C._M. li. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.105

And in the moneth of octobre & ende of this mayers yere was brent in
Smythfelde of London a preest named syr Wyllyam Sawtry for certeyn
poyntys of Heresy . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.106

<OLD_P_170V.C1>

<heading>

ANNO DN~I .M.CCCC. ANNO DN~I .M.CCCC.I. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.109

GOLDSMYTH IOHN~ FRAUNCES . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.110

IOHN~ WAKELE . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.111

ANNO .II. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.112

WYLLYAM EBOT . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.113

<$$heading>

In this seco~de yere of kyng Henry and moneth of February were drawen &
ha~ged for treason a Knyght named syr roger Claryngton at Tybourne w=t=
.ii. of his seruau~tis | y=e= pryour of Lande | & .viii. freris
mynours or Gray frerys | of y=e= which some were bachelers of dyuynyte |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,569.115

And in this yere began a great discencion in Walys atwene
<OLD_P_170V.C2> the Lorde Gray Ryffyn | & a Welsheman named Howen of
Glendore | which Howen gatheryd to hym great strength of Welshemen | and
dyd moche harme to that Countrey | not sparynge the Kynges Lordshyppes |
nor his people | and lastlye toke the sayde Lorde Gray prysoner | and
helde hym prysoner tyll contrarye his wyll he hadde Maryed the sayde
Howens doughter | <P_570> after whiche <OLD_P_171R.C1> Matrymony
fynysshed he helde the said Lorde stylle in Walys tyll he dyed | to the
kynges great displeasure . Wherfore the kynge with a stronge Army
spedde hym into Walys for to subdue the sayde Howan~ and his Adherentes
| FABYAN-1516-E1-H,570.116

But whan the kynge with his power was entred y=e= Countre he with his
Fawtours fledde into the Mountaynes FABYAN-1516-E1-H,570.117

and helde hym there | So that the kynge myght nat wynne to hym without
distruccyon of his hoost Wherfore fynally by y=e= aduyce of his lordes
<OLD_P_171R.C2> he retournyd into Englande for that season .
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,570.118

In this yere also whete and other Greynes beganne to fayle | so that a
Quarter of whete was solde at London for .xvi. s.
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,570.119

and derer shuld haue been had nat ben the prouycyon of Marchauntes that
brought Rye FABYAN-1516-E1-H,570.120

and wherwith this La~de was greatly susteyned and easyd .
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,570.121

<P_572>

<OLD_P_172V.C1>

<heading>

ANNO DN~I .M.CCCC.V. ANNO DN~I .M.CCCC.VI. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,572.125

HENRY BARTON~ . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,572.126

IOHN~ WOODCOK MERCER . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,572.127

ANNO VII. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,572.128

WYLLIAM CROWMER . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,572.129

<$$heading>

In this yere | Dame Lucye y=e= Duke of Myllan@ @ys Suster came into
Englande | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,572.131

& was maryed vnto sir Edmu~d Holande Erle of Kent in y=e= Churche of
seynt Mary Ouerey in Southwarke | vpon the .xxiiii. day of Ianuary |
where y=e= kyng was present & gaue her that day vnto the preest |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,572.132

And after the Solempnysacion of the Maryage was fynysshed she was with
great honour conueyed vnto y=e= Bysshop of Wynchester@ @s palays there
fast by where y=t= day for her was holden a Sumptuous and pompous Feast
. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,572.133

And in y=e= same yere & moneth of May Dame Phylip the yongest Doughter
of kynge Henry accompanyed w=t= dyuers lordes Spirituell and Temporal
was shypped in y=e= Northe | and so conueyed into Denmark where in a
Towne or Cytie called London she was maryed vnto the kynge of y=e= sayd
Countre . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,572.134

In this yere also Sir Thomas Ramston than Constable of y=e= Towre by
ouersyght of his Botemen | as he wold haue passed y=e= brydge towarde
the sayd Tower was drowned . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,572.135

And in the same yere for y=e= greuous complayntes that before tyme had
ben shewyd and euydently prouyd before the kyngs counsayll | And also
before the Mayre and his Brethern~ | of the great distrucco~n of fyre &
yonge fysshe | By reason of werys standynge in dyuers places of the
Ryuer of <OLD_P_172V.C2> Thamys | wherby the fysshe of the sayd Ryuer
was greatly mynysshed and wastyd | And that also if the sayd werys soo
contynued the sayd Ryuer shuld in short <P_573> processe be distroyed .
Wherfore y=e= Mayre and his bretherne the Aldermen as co~seruatours of
that Ryuer made suche laboure vnto the kynge and his Counsayll that they
opteyned Co~myssion to pull vp all the werys that stode a_twene London
and .vii. myles beyone Kyngston~ | and in lyke wyse for such other as
stode atwene London and Grauysende as wel {COM:sic} Crekes or seuerall
groundes & other . The which Co~myssion by the sayd Mayre & his
Officers was this yere put i execuco~n . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.136

And in this yere sir Robert Knollys knyght | the which in Fraunce and
Brytayne had before tyme don so many victoryous acts As in the .xxxiii.
yere of Edwarde the thirde and other yeres of his Reygne is somdele
towched made an ende of his werke at Rochester Bridge and Chapell at the
sayd brydge fote | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.137

And dyed shortly after whan he had newe reedyfied the body of the Whyte
Fryers Churche standyng in Fletestrete | and don to that house many
Notable Benefytes where after he was buryed in the body of the sayd
Churche | whiche Churche & place was first Founded by the Auncetours of
the lorde Gray Cotner~ . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.138

<OLD_P_172V.C1>

<heading>

ANNO DN~I .M.IIII.C.VI. ANNO DN~I .M.IIII.C.VII.
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.141

NICHOLAS WOTTON . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.142

RICHARDE WHYTYNGTON~ MERCER . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.143

ANNO .VIII. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.144

GODFEY BROOK . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.145

<$$heading>

In this yere and moneth of Noue~bre one named the Walshe Clerke apeched
a knyght called Sir Percyuall <OLD_P_172V.C2> Sowdan of Treason for
tryall wherof daye was gyuen to theym to fyghte in Smythfelde the day
abouesayd | at whiche <OLD_P_173R.C1> daye eyther apperyd | & there
Faught a season | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.147

But in the ende the Clerke was Recreau~t | wherfore immedyatly he was
spoyled of his Armour & layde vpon an hardyll so drawen to Tyborne and
there hanged . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.148

And in this yere also | sir Henry Erle of Northumberlande and the lorde
Bardolf co~mynge out of Scotlande <OLD_P_173R.C2> with a stronge company
to y=e= displeasur & hurt of the kynge as they entendyd were met and
encountred with the Gentylmen and Comons of the North & foughten with
and distressyd | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.149

And after strake of their heddes FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.150

and sent them to London whiche than were pyght vpon the brydge amonge
many other . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.151

<OLD_P_173R.C1>

<heading>

ANNO DN~I .M.IIII.C.VII. ANNO DN~I .M.IIII.C.VIII. .
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.154

HENRY PONFREYT . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.155

WYLLYAM STONDON~ GROCER . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.156

ANNO .IX. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.157

HENRY HALTON . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.158

<$$heading>

In this yere & moneth of Decembre began a Frost | y=e= whiche contynued
by the space of xv. wekes after or therupon | So that byrdes were
wonderly famysshed and distressed by vyolence of the same .
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.160

And in the same yere sir Edmonde of Holande Erle of Kent was by the
kynge made Admyrall of the See | The whiche storyd and skymmyd y=e= see
ryght well and manfully | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.161

And lastly landed in the Coost of Brytayne | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.162

and besieged there <OLD_P_173R.C2> a Castell named Briak
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.163

and wan it by strength | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.164

But in the wynnynge therof he was so deedly wounded with an arowe in
y=e= heed that he dyed shortly after | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.165

And than his Corps was brought agayne into Englande | & buryed omonge
his Auncetours . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.166

And in the begynnynge of this yere was slayne and murderyd the Duke of
Orleau~ce in Parys lyke as before it is more at length shewyd in the
.xxvii. yere of Charlys the .vii. kynge of Fraunce .
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.167

<OLD_P_173R.C1>

<heading>

ANNO DN~I .M.IIII.C.VIII. ANNO DN~I .M.CCCC.IX.
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.170

THOMAS DUKE . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.171

DREWE BARENTYNE GOLDSMYTH . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.172

ANNO .X. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.173

WILLYAM NORTON~ . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,573.174

<$$heading>

In this yere the Seneshall of Henaude came into this Lande with a goodly
Companye of Henauders & other straungers | for to do and parfourme
certayne Faytes of Armys agayn <P_574> dyuers nobles and Gentylmen of
this lande . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.176

And firste the sayd Seneshall chalenged the Erle of Somerset | and other
of his Company other Gentylmen of this la~de as after shall appere .
For Executynge of whiche disporte the place of Smythfelde by the kynge
was appoynted | And barryd and fensyd for the same entent and daye sette
for euery man to be Redy by the .xi. daye of
{COM:a_blank_in_the_source_text} At whiche day the Seneshall
<OLD_P_173R.C2> as chalenger entred the Felde pompously
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.177

And after with a goodly Company of men of honour | was the Erle of
Somerset brought into y=e= same | where they ra~ne togyder certayne
Courses and executed other Fayts of Armys | wherof the pryse and honour
was gyuen by y=e= Herawdes vnto the Erle | so that he wanne that day
great honour . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.178

Than the seconde day came in a knyght Henauder as Chalengoure | To whome
as defendaunt came sir Richard of Arundell kynght | the whiche ranne
certayne Courses on horse bak And after went togyder w=t= axes on foote
where sir Richarde was put to the worse FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.179

For y=e= Henauder brought hym vpon his <OLD_P_173V.C1> kne .
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.180

Then the thirde daye came in an other knyght of Henaude Chalenger | to
whom as defendau~t came in Sir Iohn~ Cornewayll knyght |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.181

and so well bare hy~ that he put the Straunger to the worse .
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.182

Vpon the .iiii. daye came into the felde an Esquyre Henauder agayn whom
ranne the sone of sir Iohn Cheyny | The which at the seconde course
sette his Stroke so egerly that he ouerthrewe the Henauder horse and man
| for whiche dede the kyng dubbyd hym forth_with knyght .
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.183

Vpon y=e= v. day played togyder an Henauder and a Squyre called Iohn~
Stewarde | whiche daye also the Englysshe man wan y=e= worshyp .
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.184

Vpon the .vi. daye Skyrmysshed there togyder an Henauder | and an
Englysshe Equyer named Wyllm~ Porter . | The whiche gatte suche worshyp
of the same Henauder | that the kynge for his guerdon made hym streyght
knyght <OLD_P_173V.C2> Vpon the .vii. daye FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.185

in lyke wyse played Insamble an Henauder and one Iohn~ Standysshe
Esquyer | The whiche semblably for his prowesse & manly dealyng was also
of the kynge dubbyd knyght . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.186

And a Gascoygn~ that the same day wan the pryce of an other straunger
was Immedyatly made knyght of the kynge . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.187

And vpon the .viii. day or last day of this Chalenger came into the
felde .ii. Henauders vnto whom came .ii. Bretherne beynge Sowdyours of
Calays | The whiche Bekeryd togyder a longe season | soo that eyther
p~tie receyued plentie of good strokes tyll peas by y=e= kynge was
co~mau~dyd | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.188

& so this Chalenge was fynysshed | to the great honour of the kyng | the
whiche after Feasted thyse Strau~gers | and with Ryche gyfts sent &
retourned them agayne to theyr Countrees . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,574.189

<P_576>

<OLD_P_174V.C1>

<heading>

ANNO DN~I .M.IIII.C.X. ANNO DN~I .M.IIII.C.XI.
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.193

IOHN~ RAYNEWELL . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.194

ROBERT CHYCHELEY GROCER . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.195

ANNO .XIII. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.196

WYLLYAM COTTON~ . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.197

<$$heading>

In this yere | and vpon the .xii. day of Octobre were thre Flodes in
Thamys | whiche thynge no man than lyuynge cowde remembre y=e= lyke to
be seen . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.199

And in this yere was the lorde Thomas sone to the kyng created duke of
Clarence . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.200

And in this yere | the kynge at the Request of the duke of Orleaunce
sent ouer the foresayd duke his sone to ayde the sayd duke of Orleaunce
agayne the Duke of Burgoyne | Of whose actes and his company
<OLD_P_174V.C2> I haue before made report in y=e= Story of Charlys the
.vii. kynge of Fraunce . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.201

And in this yere y=e= kyng caused a new Coyne of Nobles to be made |
which were of lesse value thanne the olde noble by .iiii. d. in a
noble . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.202

In this yere also the kynge Created Iohn~ his sone Duke of Bedfordde and
his other sone Humfrey duke of Glouceter FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.203

he made also sir Thomas Beauforde Erle of Dorset |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.204

& the duke of Anmarle he created duke of yorke .
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.205

<OLD_P_174V.C1>

<heading>

ANNO DN~I .M.IIII.C.XI. ANNO DN~I .M.IIII.C.XII.
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.208

RAUFFE LEUENHM~ . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.209

WYLLYAM WALDREN~ . MERCER . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.210

ANNO .XIIII. FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.211

WYLLYAM SEUENOK . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.212

<$$heading>

In this yere | and .xx. daye of the Moneth of Nouembre was a great
Counsayll holden at the Whyte Freres of London | By the whiche it was
amonge other thynges concluded | that for the kynges great Iournaye that
he entendyd to take in vysytynge of the holy Sepulcre of our Lord
certayne Galeys of warre shuld be made | & other purueaunce concernynge
the same Iournay Wherupon all hasty and possyble spede was made |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.214

But after the feest of Cristenmasse | whyle he was makynge his prayers
at seynt Edwardes Shryne to <OLD_P_174V.C2> take there his leue | and so
to spede hym vpon his Iournaye he became so syke y=t= suche as were
aboute hym feryd that he wolde haue dyed Right there | wherfore they for
his comforte bare hym into the Abbotts place & lodgyd hym in a Chambre |
& there vpon a paylet layde hym before the fyre where he laye in great
Agony a certayne of tyme . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.215

At length whan he was co~myn to hymselfe nat knowynge where he was |
freyned of suche as then were aboute hym what place that was | The which
shewyd to hym that it belongyd vnto y=e= Abbot of Westmynster |
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.216

And for he felte hymself so syke he co~maunded <OLD_P_175R.C1> to aske
if that Chambre had any specyall name wherunto it was answeryd that it
was named Iherusalem | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.217

Than sayd the kynge louynge be to the Fader of Heuen
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,576.218

For nowe I knowe I <P_577> shall dye in this Chambre accordyng to y=e=
Prophecye of me beforesayd | that I shulde dye i Irl~m
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,577.219

And so after he made hymself Redy FABYAN-1516-E1-H,577.220

& dyed shortly after vpon y=e= day of seynt Cuthbert or y=e= .xx. day
of Marche when he had reygned .xiii. yeres .v. monthes | & .xxi.
dayes . Leuynge after hym .iiii. So~nes | that is to meane Henry that
was kyng | Thomas that was duke of Orleaunce | Iohn~ duke of Bedforde
and Humfrey duke of Glouceter | FABYAN-1516-E1-H,577.221

And the .v. was named Henry Ryche Cardynall of Wynchester
FABYAN-1516-E1-H,577.222

and ii. Doughters that one beynge Quene of Denmarke | And that other
Duchesse of Barre | as before is shewyd . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,577.223

Whanne kynge Henry was deed he was conueyed by water vnto Feuersham |
and from thens by lande vnto Caunterbury | and there enteryd by the
Shryne of Seynt Thomas . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,577.224

To the foresayd Henry the Riche Cardynall | kynge Henry had or begat
.ii. other So~nes vpon dame Katheryne Swynford | as before is shewyd in
the .viii. yere of Richarde y=e= seconde whiche were named as there is
expressyd . FABYAN-1516-E1-H,577.225

