<BEGIN_fiennes-1698-e3-h>

<P_141>

<heading:edcomment:PART_III>

<heading>

" MY GREAT JOURNEY TO NEWCASTLE AND TO CORNWALL "
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.5

<paren> 1698 <$$paren> FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.6

1 . FROM LONDON THROUGH EAST ANGLIA TO ELY FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.7

My Great Journey to Newcastle and to Cornwall , the account of many
journeys into most parts of England what observation and distance of one
place to another in my travels . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.8

From London to Albins in Essex 17 mile , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.9

Sir Robert Abdys , whose house stands very pleasantly in a park full of
deer ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.10

the house on an advanced ground appeares to view at the entrance ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.11

but it@ @s old building large roomes , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.12

some rows of trees lead up to it ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.13

thence I return'd home 17 mile more ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.14

from London to Bednal-green twice and back again 16 mile ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.15

from London to Highgate 4 miles to Mr. Thomas's house , where is a most
exact garden , with all sorts of greens and flowers and fishponds
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.16

it@ @s all but little ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.17

there my Nephew Fiennes Harrison with Mr. Showers went to fish with me
, FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.18

thence we went to Hampstead FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.19

so made it 5 mile home againe ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,141.20

I went from London <P_142> twice and back againe from Kensingston , in
all 8 mile - FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.21

this I put in only to know the number of miles that I went in one yeare
. FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.22

From London to Amwell_bery which is in Hartfordshire 19 mile , where I
staid a day or two , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.23

thence to Bishopstafford in Essex 13 mile , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.24

thence to Dunmew 8 long miles thro' severall little villages ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.25

it@ @s very deep way especially after raines ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.26

this is a little Market town , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.27

they are altogether taken up about the spinning and prepareing for the
Bayes : FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.28

all along between that and Colchester you pass but halfe a mile ere one
comes to two or 3 houses all along the road , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.29

it@ @s from Dunmow to Collchester 22 miles , and mostly clay deep way .
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.30

Colchester is a large town FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.31

in the compass of ground , formerly there was 16 Churches tho' now much
of it is ruinated ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.32

a mile before you come to the new town one enters a little village which
still is in the limits of the Citty and Majors jurisdiction ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.33

there is a pretty good house of the Lord Lucas :
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.34

you enter the town by a gate FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.35

there are 4 in all , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.36

there is a large streete which runs a great length down to the bridge
near a mile long , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.37

about the middle of it runs another broad streete and near its length ,
in which is the Market Cross and Town Hall and a long building like
stalls on purpose to lay their Bayes when exposed to saile ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.38

great quantetyes are made here and sent in Bales to London that is 44
miles distant , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.39

the whole town is employ'd in spinning weaveing washing drying and
dressing their Bayes , in which they seeme very industrious ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.40

there I saw the Card they use to comb and dress the Bayes , which they
call them testles which are a kind of rush tops or something like them
which they put in frames or laths of wood ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,142.41

the town looks like a thriveing place by the substantiall houses , well
pitched streetes which are broad enough for two Coaches to go a_breast ,
besides a pitch'd walke on either side by the houses , secured by stumps
of wood and is <P_143> convenient for 3 to walke together ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.42

their buildings are of timber of loame and lathes and much tileing ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.43

the fashion of the Country runs much in long roofes and great
cantilivers and peakes ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.44

out of these great streetes runs many little streetes but not very
narrow , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.45

mostly old buildings except a few houses builded by some Quakers that
are brick and of the London mode ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.46

the town did extend it self to the sea FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.47

but now its ruines sets it 3 mile off ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.48

the low grounds all about the town are used for the whitening their
Bayes for which this town is remarkable , and also for exceeding good
oysters , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.49

but it@ @s a dear place FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.50

and to grattifye my curiosity to eate them on the place I paid dear ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.51

it@ @s a town full of Dessenters FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.52

2 meeteings very full besides Anabaptists and Quakers ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.53

formerly the famous Mr. Stockton was minister there till he dyed .
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.54

From Colchester to Ipswitch is 18 mile and thence to Dedom 9 miles ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.55

the way pretty good except 4 or 5 miles they call the Severalls , a sort
of deep moore ground and woody ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.56

at this place I passed over a wooden bridge pretty large with timber
railes of which make they build their bridges in these parts ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.57

and now I go into Suffolk which is not so rich land as that part of
Essex I passed through which was meadows and grounds with great burdens
of grass and corn . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.58

So I went to Ipswitch 9 mile more , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.59

this is a very clean town and much bigger than Colchester is now ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.60

Ipswitch has 12 Churches , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.61

their streetes of a good size well pitch'd with small stones ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.62

a good Market Cross railed in , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.63

I was there on Satturday which is their market day
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.64

and saw they sold their butter by the pinte , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.65

20 ounces for 6 pence , and often for 5@ @d. or 4@ @d.
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.66

they make it up in a mold just in the shape of a pinte pot
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.67

and so sell it ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.68

their Market Cross has good carving , the figure of Justice carv'd and
gilt , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.69

there is but 3 or 4 good houses in the town , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.70

the rest is much like the Colchester buildings but it seems more
shatter'd FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.71

and indeed the town looks a little disregarded ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.72

and by enquiry found it to be thro' pride and sloth ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,143.73

for tho' the sea would bear a ship of 300 tun up quite <P_144> to the
key and the ships of the first rate can ride within two mile of the town
, yet they make no advantage thereof by any sort of manufacture , which
they might do as well as Colchester and Norwitch , so that the shipps
that brings their coales goes light away ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.74

neither do they adress themselves to victual or provide for shipps ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.75

they have a little dock where formerly they built ships of 2 or 300 ton
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.76

but now little or nothing is minded save a little fishing for the supply
of the town . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.77

There is one pretty good house of the Earle of Herriford that marry'd
one of Mr. Norborns Daughters that was killed by Sir Thomas Montgomery
; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.78

you enter thro' two Courts walled and divided by a breast wall on which
are iron spikes pallasadoes , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.79

the middle is a broad gravell walke fenced in with stone balls on each
side , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.80

3 or 4 steps up into the other Court , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.81

and so many steps more thro' an arch into a third Court ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.82

this arch joyns a low building which are the offices and leaded on the
top and rail'd round , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.83

and each end enters into chambers joyning to the house that is built
round this last Court , from whence you enter the porch ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.84

the house is handsome FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.85

all brick worke and brick pillars , a good hall parlour and
drawing_roome and large closet , 2 or 3 other roomes left answereing it
and a Billyard Roome above with as many roomes of State all furnish'd
with good old things ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.86

a pretty staircase FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.87

but it@ @s all little ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.88

there are 3 gardens on the one side with grass and gravell walks all
kept neate and good fruite ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.89

on the other side is one large garden with a sum~er house in which
stands a large statue , black of a gigantick form and proportion ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.90

this answeres the fine green house on the other side ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.91

this town has many Dessenters in it . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.92

Thence I went to Woodbridge 7 mile , mostly lanes enclosed countrys ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.93

this is a little Market town FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.94

but has a great meeting for the Dessenters ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.95

thence to Wickham 5 mile more - FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.96

but these are all very Long miles . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,144.97

<P_145>

Thence to Saxmunday 8 miles more , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.99

this is a pretty bigg market town , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.100

the wayes are pretty deep , mostly lanes very little commons ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.101

I pass'd by severall Gentlemens seates - FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.102

one Mr. Dormers which stands in a fine parke FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.103

the entrance from the Road thro' rows of trees discovered the front and
building very finely to view , being built with stone and brick and many
sashes FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.104

lookes like a new house , with the open iron barr gates between pillars
of stone the breadth of the house ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.105

so to Bathfort 8 miles where is the remaines of the walls of an Abby
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.106

and there is still a very fine Church , all carv'd in stone hollow work
one tire above another to the tower that ascends not very high but
finely carv'd also ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.107

hence I descended into lower grounds banck'd on each side with a brick
wall but low , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.108

and so a walk on it for foote people and severall arches here and there
to draine off the water , so that those bancks are to secure the Road
from the marshy fenny water that oft a great extent on both sides is
subject to ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.109

thence I passed by some woods and little villages of a few scattered
houses , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.110

and generally the people here are able to give so bad a direction that
passengers are at a loss what aime to take , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.111

they know scarce 3 mile from their home , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.112

and meete them where you will , enquire how farre to such a place , they
mind not where they are then FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.113

but tell you so farre which is the distance from their own houses to
that place ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.114

I saw at a distance as I descended some of their hills a large place
that look'd nobly and stood very high like a large town ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.115

they told me it was called either Stowle or Nole I can@ @not tell which
. FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.116

I rode in sight of St. Georges Channell in the way from Colchester and
Ipswitch and so to Norwich , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.117

sometymes it was in view then lost againe ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.118

to Beckle is 8 mile more which in all was 36 miles from Ipswitch - but
exceeding long miles - FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.119

they do own they are 41 measured miles ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.120

this is a little market town FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.121

but it@ @s the third biggest town in the County of Suffolke , Ipswitch ,
Berry and this ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.122

here was a good big Meeting place FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.123

at least 400 hearers FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.124

and they have a very good Minister one Mr. Killinghall ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.125

he is but a young man FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.126

but seemed very serious , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,145.127

I was there the <P_146> Lords day ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.128

Sir Robert Rich is a great supporter of them FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.129

and contributed to the building the Meeting place , which is very neate
, FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.130

he has a good house at the end of the town with fine gardens ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.131

there are no good buildings the town being old timber and plaister-work
except his and one or two more , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.132

there is a pretty bigg Market Cross and a great market kept ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.133

there is a handsome stone_built Church and a very good publick Minister
whose name is Armstrong he preaches very well ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.134

they say notwithstanding the town is a sad Jacobitish town ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.135

this chooses no parliament men . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.136

At the towns end one passes over the River Waveny on a wooden bridg
railed with timber FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.137

and so you enter into Norfolk , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.138

it@ @s a low flatt ground all here about so that the least raines they
are overflowed by the River and lye under water , as they did when I was
there , so that the roade lay under water which is very unsafe for
strangers to pass , by reason of the holes and quick sands and loose
bottom ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.139

the ordinary people both in Suffolk and Norfolk knitt much
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.140

and spin , some with the rock and fusoe as the French does , others at
their wheeles out in the streete and lanes as one passes ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.141

it@ @s from this town to Norwitch 12 miles FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.142

and it@ @s 10 to Yarmouth , where they built some small shipps and is a
harbour for them , and where they victual them , also Harwitch about 12
or 14 miles also , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.143

but the miles are here as long again as about London ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.144

and pretty deep way especially after raines , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.145

these miles are much longer than most miles in Yorkshire .
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.146

Norwitch opens to view a mile distance by the help of a hill whereon is
a little village , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.147

as I observe most of the great towns and cittys have about them little
villages as attendants or appendix's to them which are a sort of
subburbs , there being stragling houses for the most part all the way
between that and the gates ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,146.148

you pass over a high bridge that leads on <P_147> over a high Causey of
a pretty length which lookes somewhat dangerous , being fenced with
trenches from its bancks pretty deep that@ @s on both sides to secure it
from the water , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.149

and these trenches runns in many places round the low grounds to drain
them , which are employ'd to whiten and bleach their woollen stuff the
manufacture of the place ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.150

this long Causey brings you to the large stone bridge over the river
into which those trenches empty themselves . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.151

Then you proceed to the Citty which is walled round full of towers ,
except on the river side which serves for the wall ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.152

they seeme the best in repaire of any walled citty I know , tho' in some
places there are little breaches , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.153

but the carving and battlements and towers looks well ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.154

I enter'd the West gate , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.155

there are 12 gates in all and 36 Churches which is to be seen in a clear
day altogether , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.156

on the Castle walls I told 30 myself ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.157

there they are built all of flints well headed or cut which makes them
look blackish and shineing ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.158

the streetes are all well pitch'd with small stones and very clean
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.159

and many very broad streetes ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.160

that I entred in first was very broad for 2 Coaches or Carts to pass on
either side FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.161

and in the middle was a great Well house with a wheele to wind up the
water for the good of the publick ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.162

a little farther is a large pond walled up with brick a mans height with
an entrance on one end , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.163

a little farther was a building on which they were at work design'd for
a Water house to supply the town by pipes into their houses with water ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.164

at a little distance was another such a pond walled in , as I described
before ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.165

these things fill up the middle of this spacious streete which is for
use and also ornament , the spaces each side being so broad ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.166

this brings you into a broad space called the Hay market which is on a
hill a very steep descent all well pitch'd as before ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.167

this comes to another space for a market to sell hoggs in
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.168

and opens farther into divisions of buildings that begins severall
streetes that runs off good lengths and are of a tollerable size ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.169

one runs along behind , which is all for stalls for the Country butchers
that bring their meate for the supply of the town , which pay such a
rent for them to the town , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,147.170

on the other side are houses of the Town butchers the <P_148>
Inhabitants , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.171

by it is a large market for fish which are all at a little distance from
the heart of the Citty so is not annoy'd with them ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.172

there is a very large Market place and Hall and Cross for fruite and
little things every day , and also a place under pillars for the Corn
market . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.173

The building round here is esteemed the best FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.174

and here is the Town Hall FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.175

but all their buildings are of an old form , mostly in deep poynts and
much tileing as has been observ'd before , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.176

and their building timber FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.177

and they playster on laths which they strike out into squares like broad
free stone on the outside , which makes their fronts look pretty well ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.178

and some they build high FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.179

and contract the roofes resembling the London houses , but none of brick
except some few beyond the river which are built of some of the rich
factors like the London buildings ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.180

there is in the middle of the town the Duke of Norfolk@ @s house of
brick and stone with severall towers and turrets and balls that looks
well , with large gardens FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.181

but the inside is all demolish'd , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.182

only the walls stand and a few roomes for offices , but nothing of state
or tollerable for use . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.183

On the Castle hill you see the whole Citty at once , being built round
it , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.184

it@ @s a vast place FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.185

and takes up a large tract of ground FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.186

it@ @s 6 miles in compass ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.187

here is the County hall and Goale where the asizes are held and the
sessions ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.188

nothing of the Castle remaines but a green space
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.189

and under it is also a large space for the beast market
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.190

and 3 tymes in the year is there very great faires kept , to which
resort a vaste concourse of people and wares a full trade ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.191

the whole Citty lookes like what it is , a rich thriveing industrious
place ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.192

Satturday is their great market day ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.193

they have beside the Town hall a hall distinct which is the Sealeing
hall where their stuffs are all measured , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.194

and if they hold their breadth and lengths they are sealed ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.195

but if they are deffective there is a fine layd on the owner and a
private marke on the stuff which shews its defficiency .
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,148.196

<P_149>

Here was also the Mint which they coyn'd at , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.198

but since the old money is all new coyn'd into mill'd money , that
ceases : FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.199

here there is a fine large Cathedrall and very lofty but nothing
remarkable of monuments or else ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.200

by it is 3 Hospitalls for boys girls and old people who spinn yarne , as
does all the town besides for the Crapes Callimanco and Damaskes which
is the whole business of the place ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.201

indeed they are arrived to a great perfection in their worke so fine and
thinn and glossy FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.202

their pieces are 27 yards in length FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.203

and their price is from 30 shillings to 3 pound as they are in fineness
; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.204

a man can weave 13 yards a day , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.205

I saw some weaveing ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.206

they are all employ'd in spinning knitting weaveing drying scouring
fulling or bleaching their stuffs ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.207

their hospitalls are well provided for FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.208

there are 32 women in one as many men in the other ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.209

there is also a good free schoole ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.210

there is a great many Cerimonyes in the choice and swearing their major
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.211

they elect him the first of May FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.212

and then prepare for his being sworne on Holly Thursday ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.213

they new_washe and plaister their houses within and without which they
strike out in squares like free stone ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.214

all the streete in which this major elects house is very exact in
beautifying themselves and hanging up flaggs the coullours of their
Companyes and dress_up pageants FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.215

and there are playes and all sorts of shows that day , in little what is
done at the Lord Major of London show ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.216

then they have a great feast with fine flaggs and scenes hung out ,
musick and danceing ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.217

I was in the hall they keep their feast in FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.218

and saw some of their preparations for that day being about a fortnight
to it . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.219

The town is a mile and a halfe from the North to the South gate ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.220

just by one of the Churches there is a wall made of flints that are
headed very finely and cut so exactly square and even , to shutt in one
to another , that the whole wall is made without cement at all they say
, FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.221

but it appears to be very little if any morter ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.222

it looks well very smooth shineing and black ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.223

a great many Descenters are in this Citty ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,149.224

the Gentlewoman that was my acquaintance there dyed 10 dayes before I
came thither so I made no great stay there but <P_150> to see about the
town ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.225

there are besides severall common cunduits . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.226

Thence I went to Windham a little market town 5 miles , mostly on a
Causey the country being low and moorish FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.227

and the road on the Causey was in many places full of holes , tho' it@
@s secured by a barr at which passengers pay a penny a horse in order to
the mending the way , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.228

for all about is not to be rode on unless it@ @s a very dry summer ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.229

thence we went mostly through lanes where you meete the ordinary people
knitting 4 or 5 in company under the hedges ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.230

to Attleborough 5 mile more which is such another little market town ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.231

then over an open down like Salisbery Plaine 4 mile more to a little
village , still finding the country full of spinners and knitters ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.232

thence to Thetford 6 miles more , which was formerly a large place but
now much decay'd FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.233

and the ruines only shews its dimentions ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.234

there is a very high hill quite round stands up on one side of it and
can scarcely be ascended so steepe ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.235

here I lay which is still in Norfolk . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.236

Next day I went to Euston Hall which was the Lord Arlington@ @s and by
his only daughters marriage with the Duke of Grafton is his sons by her
, FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.237

it@ @s two mile from Thetford ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.238

it stands in a large parke 6 miles about , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.239

the house is a Roman H of brick , 4 towers with balls on them ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.240

the windows are low and not sarshes FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.241

else the roomes are of a good size and height ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.242

a good staircase full of good pictures , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.243

a long gallery hung with pictures at length - FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.244

on the one side the Royal family from K. Henry the 7th by the Scottish
race his eldest daughter down to the present King William and his Queen
Mary , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.245

the other side are forreign princes from the Emperour of Moroccoe the
Northern and Southern princes and Emperour of Germany ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.246

there is a square in the middle where stands a billiard table hung with
outlandish pictures of Heroes , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.247

there is Count Egminton Horn etc. , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.248

at the end of the roome is the Duke and Dutchess of Grafton@ @s pictures
at length also ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.249

thence I enterd into dineing and drawing roome and bed chambers of a
very good size and good fretwork on the cieling ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,150.250

in one of the roomes was the Dutchess of Cleaveland@ @s picture in a
<P_151> Sultaness dress - the Duke of Grafton being King Charles the
Second base son by her - FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.251

there was also another picture of the Royal family King Charles the
First@ @s 5 Children altogether , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.252

I have often seen 3 which was King Charles the Second King James and the
Princess of Orange , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.253

but here was also the Lady Elizabeth and the Duke of Glocester a little
Infant on a pillow ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.254

in another place there is the Queen Mothers picture and Lady Heneretta
drawn large ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.255

there is a fine hall and parlour below pav'd with free stone ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.256

there are good gardens with fountaines and some stone statues , a
Cannall by the side , a large Court at the entrance with 3 iron barr
gates which open to the front divided with stone pillars and balls ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.257

the Court without is walled round FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.258

and the wall is carry'd a great length round the back yards ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.259

within this is another Court with iron spike pallasadoes divided every 2
or 3 yards by little stone pillars with balls ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.260

there are severall rows of trees runs of a great length thro' the parke
a visto to the front of the house , which lookes nobly tho' not just of
the new_modell'd way of building ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.261

at the back gate I crossed over the river Waveny which is the division
of the two County's FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.262

and enter'd Suffolk , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.263

and pass'd over perfect downs champion country just like Salisbery
Plaine , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.264

and the winds have a pretty power here FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.265

and blows strongly in the winter not well to be endured .
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.266

So to St. Edmunds-bury 8 mile - FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.267

but as has been often observ'd before the miles are very long -
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.268

I pass'd by two or 3 little villages FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.269

and about 2 mile off there is the town of St. Edmunds Bury which
appeares standing on a great hill ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.270

the towers and buildings look so compact and well together with the
trees and gardens thick about it the prospect was wonderfully pleasant ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.271

a mile off by a little village I descended a hill which made the
prospect of the town still in view and much to advantage ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.272

it@ @s but two parishes ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.273

the Market Cross has a dyal and lanthorn on the top ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,151.274

and there being another house pretty close to it high built with such a
tower and lanthorn also , with the two churches towers and some other
buildings pretty good made it appear nobly at a <P_152> distance ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.275

this high house is an apothecarys , at least 60 stepps up from the
ground FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.276

and gives a pleaseing prospect of the whole town , that is compact
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.277

severall streetes but no good buildings ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.278

except this the rest are great old houses of timber and mostly in the
old forme of the country which are long peaked roofes of tileing ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.279

this house is the new mode of building , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.280

4 roomes of a floore pretty sizeable and high , well furnish'd , a
drawing roome and chamber full of China and a Damaske bed embroyder'd ,
2 other roomes , Camlet and Mohaire beds , a pretty deale of plaite in
his wives chamber , parlours below and a large shop ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.281

he is esteem'd a very rich man ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.282

he shewed me a Curiosity of an Herball all written out with every sort
of tree and herb dryed and cut out and pasted on the leaves -
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.283

it was a Doctor of Physicks work that left it him as Legacy at his death
, FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.284

it was a fine thing FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.285

and would have delighted me severall dayes FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.286

but I was passant ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.287

there was two streets were broad and very long out of which run a_cross
5 or 6 streetes more , which are as good as in most country towns ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.288

they were well pitch'd with small stones ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.289

there are many Descenters in the town FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.290

4 Meeting places with the Quakers and Anabaptists ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.291

there is only the ruines of the Abby walls and the fine gate at the
entrance that remaines stone well carv'd ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.292

it seemes to be a thriveing industrious town 4 gates in it .
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.293

There are a great deale of Gentry which lives in town tho' there are no
good houses but what are old rambling ones , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.294

there are in that they call the Green , a space by the Churches which
are pretty near together , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.295

they are pretty large FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.296

but nothing curious in them , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.297

stone buildings FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.298

no monuments worth notice ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.299

they keep them very clean and neate FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.300

and have a moveable scaffold to clean the roofe and windows and walls ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.301

it@ @s a very dear place FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.302

so much Company living in the town makes provision scarce and dear ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.303

however it@ @s a good excuse to raise the reckoning on strangers .
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,152.304

<P_153>

Thence I went to Admiral Russells who is now Lord Orford ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.306

a long 10 mile FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.307

and loseing my way made it 12 mile , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.308

it@ @s pretty good way ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.309

I passed by a village or two FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.310

and in a mile of Lord Orffords house I enter Cambridgeshire ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.311

it stands 3 mile from New Market FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.312

you ride in sight of New Market Heath where the races are ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.313

it@ @s good road ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.314

here are severall good gardens well kept good gravell and green walks
with fine greens and flowers walled in and all the outhouses very
handsome ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.315

a coach yard and stables in the middle of which is a large gate into the
ground and built over with a high lanthorn where hangs the clock and
bell , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.316

this stands higher than the house like a tower , the house being a flat
roofe leaded and railed round full of chimneys ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.317

but this tower I saw 10 mile off ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.318

all the out offices built round a court very handsome ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.319

the hall is very noble paved with freestone a squaire of black marble at
each corner of the freestone ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.320

there are two fine white marble tables veined with blew ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.321

it@ @s wanscoated with Wallnut tree the pannells and rims round with
Mulbery tree that is a lemon coullour FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.322

and the moldings beyond it round are of a sweete outlandish wood not
much differing from Cedar but of a finer graine ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.323

the chaires are all the same ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.324

it@ @s hung with pictures att full proportion of the Royal family ; all
in their coronation robes from Charles the First to his Majesty with the
Queen also , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.325

and at the end is Prince George and Princess Ann , in their robes of
crimson velvet and Dukel coronet as Duke and Dutchess of Cumberland ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.326

the whole house is finely furnish'd with differing coulloured damask and
velvets some figured and others plaine , at least 6 or 7 in all richly
made up after a new mode ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.327

in the best drawing roome was a very rich hanging gold and silver and a
little scarlet , mostly tissue and brocade of gold and silver and border
of green damaske round it ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.328

the window curtain the same green damaske and doore curtaines ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.329

there was no looking-glass FIENNES-1698-E3-H,153.330

but on the <P_154> chimney-piece and just opposite in the place a
looking glass used to be was 4 pannells of glass in length and 3 in
breadth set together in the wanscoate ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.331

the same was in another drawing roome which was for my Lord ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.332

the dineing roome had this looking glass on the two peers between the
three windows FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.333

it was from the top to the bottom 2 pannells in breadth and 7 in length
, so it shews one from top to toe ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.334

the roomes were all well wanscoated and hung FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.335

and there was the finest carv'd wood in fruitages herbages gemms beasts
fowles , etc. , very thinn and fine all in white wood without paint or
varnish , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.336

the severall sorts of things thus carv'd were exceeding naturall all
round ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.337

the chimney pieces and the sconces stand on each side the chimneys and
the glasses in those chambers where were loose looking-glasses , which
were with fine carv'd head and frames some of the naturall wood others
gilt , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.338

but they were the largest looking-glasses I ever saw ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.339

there was a great flower pott gilt each side the chimney in the dineing
roome for to sett trees in ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.340

the great curiosity of this wood carving about the doores chimneys and
sconces together with the great looking glass pannells is much talked
off FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.341

and is the finest and most in quantety and numbers that@ @s to be seen
any where ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.342

there is very fine China and silver things andirons and jarrs and
perfume pots of silver ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.343

the common roomes are all new convenient and neate with double doores
lined to prevent noises ; FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.344

the staircase is wanscoated , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.345

very noble fine pictures , FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.346

there is the battle at La Hogue a large sea piece with an inscription of
the Admiralls valour when the great ship the Gunn was burnt , mightily
valued by the French King . FIENNES-1698-E3-H,154.347

