<BEGIN_fitzh-1534-e1-h>

<P_35>

<heading>

26 . HOWE RYE SHULDE BE SHORNE . FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.4

<$$heading>

In the later ende of July , or in the begynnynge of Auguste , is tyme to
shere Rye , the whiche wolde be shorne cleane , and faste bounden .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.6

And in somme places they mowe it , the whiche is not soo good to the
housbandes profytte , FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.7

but it is the sooner done . FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.8

For whan it is mowen , it wyll not be so fast bounden :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.9

and he can not gather it soo cleane , FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.10

but there wyll be moche losse , FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.11

and taketh more rowme in the barne than shorne corne dothe .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.12

And also it wyll not kepe nor saue it selfe from rayne or yll wether ,
whan it standeth in the couer , as the shorne corne wyll do .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.13

<heading>

27 . HOWE TO SHERE WHEATE . FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.15

<$$heading>

Wheate wolde be shorne cleane , and harde bounden in lyke maner ;
FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.17

but for a generall rule , take good hede , that the sherers of all maner
of whyte corne cast not vppe theyr handes hastely ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.18

for thanne all the lose corne , and the strawes , that he holdeth not
fast in his hande , flieth ouer his heed , FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.19

and are loste : FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.20

and also it wyll pull of the eares , and specyallye of the cornes that
be verye rype . FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.21

In somme places they wyll shere theyr cornes hyghe , to the entente to
mowe theyr stubble , eyther to thacke or to bren : FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.22

if they so do , they haue greate cause to take good hede of the sherers
. FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.23

For if the eares of corne croke downe to the erthe , and the sherer take
not good hede , and put up the eare er he cut the strawe : as many eares
as be vnder his hoke or sicle fall to the erthe , FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.24

and be loste ; FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.25

and whan they mowe the stubble , it is great hyndraunce to the profytte
of the grounde . FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.26

And in Sommersetshire , about Zelcestre and Martok , they doo shere
theyr wheate very lowe , FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.27

and all the wheate-strawe that they pourpose to make thacke of , they do
not thresshe it , FITZH-1534-E1-H,35.28

but cutte of the <P_36> eares , FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.29

and bynde it in sheues , FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.30

and call it rede : FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.31

and therwith they thacke theyr houses . FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.32

And if it be a newe house , they thacke it vnder theyr fote : the whiche
is the beste and the surest thacking that can be of strawe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.33

for crowes and douues shall neuer hurte it . FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.34

<heading>

28 . TO MOWE OR SHERE BARLEY AND OTES . FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.36

<$$heading>

Barley and otes be moste commonly mowen , FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.38

and a man or woman folowythe the mower with a hande-rake halfe a yarde
longe , with .vii. or .viii. tethe , in the lyfte hande , and a syckle
in the ryghte hande , FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.39

and with the rake he gethereth as moche as wyll make a shefe .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.40

And thanne he taketh the barley or otes by the toppes ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.41

and pulleth out as moche as wil make a band , FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.42

and casteth the band from him on the land , FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.43

and with his rake and his syckle taketh vp the barley or otes ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.44

& layeth them vppon the bande , FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.45

and so the barley lyeth vnbounden .iii. or .iiii. dayes , if it be
fayre wether , FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.46

and than to bynde it . FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.47

And whan the barley is ledde away , the landes muste be raked ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.48

or els there wyll be moche corne loste , FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.49

and if the barley or otes lye , they muste nedes be shorne .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.50

<heading>

29 . TO REPE OR MOWE PEES AND BEANES . FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.52

<$$heading>

Pees and benes be moste commonly laste reped or mowen , of diuers maners
, some with sickles , some with hokes , and some with staffe-hokes .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.54

And in some places they lay them on repes , FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.55

and whan they be dry , they laye them to-gether on heapes , lyke
hey-cockes , FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.56

and neuer bynde them . FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.57

But the beste way is , whan the repes be dry , to bynde them , and to
set theym on the rydge of the landes three sheues to-gether ;
FITZH-1534-E1-H,36.58

and loke that your sherers , repers , or mowers geld not your beanes ,
that is to saye , to cutte the beanes so hye , <P_37> that the
nethermoste codde growe styll on the stalke ; FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.59

and whan they be bounden , they are the more redyer to lode and vnlode ,
to make a reke , and to take fro the mowe to thresshe .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.60

And soo be not the repes . FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.61

<heading>

30 . HOWE ALL MANER OF CORNES SHULDE BE TYTHED . FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.63

<$$heading>

Nowe that all these cornes before specyfyed be shorne , mowed , reped ,
bounden vp , and layde vppon the rydge of the lande , lette the
housbande take hede of goddes commaundemente , FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.65

and let hym goo to the ende of his lande , and begynne and tell .ix.
sheues , FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.66

and let hym caste out the .x. shefe in the name of god , and so to
pervse from lande to lande , tyll he haue trewely tythed all his corne .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.67

And beware , FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.68

and take hede of the sayinge of our lorde by his prophete Malachias ,
the whiche saythe , Quia michi non dedisti decimas et primitias , id
circo in fame et penuria maledicti estis . FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.69

That is to saye , Bycause ye haue not gyuen to me your tythes , and your
fyrste-fruytes , therefore ye be cursed , and punysshed with honger and
penury . FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.70

And accordynge to that saynte Austyn saythe : Da decimas , alioqui
incides in decimam partem angelorum qui de celo corruerunt in infernum .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.71

That is to say , Gyue thy tythes truely , or els thou shalt fall amonge
the tenthe parte of aungelles that felle from heuen in-to hell , the
whiche is an harde worde to euery man , that oughte to gyue tythes , and
doth not gyue them truely . FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.72

But saynte Austyne saythe a comfortable worde again , to them that gyue
theyr tythes truely , FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.73

that is to saye : Decimae sunt tributa egentium animarum :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.74

Tythes are tributes or rewardes to nedye soules . FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.75

And ferther he saythe : Si decimam dederis , non solum abundantiam
fructum recipies , sed etiam sanitatem corporis et animae consequeris ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,37.76

That is to saye , If thou haue gyuen thy tythes truely , thou shalte not
onely receyue the profite , and the abundaunce <P_38> of goodes ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.77

but also helthe of bodye and soule shall folowe . FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.78

Wolde to god , that euerye man knewe the harde worde of our lorde by his
prophete Malachias , and also the comfortable wordes of the holy saynte
Austyn . FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.79

For than wolde I truste verely , that tythes shulde be truely gyuen .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.80

<heading>

31 . HOWE ALL MANER OF CORNE SHULDE BE COUERED . FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.82

<$$heading>

Nowe these cornes be shorne and bounden , and the tithes cast out , it
is tyme to couer theym , shoke theym , or halfe-throne them ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.84

but couerynge is the beste waye of all maner of whyte corne .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.85

And that is , to set foure sheues on one syde , and .iiii. sheues on
the other syde , and two sheues aboue , of the greatteste , bounden
harde nyghe to the nether ende , the whiche must be set vpwarde , and
the top downewarde spredde abrode to couer all the other sheues .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.86

And they wyll stand beste in wynde , and saue theym-selfe beste in rayne
, FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.87

and they wolde be set on the rydge of the lande , FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.88

and the sayde sheues to leane to-gether in the toppes , and wyde at the
grounde , that the winde may go through , to drye them .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.89

Pees and beanes wolde be set on the rydge of the lande , thre sheues
together , the toppes vpwarde , and wrythen together , and wyde benethe
, that they maye the better wyddre . FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.90

<heading>

32 . TO LODE CORNE , AND MOWE IT . FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.92

<$$heading>

Whanne all these cornes be drye and wyddred ynoughe , than lode theym
in-to the barne , FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.94

and laye euerye corne by it-selfe . FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.95

And if be a wete haruest , make many mowes : FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.96

and if thou haue not housynge ynoughe , thanne it is better to laye thy
pees and benes without vppon a reke , than {COM:it_is_to_lay_outside}
other corne , FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.97

and it is better vppon a scaffolde than vppon the grounde :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,38.98

for than it muste be well hedged <P_39> for swyne and catel ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.99

and the grounde wyll rotte the bottom , FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.100

and the scaffolde saueth both hedgynge and rottynge :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.101

but they must be well couered bothe . FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.102

And the husband may set shepe or catel vnder the same scaffold
FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.103

and wyll serue hym in stede of an house , if it be well and surely made
, &c. FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.104

<heading>

33 . THE SECOND STURRYNGE . FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.106

<$$heading>

In August , and in the begynnyng of September , is tyme to make his
seconde sturrynge , FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.108

and most commonly it is cast downe and plowed a meane forowe , not to
depe nor to ebbe , so he turne it clene . FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.109

And if it be caste , it wolde be water-forowed bytwene the landes ,
there-as the reane shulde be , FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.110

and it wyll be the dryer , whan the lande shall be sowen .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.111

And if the landes lie high in the ridge , & highe at the reane , & lowe
in the myddes of the side , that the water may not ronne easely in-to
the reane , as I se dayly in many places : than let the husband set his
plough .iii. or .iiii. fote from the rydge , and cast all the rydge on
bothe sydes , and whan the rydge is cast , set his plough there-as he
began , and rydge vp the remenant of the lande , FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.112

and so is the land bothe cast and rydged , and all at one plowynge .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.113

And this shall cause the lande to lye rounde , whan it is sowen at the
nexte tyme , FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.114

and than shall it not drowne the corne . FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.115

<heading>

34 . TO SOWE WHEAT AND RYE . FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.117

<$$heading>

Aboute Myghelmasse it is tyme to sowe bothe wheate and rye .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.119

Wheate is mooste commonlye sowen vnder the forowe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.120

that is to saye , caste it vppon the falowe , FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.121

and than plowe it vnder . FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.122

And in some places they sowe theyr wheate vppon theyr pees-stubble , the
whiche is neuer soo good , as that that is sowen vppon the falowe :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,39.123

and that is vsed , where they make falowe in a fyelde euery <P_40>
fourthe yere . FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.124

And in Essex they vse to haue a chylde , to go in the forowe before the
horses or oxen , with a bagge or a hopper full of corne :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.125

and he taketh his hande full of corne , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.126

and by lyttel and lytel casteth it in the sayde forowe .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.127

Me semeth , that chylde oughte to haue moche dyscretion .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.128

Howe-be-it there is moche good corne , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.129

and rye is mooste commonlye sowen aboue and harrowed ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.130

and two London busshelles of wheate and rye wyll sowe an acre .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.131

Some grounde is good for wheate , some for rye , and some is good for
bothe : FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.132

and vppon that ground sowe blend-corne , that is both wheate and rye ,
the whyche is the surest corne of growyng , and good for the husbandes
houshold . FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.133

And the wheate , that shall be medled with rye , muste be suche as wyll
soone be rype , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.134

and that is flaxen wheate , polerd wheate , or whyte wheate .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.135

And ye shall vnderstande , that there be dyuers maners of wheates .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.136

Flaxen wheate hath a yelowe eare , and bare without anis ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.137

and is the bryghtest wheate in the busshell , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.138

and wyll make the whytest breed , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.139

and it wyll weare the grounde sore , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.140

and is small strawe , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.141

and wyll growe very thycke , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.142

and is but small corne . FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.143

Polerde wheate hath noo anis , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.144

thycke sette in the eare , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.145

and wyll soone fall out , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.146

and is greatter corne , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.147

and wyll make whyte breed . FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.148

Whyte wheate is lyke polerde wheate in the busshell ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.149

but it hath anis , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.150

and the eare is foure-square , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.151

and wyll make white breed : FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.152

and in Essex they call flaxen wheate whyte wheate .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.153

Red wheate hath a flat eare , an inche brode , full of anis ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.154

and is the greatteste corne , and the brodeste blades , and the
greatteste strawe , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.155

and wyl make whyte breed , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.156

and is the rudeste of colour in the busshell . FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.157

Englysshe wheate hath a dunne eare , fewe anis or none ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.158

and is the worste wheate , saue peeke-wheate . FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.159

Peekewheete hath a red eare , ful of anis , thyn set ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.160

and ofte tymes it is flyntered , FITZH-1534-E1-H,40.161

that is to saye , small corne wrynkeled <P_41> and dryed ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.162

and wyll not make whyte breade , FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.163

but it wyl growe vpon colde grounde . FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.164

<heading>

35 . TO THRESSHE AND WYNOWE CORNE . FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.166

<$$heading>

This wheate and rye , that thou shalte sowe , ought to be very cleane of
wede , FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.168

and therfore , er thou thresshe thy corne , open thy sheues , and pyke
oute all maner of wedes , and than thresshe it , and wynowe it cleane ,
and so shalt thou haue good clene corne an other yere .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.169

And in some countreys , aboute London specyallye , and in Essex and
Kente , they do fan theyr corne , the whiche is a verye good gise , and
a great saueguarde for shedynge of the corne . FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.170

And whan thou shalte sell it , if it be well wynowed or fande , it wyll
be solde the derer , FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.171

and the lyghte corne wyll serue the husbande in his house .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.172

<heading>

36 . TO SEUER PEES , BEANES , AND FYTCHES . FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.174

<$$heading>

Whan thou haste thresshed thy pees , and beanes , after they be wynowed
, and er thou shalte sowe or selle them , let theym be well reed with
syues , and seuered in thre partes , the great from the small , and thou
shalte gette in euerye quarter a London busshell , or there about .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.176

For the small corne lyeth in the holowe and voyde places of the greate
beanes , FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.177

and yet shall the greate beanes be solde as dere , as
{COM:they_would_be_sold} if they were all together , or derer , as a man
may proue by a famylier ensample . FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.178

Let a man bye .C. hearynges , two hearynges for a penye , and an other
.C. hearynges , thre for a peny , FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.179

and let hym sell these .CC. hearinges agayne .v. heringes for .ii. d.
; FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.180

nowe hath he loste .iiii. d . FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.181

For C. hearinges , .ii. for i .d. , cost v .s. ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.182

and C. hearynges , .iii. for a peny , coste .iii s. and .iiii d. ,
the whiche is .viii. s and .iiii. d. ; FITZH-1534-E1-H,41.183

and whan he selleth .v. herynges for .ii. d. , xx. heringes cometh
but <P_42> to .viii. d. FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.184

and there is but .xii._score heringes , FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.185

and that is but .xii. grotes , and xii. grotes ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.186

and that cometh but to .viii. s. FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.187

and so he hath lost .iiii. d. FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.188

and it is bicause there be not so many bargeins , FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.189

for in the bienge of these .CC. heringes there be .v._score bargeins ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.190

and in the sellinge of the same there be but .xlviii. bargeyns ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.191

and so is there lost .x. hearinges , the whiche wolde haue ben .ii.
bargeyns moo , FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.192

and than it had ben euen and mete . FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.193

And therfore he that byeth grosse sale , and retayleth , muste nedes be
a wynner . FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.194

And so shalt thou be a loser , if thou sell thy pees , beanes , and
fytches together : FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.195

for than thou sellest grosse sale . FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.196

And if thou seuer them in thre partes , than thou doest retayle , wherby
thou shalte wynne . FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.197

<heading>

37 . OF SHEPE , AND WHAT TYME OF THE YERE THE RAMMES SHULDE BE PUT TO
THE EWES . FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.199

<$$heading>

An housbande can not well thryue by his corne , without he haue other
cattell , nor by his cattell , without corne . FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.201

For els he shall be a byer , a borower , or a begger .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.202

And bycause that shepe in myne opynyon is the mooste profytablest
cattell that any man can haue , therfore I pourpose to speake fyrst of
shepe . FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.203

Than fyrst is to be knowen , what tyme thou shalt put thy rammes to thy
ewes ; FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.204

and therin I make a distinction , FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.205

for euery man maye not put to theyr rammes all at one tyme ;
FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.206

for if they doo , there wyll be greate hurte and losse ;
FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.207

for that man , that hath the best shepe-pasture for wynter , and soone
spryngynge in the begynnynge of the yere , he maye suffre his rammes to
goo with his ewes all tymes of the yere , to blyssomme or ryde whan they
wyll : FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.208

but for the comon pasture , it is tyme to put to his rammes at the
Exaltation of the holye crosse : FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.209

for than the bucke goth to the rut , FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.210

and so wolde the ramme . FITZH-1534-E1-H,42.211

But for the common husbande , that hath noo pasture but the common
fieldes , it is tyme ynoughe at the feste of <P_43> saynt Mychaell the
archangel . FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.212

And for the poore housbande of the Peeke , or suche other , that dwell
in hylly and hyghe groundes , that haue no pastures , nor common fieldes
, but all-onely the comon hethe , Symon and Jude daye is good tyme for
theym , FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.213

and this is the reason why . FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.214

An ewe goth with lambe .xx. wekes , FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.215

and shall yeane her lambe in the .xxi. weke ; FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.216

& if she haue not conueniente newe grasse to eate , she maye not gyue
her lambe mylke : FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.217

and for wante of mylke , there be manye lambes perysshed and loste :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.218

and also for pouertye , the dammes wyll lacke mylke , and forsake theyr
lambes , FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.219

and soo often tymes they dye bothe in suche harde countreys .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.220

<heading>

38 . TO MAKE AN EWE TO LOUE HER LAMBE . FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.222

<$$heading>

If thy ewe haue mylke , and wyll not loue her lambe , put her in a
narowe place made of bordes , or of smothe trouse , a yarde wyde ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.224

and put the lambe to her , FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.225

and socle it , FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.226

and yf the ewe smyte the lambe with her heed , bynd her heed with a
heye-rope , or a corde , to the syde of the penne :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.227

and if she wyl not stande syde_longe all the lambe , than gyue her a
lyttell hey , and tye a dogge by her , that she maye se hym : and this
wyll make her to loue her lambe shortely . FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.228

And if thou haue a lambe deed , wherof the damme hath moche mylke , fley
that lambe , and tye that skynne vpon an other lambes backe , that hath
a sory damme , with lyttell mylke , and put the good ewe and that lambe
together in the penne , and in one houre she wyll loue that lambe ;
FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.229

& than mayst thou take thy sory weyke ewe awaye , and put her in an
other place : FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.230

and by this meanes thou mayste fortune to saue her lyfe , and the lambes
bothe . FITZH-1534-E1-H,43.231

<P_44>

<heading>

39 . WHAT TYME LAMBES SHULDE BE WAYNED . FITZH-1534-E1-H,44.234

<$$heading>

In some places they neuer seuer their lambes from theyr dammes ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,44.236

and that is for two causes : FITZH-1534-E1-H,44.237

One is , in the beste pasture where the rammes goo alwaye with theyr
ewes , there it nedeth not , FITZH-1534-E1-H,44.238

for the dammes wil waxe drye , and wayne theyr lambes theym-selfe .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,44.239

An other cause is , he that hath noo seuerall and sounde pasture , to
put his lambes vnto whan they shoulde be wayned , he muste eyther sell
them , or let them sucke as longe as the dammes wyll suffre theym ;
FITZH-1534-E1-H,44.240

and it is a common sayinge , that the lambe shall not rotte , as longe
as it souketh , excepte the damme wante meate . FITZH-1534-E1-H,44.241

But he that hath seueral and sounde pasture , it is tyme to wayne theyr
lambes , whanne they be .xvi. wekes old , or .xviii. at the farthest ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,44.242

and the better shall the ewe take the ramme agayne .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,44.243

And the poore man of the peeke countreye , and suche other places ,
where as they vse to mylke theyr ewes , they vse to wayne theyr lambes
at xii. wekes olde , and to mylke theyr ewes fiue or syxe wekes , &c.
FITZH-1534-E1-H,44.244

But those lambes be neuer soo good as the other that sucke longe , and
haue meate ynoughe . FITZH-1534-E1-H,44.245

<P_95>

<heading>

146 . WHAT WARKES A WYFE SHULDE DO IN GENERALL .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.248

<$$heading>

First in a mornyng whan thou arte waked , and purposeste to ryse , lyfte
vp thy hande , FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.250

and blesse the , FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.251

and make a sygne of the holy crosse , In nomine patris , et filii , et
spiritus sancti . Amen . FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.252

In the name of the father , the sonne , and the holy gooste .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.253

And if thou saye a Pater noster , an Aue , and a Crede , and remember
thy maker , thou shalte spede moche the better . FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.254

And whan thou arte vp and redy , than first swepe thy house ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.255

dresse vp thy dyssheborde , FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.256

and sette all thynges in good order within thy house :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.257

milke thy kye , FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.258

socle thy calues , FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.259

sye vp thy mylke , FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.260

take vppe thy chyldren FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.261

and araye theym , FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.262

and prouyde for thy husbandes brekefaste , dynner , souper , and for thy
chyldren and seruauntes , FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.263

and take thy parte with theym . FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.264

And to ordeyne corne and malte to the myll , to bake and brue withall
whanne nede is . And meete it to the myll , and fro the myll ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.265

and se that thou haue thy measure agayne besyde the tolle , or elles the
myller dealeth not truely with the , FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.266

or els thy corne is not drye as it shoulde be . FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.267

Thou must make butter , and chese whan thou maist , serue thy swyne
bothe mornyng and euenynge , and gyue thy poleyn meate in the mornynge ;
FITZH-1534-E1-H,95.268

<P_96> and whan tyme of the yere cometh , thou must take hede howe thy
hennes , duckes , and geese do ley , and to gather vp theyr egges , and
whan they waxe brodye , to sette them there as noo beastes , swyne , nor
other vermyn hurte them . FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.269

And thou muste knowe , that all hole-footed fowles wyll sytte a moneth ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.270

and all clouen-footed fowles wyll sytte but three wekes , excepte a
peyhenne , and greatte fowles , as cranes , bustardes , and suche other
. FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.271

And whan they haue broughte forthe theyr byrdes , to see that they be
well kepte from the gleyd , crowes , fullymartes , and other vermynne .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.272

And in the begynnynge of Marche , or a lyttell afore , is tyme for a
wyfe to make her garden , and to gette as many good sedes and herbes as
she canne , and specially suche as be good for the potte , and to eate :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.273

and as ofte as nede shall requyre , it muste be weded ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.274

for els the wedes wyl ouergrowe the herbes . FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.275

And also in Marche is tyme to sowe flaxe and hempe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.276

for I haue harde olde houswyues saye , that better is Marche hurdes than
Apryll flaxe , FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.277

the reason appereth : FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.278

but howe it shulde be sowen , weded , pulled , repeyled , watred ,
wasshen , dryed , beaten , braked , tawed , hecheled , spon , wounden ,
wrapped , and wouen , it nedeth not for me to shewe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.279

for they be wise ynough ; FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.280

and therof may they make shetes , bordclothes , towels , shertes ,
smockes , and suche other necessaryes , FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.281

and therfore let thy dystaffe be alwaye redye for a pastyme , that thou
be not ydle . FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.282

And vndouted a woman can-@ @not gette her lyuynge honestely with
spynnynge on the distaffe , FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.283

but it stoppeth a gap , FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.284

and muste nedes be had . FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.285

The bolles of flaxe , whan they be ripeled of , must be rideled from the
wedes , and made drye with the son , to get out the sedes .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.286

Howe_be_it one maner of linsede , called loken sede , wyll not open by
the son : FITZH-1534-E1-H,96.287

and therfore , whan they be drye , they muste be sore brused and broken
, the wiues knowe howe , and than winowed and kepte drye , tyll
yere-tyme come <P_97> agayn . FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.288

Thy female hempe must be pulled from the churle hempe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.289

for that beareth no sede , FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.290

and thou must do by it , as thou dydest by the flax .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.291

The churle hempe beareth sede , FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.292

and beware that byrdes eate it not , as it groweth :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.293

the hemp therof is not soo good as the female hempe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.294

but yet it wyll do good seruyce . FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.295

May fortune somtime , that thou shalt haue so many thinges to do , that
thou shalt not well knowe where is best to begyn .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.296

Than take hede , which thing shulde be the greattest losse , if it were
not done , and in what space it wold be done : FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.297

than thinke what is the greatest losse , FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.298

& there begyn . FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.299

But in case that thynge , that is of greateste losse , wyll be longe in
doynge , and thou myghteste do thre or foure other thynges in the meane
whyle , thanne loke well , if all these thynges were sette together ,
whiche of them were the greattest losse ; FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.300

and if all these thynges be of greater losse , and may be all done in as
shorte space , as the other , than doo thy many thynges fyrste .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.301

It is conuenyente for a housbande to haue shepe of his owne , for many
causes , FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.302

and than maye his wife haue part of the woll , to make her husbande and
her-selfe some clothes . FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.303

And at the leaste waye , she may haue the lockes of the shepe , eyther
to make clothes or blankettes & couerlettes , or bothe .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.304

And if she haue no woll of her owne , she maye take wol to spynne of
clothe-makers , FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.305

and by that meanes she maye haue a conuenyent lyuynge , and many tymes
to do other warkes . FITZH-1534-E1-H,97.306

It is wyues occupation , to wynowe all maner of cornes , to make malte ,
to wasshe and wrynge , to make heye , shere corne , and in tyme of nede
to helpe her husbande to fyll the mucke-wayne or dounge-carte , dryue
the ploughe , to loode hey , corne , and suche other . And to go or
ride to the market , to sel butter , chese , mylke , egges , chekyns ,
capons , hennes , pygges , gese , and all maner of cornes . And also to
bye all maner of necessarye thynges belongynge to houssholde , and to
<P_98> make a trewe rekenynge and a-compte to her housbande , what she
hath payed . FITZH-1534-E1-H,98.307

And yf the housbande go to the market , to bye or sell , as they ofte do
, he than to shewe his wife in lyke maner . FITZH-1534-E1-H,98.308

For if one of them shoulde vse to deceyue the other , he deceyueth
hym-selfe , FITZH-1534-E1-H,98.309

and he is not lyke to thryue . FITZH-1534-E1-H,98.310

And therfore they muste be trewe eyther to other .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,98.311

I coulde peraduenture shewe the housbandes dyuerse poyntes that the
wyues deceyue them in : and in lyke maner , howe husbandes deceyue theyr
wyues : FITZH-1534-E1-H,98.312

but if I shulde do so , I shulde shewe mo subtyll poyntes of deceypt ,
than eyther of them knewe of before . FITZH-1534-E1-H,98.313

And therfore me semeth beste to holde my peace , least I shoulde do as
the knyght of the toure dyd , the whiche had many fayre doughters , and
of fatherly loue that he oughte to them , he made a boke , to a good
entente , that they myghte eschewe and flee from vyces , and folowe
vertues . In the whiche boke he shewed , that if they were wowed ,
moued , or styred by any man , after suche a maner as he there shewed ,
that they shulde withstande it . In the whiche boke he shewed so many
wayes , howe a man shoulde atteyne to his purpose , to brynge a woman to
vice , the whiche wayes were so naturall , and the wayes to come to
theyr purpose were soo subtylly contryued , and craftely shewed , that
harde it wold be for any woman to resyste or deny theyr desyre .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,98.314

And by the sayd boke hath made bothe the men and the women to knowe more
vyces , subtyltye , and crafte , than euer they shulde haue knowen , if
the boke had not ben made : in the whiche boke he named hym-selfe the
knight of the towre . FITZH-1534-E1-H,98.315

And thus I leue the wyues , to vse theyr occupations at theyr owne
discreation . FITZH-1534-E1-H,98.316

<heading>

147 . TO KEPE MEASURE IN SPENDYNGE . FITZH-1534-E1-H,98.318

<$$heading>

Nowe thou husbande and huswyfe , that haue done <P_99> your diligence
and cure , accordynge to the fyrste artycle of the philosopher , that is
to saye : Adhibe curam . And also haue well remembred the sayeng of
wyse Salomon : Quod ociosus non gaudebit cum electis in caelo : sed
lugebit in aeternum cum reprobis in inferno : Thanne ye must remembre ,
obserue , and kepe in mind , the seconde article of the sayinge of the
philosopher , that is to saye , Tene mensuram : FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.320

That is to saye in englysshe , holde and kepe measure .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.321

And accordynge to that sayenge , I lerned two verses at grammer-schole ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.322

and they be these , Qui plus expendit , quam rerum copia rendit : Non
admiretur , si paupertate grauetur : FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.323

he that dothe more expende , thanne his goodes wyll extende , meruayle
it shall not be , thoughe he be greued with pouertee .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.324

And also accordynge to that sayenge speketh sayncte Paul
FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.325

and saythe , Iuxta facultates faciendi sunt sumptus , ne longi temporis
victum , breuis hora consumat : FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.326

That is to saye , After {COM:preceding_word_"After"_emended} thy faculty
or thy honoure , make thyne expences , leste thou spende in shorte space
that thynge , that thou shouldest lyue by longe .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.327

This texte toucheth euery manne , from the hyest degree to the loweste ;
wherfore it is necessary to euerye manne and womanne to remembre and
take good hede there-vnto , for to obserue , kepe , and folowe the same
; FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.328

but bycause this texte of sayncte Paule is in latyn , and husbandes
commonely can but lyttell laten , I fere leaste they can-@ @not
vnderstande it . And thoughe it were declared ones or twyse to theym ,
that they wolde forgette it : Wherfore I shall shewe to theym a texte in
englysshe , FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.329

and that they maye well vnderstande , FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.330

and that is this , Eate within thy tedure . FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.331

<heading>

148 . TO EATE WITHIN THE TEDURE . FITZH-1534-E1-H,99.333

<$$heading>

Thou husbande and huswife , that intend to folowe the sayinge of the
philosopher , that is to saye , kepe <P_100> measure , you muste spare
at the brynke , and not at the bottom , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.335

that is to vnderstande , in the begynnynge of the yere , sellynge of thy
cornes , or spendynge in thy house , vnto the tyme that thou haue sowen
agayne thy wynter-corne , and thy lente-corne , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.336

and than se what remayneth to serue thy house , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.337

and of the ouerplus thou mayste sell and bye suche other necessaryes ,
as thou must nedes occupie . FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.338

And if thou spende it in the begynnynge of the yere , and shall want in
the hynder ende , than thou doste not eate within thy tedure ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.339

and at the laste thou shalte be punyshed , as I shal proue the by
ensample . FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.340

Take thy horse , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.341

and go FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.342

tedure him vpon thyne owne lees , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.343

flytte hym as ofte as thou wylte , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.344

no manne wyll saye ' wronge thou doste ' ; FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.345

but make thy horse to longe a tedure , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.346

than whan thou haste tyed hym vppon thyne owne lees , his tedure is so
longe , that it recheth to the middes of an-other mans lees or corne :
FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.347

Nowe haste thou gyuen hym to moche lybertye , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.348

and that man , whose corne or grasse thy horse hath eaten , wyll be
greued at the , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.349

and wyll cause the to be amerced in the court , or elles to make hym
amendes , or bothe . FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.350

And if thy horse breake his tedure , and go at large in euery mans corne
and grasse , than commeth the pynder , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.351

and taketh hym , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.352

and putteth hym in the pynfolde , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.353

and there shall he stande in prison , without any meate , vnto the tyme
thou hast payde his raunsome to the pynder , and also make amendes to
thy neyghbours , for distroyenge of theyr corne .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.354

Ryght so , as long as thou eatest within thy tedure , that thou nedest
not to begge nor borowe of noo man , soo longe shalte thou encrease and
growe in rychesse , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.355

and euery man wyll be content with the . FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.356

And if thou make thy tedure to longe , that thyne owne porcyon wyll not
serue the , but that thou shalte begge , borowe , or bye of other : that
wyll not longe endure , FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.357

but thou shalte fall in-to pouertye . FITZH-1534-E1-H,100.358

And if thou breake <P_101> thy tedure , and ren ryot at large , and
knowe not other mennes goodes frome thyne owne , than shall the pynder ,
that is to saye , the sheryffe and the bayly , areste the , and putte
the in the pynfolde , that is to say , in prison , there to abyde tyll
the truth be knowen : FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.359

and it is meruayle , if thou scape with thy lyfe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.360

an therfore eate within thy tedure . FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.361

<heading>

149 . A SHORTE LESSON FOR THE HUSBANDE . FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.363

<$$heading>

One thinge I wyl aduise the to remembre , and specially in wynter-tyme ,
whan thou sytteste by the fyre , and hast supped , to consyder in thy
mynde , whether the warkes , that thou , thy wyfe , & thy seruauntes
shall do , be more auauntage to the than the fyre , and candell-lyghte ,
meate and drynke that they shall spende , FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.365

and if it be more auantage , than syt styll : FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.366

and if it be not , than go to thy bedde FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.367

and slepe , FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.368

and be vppe betyme , FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.369

and breake thy faste before day , that thou mayste be all the shorte
wynters day about thy busynes . FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.370

At grammer-scole I lerned a verse , FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.371

that is this , Sanat , sanctificat , et ditat surgere mane .
FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.372

That is to say , Erly rysyng maketh a man hole in body , holer in soule
, and rycher in goodes . FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.373

And this me semeth shuld be sufficient instruction for the husbande to
kepe measure . FITZH-1534-E1-H,101.374

