<BEGIN_forman-1602-e2-h>

<P_1>

In Dei nomine , Amen . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,1.3

This is the bocke of the life and generation of Simon , the sonn of
William , the sonn of Richard , the sonne of Ser Thomas of Ledes , the
sonn of Ser Thomas Forman , of Furnifales , and of An his wife ,
daughter of Ser Antony Smithe , &c. borne in the yeare from the
Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ 1552 , the 30. of December , beinge
Saturday and new yere's eve , at 45 minutes after 9 of the clocke at
nighte , of the naturalle bodie of Marie , wife of the said William
Forman aforsaid , and daughter of Jhon Foster , esquier , by Marienne
Hallom , his wife , in a village called Quidhampton , in the countie of
Wilts , sytuate in the valley on the north side of the river betwene
Wilton and Sarum , whose parents were well descended and of good
reputation and fame , and havinge many childrene and they disposed
diversly . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,1.4

He had by the saide Marie six sonnes and too daughters , <P_2> viz.
William , the eldest : Jone , the second , which after married with
William Hannom , gentleman , whose father was sometymes Maior of Sarum ,
by whom she had noe yssue ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.5

after his death , she maried on William Brincke , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.6

and died without yssue . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.7

The third child of the said William and Marie was Henrie , that after
toke to wife An the daughter of Thomas Harte , and had by her yssue a
daughter named An . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.8

The fowarth was Richard , whoe toke to wife Sissely Parlet , the sole
ayer of Jhon Parlete , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.9

and she died in childbed , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.10

and after he toke to his second wife Jone Warum , by whom he had three
children , Jhon , Dority and Richard , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.11

and she also died . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.12

The fifte child of the saide William and Mary was this Simon , whoe in
the 47. yeare of his age toke to wife , through the grace and wil of
God , Ane , the daughter of Jhon Baker , of Kente , a cyvilian , and of
Dorytie Monninges , the daughter of Sir Edward Monninges , of Kente ,
knighte , to whom was alyed many howses of honor and worshipe , as the
Cliffordes , the Sandes , the Lovelesses , the Chitches , the Finches ,
the Alifes , the Grindfordes , the Kempes , the Agers , and many
knightes and ladies , as the Erelle of Comberlan , Sir James Clifford ,
Sir Michell Sandes , the Ladie Loveles , the Ladie Ashenden , and divers
others , &c. FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.13

The sixte childe of the said William and Mary was Robarte , whoe toke to
wife Jon , the daughter of Steaven Pore , gentleman , of Dorsetshire ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.14

and the sam Robarte died leavinge his said wife with child .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.15

The seventh child of the said William and Marie was a daughter , alsoe
named Jone . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.16

And the laste and yongeste was Johne , which too were not maried aft 40
yers of age . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.17

And this was specially to be noted in the children of the said William
and Marie , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.18

there was never any of them did marry till they were at leste 34 yers of
age . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,2.19

And it is recorded in auncient <P_3> bockes that ther ar three thinges
specially noted in the name of the Formans , that is , ther was never
any of them proud , covetouse , nor a traitor ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.20

and that may wel@ @be seen to this daie in the generation .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.21

The father of this Simon died when he was but a_xj. yers old ;
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.22

his mother lived after the death of his father 40 yeres a widdowe ;
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.23

when she was fowar_score_and_xij. yers old , she was a lustie woman ;
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.24

but we will leave them all and speak of the wonderfull life of the sayd
Symon . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.25

<heading>

OF VISIONS THAT THE SAID SYMON HAD , BEINGE YET A CHILDE .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.27

<$$heading>

Simon , beinge a child of six yers old , his father loved him above all
the reste , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.29

but his mother nor brethren loved him not . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.30

His father , for the affecton he had to him , wold alwaies have him ly
at his bedes feete in a lyttle bed for the nonce , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.31

and soe sone as he was alwaies laid downe to slepe , he should see in
visions alwaies many mighti mountaines and hills com rowling againste
him , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.32

although they wold overron him and falle on him and brust him , yet he
gote upp alwaies to the top of them FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.33

and with moch adoe wente over them . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.34

Then should he see many grete waters like to drowne him , boilinge and
raginge against him as thoughe they wolde swallowe him up ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.35

yet he thought he did overpasse them . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.36

And thes dremes and visions he had every nighte continually for 3 or 4
yers space . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.37

Thes visions God did showe him in his youth , to signifie unto him his
trobles in his riper years ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.38

for the mightie mountaines mighte signifie the great and mightie
potentates that he had controversy with afterwards .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.39

And the waters mighte signifie the greate councells that were houlden
againste hime , to overthrowe him ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.40

yet God , the only defendor of all that be His , wold never let him be
overthrowen ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.41

but contynuallye gave him alwaies in the end the victory of alle his
enimies , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.42

and he overpaste all with credite by the helpe of God , to whom be
praise for evermore ! FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.43

Amen . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,3.44

<P_4>

<heading>

HOWE SIMON WAS SET TO SCOLE , WITH WHOM AND WHER .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.47

<$$heading>

When Simon was almoste eyghte yers of age , in those daies when the
souldiars came from Newe-Haven , which was aboute the yere of our Lord
God , 1560 , that the plague began in Salisbury , ther was a certain
minister named William Ryddonte , <font> alias <$$font> Ridear , that by
his trade and occupation was a cobler , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.49

byt after Quen Maries dayes , when the lawe did turne , he was made a
minister , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.50

and soe withalle bacame a scholmaster and teacher of children .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.51

He was a man of som 50 yers , mean of stature , and a black grom sir .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.52

He could read English well , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.53

but he could noe Lattine more then the singell accidens ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.54

and that he lerned of his too sonnes that went daily to a free scolle .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.55

This person , when the plague began , fled from Salisbury for feare
therof , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.56

and cam to dwelle at the priorie of St. Gilles , nere unto the father
of this Simon , to whom this Simon was put to scolle at Michaelmas ,
wher he lerned his letters . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.57

And when he came to lerne " In the name of the Father , " &c. , because
his capacity could not understand the mistery of spellinge , he prayed
his master he mighte goe to scolle noe more , because he should never
learne yt ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.58

but his said master beate him for yt , which made him the more diligent
to his bocke , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.59

and after som four dais , when he had pondered theron well and had the
reason thereof , he learned yt . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.60

And after that , his master never beate him for his bocke again .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.61

And he profited soe well , that in on yeare or lyttle more he had lerned
his single accidentes and his rules clean out . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.62

And bording with this priste in the winter time , he wold make him lie
alwaies naked , which kepte him in greete feare . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.63

And after this he was put to the free scolle in the Close at Salisbury ,
with on Doctor Booles , which was a very furiouse man , with whom he
wente to scole som too yeares . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,4.64

Then did the said Simon bord at one Mr. Hauknightes , that somtyme
<P_5> was register to the bishope , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.65

and nere unto this Mr. Hauknighte dwelt a cannon of the churche named
Mr. Mintorne , to whom many tymes this Simon wente .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.66

And this cannon seldom or never kepte any fier in his house ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.67

but he had some lode of faggots lying in a house , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.68

and alwaies when he was a-cold , he wold goe and carry his faggots up
into a lofte till he was hote ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.69

and when he had caried them all up , he wold fetch them downe again and
burn none , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.70

and soe he made this Simon doe many a tyme and ofte to catch a heate ,
saying yt was better to heat himself soe then to syt by the fier .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.71

Soe he went to scolle som too years with Docter Bolles ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.72

and then aboute the yeare of our Lord God , 1563 , at Christmas , his
father had him , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.73

and on the new yeare's eave after at nighte the father of the said Simon
died , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.74

for he had kepte a great Christmas , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.75

and on the day before new yer's eve he walked abrod to his ground with
on of his men . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.76

And ther came a dove , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.77

and lighted before him , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.78

and alwaies rane before him , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.79

and many tymes they offered to catch yt , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.80

and yt wold rise up and falle downe againe , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.81

and so they folowed it till it ran into a neighbour's wodbine ;
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.82

and the same nighte aboute midnighte , after the dancing and sporte was
almoste ended , he going into his chamber to goe to bed , on as he
thoughte stroke him in the necke , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.83

and he toke his bed , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.84

and died just 24 howrs after . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.85

<heading>

HOWE SYMON AFTER HIS FATHERS DEATH WAS PUT TO SHIFTE FOR HIMSELFE , AND
WENT TO DWELL WITH HIS AUNTE FOR TWO YERS . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.87

<$$heading>

After the father of Symon was dead , his mother , who never loved him ,
grudged at his beinge at hom ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.89

and what faulte soever was committed by any the reste , he was allwaies
beaten for yt , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.90

and she suffred him to goo to scolle no longer , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.91

but set him to kepe shepe , and to plowe and gathering of stickes and
such like . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,5.92

The boy beinge but a_xj. yers old juste at the death of his father ,
yet having reasonable wit and discretion , and being nymber_sprited and
apte to any thinge , seeynge the hatred of his mother and of the reste
of his brethren and sisters towardes him , and <P_6> that he could not
followe his bocke nor be at quiete , he put himself an apprentice to on
Mathewe Comins of Sarum at 14 yers , which useth many occupations .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.93

Firste he was a hosier , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.94

and therby he lerned to sowe and to make a hose ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.95

then he was a merchante of cloth , and of alle smalle wares ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.96

and sold hops , salte , oille , pitch , rosine , raisons , and all
poticary drugs and grocery , wherby the said Simon learned the knowledge
of alle wares and drugs , and howe to buy and selle ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.97

and grue soe apte , and had such good fortune , that in shorte tyme his
master committed all to his charge . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.98

But ther fell out many controversyes betwen his mistres and him ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.99

and she wold often beate him , especially for on Jean Cole , her
sister's daughter , which she kepte . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.100

<heading>

HOWE SYMON BEATE MARY ROBARTES , HIS MASTERS MAIDE .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.102

<$$heading>

Nowe when Symon had put himselfe an apprentice for 10 yers , as is said
, with Mathewwe Connin , with condition that he should be
{COM:preceding_word_"be"_emended} 3 yeares at the grammer scole , the
which his master performed not , which was a parte of the cause why he
wente from his master afterwards , as hereafter shall followe . Symon
at firste beinge the yongeste apprentice of four , was put to all the
worste , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.104

and being little and smalle of stature and yong of yers , every on did
triumphe over him , but especially a kitchen maid named Mary Robartes ;
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.105

and oftentymes she wold knock him that the blod should rone aboute his
eares . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.106

Yt fell out in tracte of tyme , within the terme of five yeeres , alle
the other apprentices went away , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.107

and Symon servyd by yt , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.108

and all thinges for the shope was committed to his charge .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.109

On a certain frosty morninge his master and mistress were both gon to
the garden , and there kinswoman with them , leavinge non at home but
Symon and Mary , willing Marye to locke into the shope and helpe , yf
occasion served ; they being gone , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.110

soe {COM:preceding_word_"soe"_emended} many customers came for ware that
Simon could not attend them all , wherupon he calles Mary to stand in
the shope . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.111

And she came forth FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.112

and reviled him with many bitter wordes , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.113

and said shee wold anon have him by the ears , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.114

and soe went her way again . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,6.115

And <P_7> Simon put up all FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.116

and said lyttle , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.117

but made the beste shift he could , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.118

and ryd them all awaie , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.119

and shut the shop dore , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.120

and toke a yerd FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.121

and wente into Mary , who so sone as she sawe him was redy to have him
by the eares , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.122

but Simon stroke her on the handes with his yerd ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.123

and belabored her soe or he wente that he made her black and blue alle
over , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.124

and burst her head and handes , that he laid her alonge crying and
roringe like a bulle , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.125

for he beat her thorowly for all her knavery before to him done .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.126

<heading>

OF THE QUANDARY AND FEAR THAT SIMON WAS IN WHEN HE HAD BEATON MARIE .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.128

<$$heading>

When this combat was ended between Simon and Marie , and that Symon had
gotten the victorie of Marie , he was moch aferd ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.130

for he thoughte yf his mistres should com home first she wole take the
maides parte , and then should Simon be well beaten ; but yf his master
cam firste , then he thoughte yt wold be so moch the better .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.131

And as God wold , his master came firste , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.132

and finding the maid cryinge and howlinge , demaunded the cause ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.133

and she told him that Simon had beaten her . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.134

That@ @'s well like , said he , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.135

but yf he had , said he , he had served thee well ynough ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.136

for thou haste beaten him full ofte . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.137

And with that he asked Simon the cause . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.138

Sir , said he , her came many customers that I could not serve them and
loke to the shop to ; wherefore I called Mary to helpe to attend in the
shope , and see to things ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.139

and she came forth FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.140

and scolded at me , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.141

and wente in again FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.142

and wold not doe it , that people mighte stealle what they wold for her
. FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.143

And because therof , I did give her three or four lambskines with the
yerd . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.144

Thou servedst her well ynough , said he , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.145

and yf she be soe obstinate serve her soe again , said he .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.146

Thes words mad the maid stark mad , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.147

for she thoughte he wolde have pitied her , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.148

but he toke Simon's parte . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.149

And then shee cryed the more , till her mistress came ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.150

and demanded of her the cause , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.151

and she told her . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.152

Then she cam into the shope with open mouth , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.153

but his master stopte her mouth and furie , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,7.154

and wold not suffer her to beate Simon , as she would have don ;
wherupon <P_8> she grudged at him moch , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.155

and kepte it in mind a long tyme after . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.156

But after this Simon and Marie agreed soe well that they never were at
square after , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.157

and Mary wold doe for him all that she could . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.158

And many a pound of butter she yelded in the bottom after for Simon's
breakfaste , which before that she wold never doe .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.159

<heading>

OF THE COMBATE BETWEN SIMON AND THE TOO GODFRIES .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.161

<$$heading>

In this proces of tyme , while Simon dwelte with his said master , they
kepte a stannage at our Ladie faier , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.163

and ther were many knavishe boies which were at play behind the stannage
, FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.164

and thrue stones against the stannage , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.165

and often thruste downe their ware ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.166

and then on Richard Kinge , a jornayman , com to his master to helpe at
that faire , sent Simon out to see who made that quarelle .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.167

And amonge alle the boies ther were too of Godfries sonnes of the Swane
, an inholder , which gave Simon hard wordes , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.168

and said they wold have him by the eares , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.169

and he being somewhat ferful stode abashed , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.170

and the boies wolde not leave their knavery ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.171

at laste out came Kinge , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.172

and findinge thes boies to play the knaves soe with Simon , and
threteninge him , hardned Symon to have them by the eares ;
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.173

soe to buffets they wente . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.174

And Simon beate them bothe , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.175

and made them both give of ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.176

and after that , Simon would not shrinke for a bluddi nose with any boye
, FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.177

for he was then thorowely fleshed by the means of Kinge .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.178

<heading>

HOW SIMON WAS GIVEN TO HIS BOCKE , AND LERNED BY NIGHTE ALL THAT HENRY
GIRD LERNED IN THE DAIE . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.180

<$$heading>

Simon thus beinge with his said master was moch gyven continually to his
bocke , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.182

for he wold never be ydelle , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.183

and many tymes his master chid him that he was soe moch gyven to his
bocke , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.184

and in the end toke alle his Lattin bockes from him , which trobled
Simon his mind moch . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.185

Soe it chaunsed that a kirsy man of Denshire , on Gird of Kirton ,
borded a sonn that he had with Simon's master , that wente every dai to
the free scole , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.186

and he was bedfellowe to Simon ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,8.187

and loke whatsoever he lerned by day , that <P_9> did Simon learne of
him alwaies at nighte , wherby , thoughe he profited himselfe but lyttle
, yet he loste nothinge of that he had before-tyme lerned ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.188

for his mind was moste ardently set on his bocke .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.189

<heading>

HOW A. Y. LOVED SIMON . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.191

<$$heading>

Ther was a man of good reputation and wealth , that dwelte not far from
Simon's master , that had a proper fine maiden to his only daughter ,
the which being but yonge of yeares and younger then Simon , that loved
Simon wonderfull welle , and wold suerly see him once a daie ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.193

or ells she wold be sicke . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.194

And often she wold com to Simon's master , and entreat him very kindly
on holly daies that she might see him or speake with him , and somtymes
to goe to pastymes with her ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.195

and she loved him soe well that yf forty youth were at play before the
dore , in a spacious place which ther was , yf Simon were not amonge
them , she would not be ther ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.196

but yf he were there , none could kepe her from thence .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.197

Yf Simon stode by his master or mistress at the dore she wold com and
stand by him , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.198

and wold not goe from him tille necessity did comple .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.199

And Simon's master well perceyvinge the grete affection of the
gentlewoman towardes Simon , wold often say unto her , mistress An Yene
love my boy welle me@ @thinkes ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.200

and she would aunswer , yea forsothe , yf yt will please youe to give
him leave to go rone with us , wee shall give youe thankes , sir .
Wherupon oftentymes he wold give him leave ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.201

and as for Simon , he loved her not but in kindnes ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.202

but because she was soe kind to Simon , he wold doe anythinge he could
doe for her . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.203

And this love on her syde lasted longe , as herafter shal@ @be showed .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.204

<heading>

HOWE SIMON AND HIS MISTRES FELL AT CONTROVERSY , WHEREUPON SIMON AT
SEVENTEEN YERES OLD AND A HALFE WENTE FROM HIS MASTER .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,9.206

<$$heading>

When Simon had dwelte with his master som six yeres and a halfe , ther
fell out a controversye betwen Simon and his mistres <P_10> aboute a
dossen of flax that his mistres loste from stanning in Simon's absence ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.208

and then wold have laid the blam on Simon , and have beaten him for yt ,
of the whiche Simon thoughte great scorne , because he knewe himselfe
cleare of the matter , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.209

and when she wold have beaten Simon , as she had wonte to doe , with a
yeard , Simon toke the yearde from his mistres , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.210

and thruste her up behind a dore , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.211

and put the dore on her , wherupon she durste not meddle with Simon
again , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.212

but with weeping teares complained to his master , whoe for soe doinge ,
althoughe yt was moch againste his wille , beate Simon for yt ;
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.213

but he knewe his wife to be a wicked , hedstronge , and proud
fantasticalle woman , a consumer and spender of his wealth ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.214

and oftentymes they too were also at square , insomoch that twise he had
like to have killed hir by casting a peire of tailors shers at her ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.215

for once they went so nere her , that as she was going in at a dore , he
nailled her clothes and smock at her buttockes to the dore ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.216

and the pointes of the shers wente clean throughe the dore ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.217

and she honge faste by the taille ; wherupon he swore in his wrath that
yf ever he died before her , he wold never give her anythinge .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.218

Thes controversies were often betwen them , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.219

and many tymes when Simon and his master wente to his farme together ,
some too milles of in the country , they wold on complain to another of
his mistress and her pride . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.220

And his master wold say to him , Simon , thou moste suffer as well as I
myselfe ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.221

thou seeste we can@ @note remadie yt as yet , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.222

but God will send a remadie on daie . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.223

Nowe because Simon's master had beaten him for his mistres sake ,
herselfe being in faulte , Symon told his said master flate that he had
not performed his covenantes according to promise ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.224

and therfore he wold give of the trade and goe to his bocke againe ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.225

and he wepte sorely unto his master , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.226

and entreted him to have his good will ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.227

and his mastre seing he wold needes departe , consented therunto ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.228

and gave him his indenture , at the which his mistres toke on mightily ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.229

and they all wepte , some for joye and some for madnes and rage .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,10.230

<P_11>

<heading>

HOWE SIMON , AFTER HE WAS GONE FROM HIS SAID MASTER , BECAME A SCOLLER
AGAIN AT THE FRE SCOLE . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.233

<$$heading>

Nowe when Simon was gon from his said master , and was at his fre
libertie to serve ells where , he mighte have had mani masters ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.235

but he wold dwell with none , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.236

but provided and wente to the free scolle every day for eight wickes'
space , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.237

and folowed his bocke hard . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.238

Then his mother wold give him meate and drink no longer , nor any
maintenance , wherupon he was dryven to make many hard shiftes ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.239

and he was soe gredy on his bocke , that yf his master wold not have
beaten him , yf he could not say his lesson well , he wold have wepte
and suobbed more than {COM:he_would_have_wept_and_sobbed} yf he had byne
beaten . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.240

And yf his master gave him leave to play , that was death or a grete
punishment to him , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.241

for he wold say , Play , play , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.242

her is nothing but play , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.243

I shall never be a good scoller ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.244

and alwaies when his fellowes wente to playe , he wold goe to his bocke
, or into som secret place to muse and meditate , or into the church .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.245

<heading>

HOWE SIMON BECAME A SCOLMASTRE BEFORE HE WAS EIGHTEEN YERS OLD .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.247

<$$heading>

Simon , percevinge his mother wold doe nothinge for him , was dryven to
great extremity and hunger , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.249

gave of to be a scoller any longer , for lacke of maintenance ;
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.250

and at the priorie of St. Jilles , wher he himselfe was first a scoller
, ther became he a scolmaster , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.251

and taught som thirty boies , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.252

and their parentes among them gave him moste parte of his diet .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.253

And the money he gote he kept , to the some of som 40@ @s. ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.254

and after folowinge when he had bin scolmaster some halfe yere and had
40@ @s. in his purse , he wente to Oxford for to get more lerninge ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.255

and soe left of from being scolmaster . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.256

<heading>

HOWE SIMON WITH ON OF HIS OLD SCOLLEFELLOWES WOLD GOE SEEK OUT OXFORD .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.258

<$$heading>

Nowe it befell in that in the yeare of our Lord God 1573 , the 10. daie
of May , ther was an ardente desier in Simon of further lerninge and
knowledg , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,11.260

and meeting with an old scollefellowe of his , whoe before were allway
brought up together and love {COM:sic} as <P_12> brethren , whose
father-in-lawe was as moch againe him as Simon's mother was againste him
. Thes too confederated together to goe to Oxford ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.261

and did soe , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.262

and ther they became both pore scollers , the on which was Thomas Ridear
in Corpus Christie College , and Symon in Magdalen Colledge .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.263

And every day he wente to the free scolle for a tyme ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.264

and followed his boocke hard allwayes when he could have leysure .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.265

Nowe ther were too Bachelors of Arte that were too of his chife
benefactors ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.266

the one of them was Sir Thornbury , that after was bishope of Limerike ,
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.267

and he was of Magdalen College ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.268

the other was Sir Pinckney his cossine of St. Mary Halle .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.269

Thes too loved him nying welle , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.270

and many tymes wold make Simon to goo forth thro {SIC:tho} Loes the
keper of Shottofer for his houndes to goe on huntinge from morninge to
nighte , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.271

and they never studied nor gave themselves to their bockes , but to goe
to scolles of defence , to the daunceing scolles , to stealle dear and
connyes , and to hunt the hare , and to woinge of wentches ; to goe to
Doctor Lawrence of Cowly , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.272

for he had too fair daughters , Besse and Martha .
FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.273

Sir Thornbury he woed Besse ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.274

and Sir Pinckley he woed Martha , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.275

and in the end he maried her ; FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.276

but Thornbury he deceyved Besse , as the mayor's daughter of Bracly , of
which Ephues writes , deceyved him . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.277

But ther was their ordinary haunt alwaies , FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.278

and thethere muste Symon rone with the bottell and the bage early and
late . FORMAN-1602-E2-H,12.279

