<BEGIN_fox-1674-e3-h>

<P_79>

And then after many words with him I was had backe to prison againe :
FOX-1674-E3-H,79.3

& after a while I was brought uppe before him againe to have sentence
pronounced against mee FOX-1674-E3-H,79.4

& then sentence was deferred till ye next day . FOX-1674-E3-H,79.5

And ye next day I was brought before him againe & Mar: ffell
{COM:the_letters_"ell"_in_the_word_"ffell"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-H,79.6

And after hee had past sentence upon ye theifes then hee askt mee what I
had to say y=t= hee might not passe sentence against mee .
FOX-1674-E3-H,79.7

And I tolde him I had much to say if hee woulde but have patiens to
heare mee . FOX-1674-E3-H,79.8

And then hee laughed FOX-1674-E3-H,79.9

& set others a laughinge
{COM:5_words_from_"&"_to_"laughinge"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-H,79.10

& said come what have you to say : FOX-1674-E3-H,79.11

hee can say nothinge . FOX-1674-E3-H,79.12

Yes said I : FOX-1674-E3-H,79.13

I have much to say FOX-1674-E3-H,79.14

have but thee patiens to heare mee . FOX-1674-E3-H,79.15

Then I askt him whether ye oath was to bee tendred to ye kinges subjects
or to ye subjects of foreigne princes . FOX-1674-E3-H,79.16

Then said hee to ye subjects of this realme . FOX-1674-E3-H,79.17

Then I said to him looke your Indictment FOX-1674-E3-H,79.18

& there you may see you have left mee out as a subject :
FOX-1674-E3-H,79.19

for ye oath is to bee tendred to ye kinges subjects to see howe they
<P_80> stande in pointe of their {COM:the_word_"their"_interlineated}
loyalty to ye kinge FOX-1674-E3-H,80.20

& you haveinge left out ye worde subject you have made mee uncapable of
takeinge {COM:the_word_"takeinge"_interlineated} ye oath : haveinge not
named mee as a subject : soe not in a capacity of takeinge it
FOX-1674-E3-H,80.21

for thou graunts It is not to bee tendred to any but ye kinges subjects
. FOX-1674-E3-H,80.22

And then they lookt ye statute : & ye Indictment FOX-1674-E3-H,80.23

& saw it was as I said FOX-1674-E3-H,80.24

& hee confest it was an error . FOX-1674-E3-H,80.25

Then I said I had somethinge else to say to stoppe his Judgement .
FOX-1674-E3-H,80.26

Then I askt him what day of ye month ye oarth was tendred to mee att ye
sessions at Lancaster : FOX-1674-E3-H,80.27

& they said such a day of ye month as you may see in ye relation at
large . FOX-1674-E3-H,80.28

Then I bid y=m= looke there Almanackes : & see whether there was any
sessions helde at Lancaster y=t= day which ye Justices had sworne they
tendred oath to mee on {COM:the_word_"on"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-H,80.29

And when they had lookt they saw there was noe sessions helde
{COM:the_word_"helde"_interlineated} y=t= day : nor oath tendred to mee
y=t= day : as ye Justices had sworne in ye face of ye Country y=t= they
had tendred ye oath to mee such a day att ye sessions : whereas there
was noe sessions nor oath tendred to mee
{COM:5_words_from_"nor"_to_"mee"_interlineated} y=t= day .
FOX-1674-E3-H,80.30

And ye Judge said y=t= was a great error & a mistake FOX-1674-E3-H,80.31

& some of ye Justices was in a rage FOX-1674-E3-H,80.32

& said whoe has donne this FOX-1674-E3-H,80.33

some body has donne it of purpose . FOX-1674-E3-H,80.34

Then said I : are not ye Justices heere forsworne men in ye face of ye
Country : & perjured persons . FOX-1674-E3-H,80.35

Then I askt y=m= what day & what yeere of ye Kinge
{COM:3_words_from_"of"_to_"Kinge"_interlineated} ye Assizes was helde in
ye last Assises when they tendred ye oath to mee : FOX-1674-E3-H,80.36

for hee swoare : ye Courte y=t= they had tendred ye oath to mee such a
yeere accordinge to ye Indictment FOX-1674-E3-H,80.37

& they lookt ye Indictment & there Almanackes FOX-1674-E3-H,80.38

& saw y=t= they had sworne a whole yeere false . FOX-1674-E3-H,80.39

Then they was in a rage againe FOX-1674-E3-H,80.40

& stampt : FOX-1674-E3-H,80.41

now said I : is not ye Court heere : y=t= have sworne soe against mee :
perjurd persons FOX-1674-E3-H,80.42

& have not you false swearinge enough heere : FOX-1674-E3-H,80.43

whoe putts ye oath to mee y=t= can@ @not sweare at all because Christ
forbidds it . FOX-1674-E3-H,80.44

Then I said I have somethinge else to say : to thee to <P_81> stoppe thy
sentence : Whether all ye oath is to bee put Into
{COM:the_letters_"to"_in_the_word_"Into"_interlineated} ye Indictment or
noe {COM:the_words_"or_noe"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-H,81.45

yes said ye Judge all ought to bee putt in
{COM:6_words_from_"all"_to_"in"_interlineated} . FOX-1674-E3-H,81.46

Then said I : looke ye Indictment & ye oath : FOX-1674-E3-H,81.47

& there you may see these wordes <paren> viz <$$paren>
{COM:3_words_from_"these"_to_"viz"_interlineated} a power pretended to
bee derived from Rome from ye Pope : left out : in ye Indictment which
is a principle matter in ye oath . FOX-1674-E3-H,81.48

And if I shoulde take ye oath accordinge to this Indictment then I
graunt y=t= a power may come from Rome & take away ye kinges power .
FOX-1674-E3-H,81.49

Then ye Judge acknowledged this was a nother great error .
FOX-1674-E3-H,81.50

Then I said I had somethinge farther to say to him to stoppe his
Judgement . FOX-1674-E3-H,81.51

Thou graunts all ye oath is to bee put Into ye Indictment
FOX-1674-E3-H,81.52

then reade ye Indictment againe {COM:the_word_"againe"_interlineated} &
thou wilt see : these words his heires & successors is left out
FOX-1674-E3-H,81.53

for was not ye oath given foorth In Kinge
{COM:the_word_"Kinge"_interlineated} James Reigne : FOX-1674-E3-H,81.54

& was not Kinge Charles ye first his heire & Kinge Charles ye seconde
there successor : FOX-1674-E3-H,81.55

& therfore you leaveinge out those words his heires & successors you
have left out ye kinge & his father : FOX-1674-E3-H,81.56

& is not ye oath to bee taken to ye kinge : FOX-1674-E3-H,81.57

& howe can I take ye oath to ye kinge when you have left him out & soe
made noe kinge of him FOX-1674-E3-H,81.58

& if I take this oath Itt must bee to you : seeinge ye kinge is left out
. FOX-1674-E3-H,81.59

Then ye Judge acknowledged this alsoe to bee an error .
FOX-1674-E3-H,81.60

Then I said I had yett somethinge farther : to alleage to stoppe his
sentence . FOX-1674-E3-H,81.61

Then said ye Judge I have enough : FOX-1674-E3-H,81.62

butt I said if thou hast enough I desire nothinge but law & justice att
thy hands FOX-1674-E3-H,81.63

for I doe not looke for mercy . FOX-1674-E3-H,81.64

Then said ye Judge you must have Justice : FOX-1674-E3-H,81.65

Why then said I am I att liberty & free from all y=t= ever hath beene
donne against mee in this matter : FOX-1674-E3-H,81.66

yes said ye Judge you are free from all y=t= has beene donne against you
{COM:11_words_from_"you"_to_"you"_interlineated} : FOX-1674-E3-H,81.67

but said ye Judge I can putt ye oath to any man heere :
FOX-1674-E3-H,81.68

& I will tender you ye oath againe . FOX-1674-E3-H,81.69

That@ @s a snare said I : which all people may take notice of :
FOX-1674-E3-H,81.70

for I ought to bee sett free from ye goaler : & this Courte : if I am a
free man : as thou says I ought to bee : FOX-1674-E3-H,81.71

<P_82>

& yett thou tendrest ye oath before I am at
{COM:the_word_"at"_interlineated} liberty FOX-1674-E3-H,82.73

but thou ought to lett mee bee at liberty FOX-1674-E3-H,82.74

& then thou mightst have donne thy will . FOX-1674-E3-H,82.75

But hee cryed give him ye booke : FOX-1674-E3-H,82.76

& ye sheriffe & ye Justices cryed give him ye booke :
FOX-1674-E3-H,82.77

& then ye power of darknesse risse uppe in y=m= like a mountaine .
FOX-1674-E3-H,82.78

And severall Clarkes {COM:the_word_"Clarkes"_interlineated} lift upp a
bible to me . FOX-1674-E3-H,82.79

And soe at last I standinge still : I said if it bee a bible give it mee
Into my hande : FOX-1674-E3-H,82.80

yes yes said ye Judge & Justices give it to him Into his hande .
FOX-1674-E3-H,82.81

And when I had it in my hande I looket Into it FOX-1674-E3-H,82.82

& said I see it is a bible FOX-1674-E3-H,82.83

& I am glad of it . FOX-1674-E3-H,82.84

Then said I you have given mee a booke to kisse & to sweare on :
FOX-1674-E3-H,82.85

& ye book says kisse ye son FOX-1674-E3-H,82.86

& ye son says sweare not att all : & likewise ye Apostle James .
FOX-1674-E3-H,82.87

And as I was turneinge y=m= to {COM:the_word_"to"_interlineated} ye
places : & holdeinge uppe ye bible & tellinge y=m= y=t= I said as ye
booke said & y=t= Christ said yee shoulde not swear att all : I wondred
ye bible was at liberty & howe chance they did not Imprison ye booke :
FOX-1674-E3-H,82.88

for it & Christ forbidd swearinge FOX-1674-E3-H,82.89

& yee Imprison mee because I can@ @not sweare : FOX-1674-E3-H,82.90

how chance ye booke is at liberty amongst you : y=t= yee doe not
Imprison ye book y=t= forbidds to sweare as well as mee .
FOX-1674-E3-H,82.91

Then they pluckt ye bible out of my hande : FOX-1674-E3-H,82.92

& this gott abroade all over ye Country : as a by_worde : y=t= ye bible
shoulde bee at liberty & I in prison : whoe said as ye book said :
FOX-1674-E3-H,82.93

whoe gave mee a booke to sweare on y=t= commanded not to sweare at all .
FOX-1674-E3-H,82.94

Then ye Judge caled ye grande Jury : FOX-1674-E3-H,82.95

& reade ye oath againe to mee : FOX-1674-E3-H,82.96

& caled mee to say after ye Clarke : FOX-1674-E3-H,82.97

but I tolde him I never {COM:the_word_"never"_interlineated} tooke any
oath covenant nor engagement in my life : FOX-1674-E3-H,82.98

& had they not sufficent experiens howe men had sworne one way & then
another way : & howe ye Justices & ye Court had beene forsworne men
FOX-1674-E3-H,82.99

& my loyalty to ye kinge lay in yea & nea which was more then an oath :
FOX-1674-E3-H,82.100

& if ye Judge or Justices coulde convince mee : y=t= after Christ & ye
Apostle {COM:3_words_from_"&"_to_"Apostle"_interlineated} had forbidden
swearinge : y=t= they did alter there command after y=t= : & commande
men to sweare : then shew it mee & convince mee of this & I woulde
sweare . FOX-1674-E3-H,82.101

And there beinge a many preists there I said : if they coulde not doe it
: lett ye preists stande uppe & doe it : & <P_83> if they coulde not doe
it lett ye bishopps come & doe it : FOX-1674-E3-H,83.102

but never a one of ye preists made any aunswer . FOX-1674-E3-H,83.103

But at last : ye Judge said all ye worlde can@ @not convince you .
FOX-1674-E3-H,83.104

Then said I : ye whole worlde lyes in wickednesse FOX-1674-E3-H,83.105

bringe out your spirituall men as you call y=m= to convince mee .
FOX-1674-E3-H,83.106

Soe after : many more words : ye Judge bid ye goaler take mee away .
FOX-1674-E3-H,83.107

And M: ff: they praemunired FOX-1674-E3-H,83.108

& hee past sentence upon her . FOX-1674-E3-H,83.109

And ye next day they brought mee againe before ye same Judge :
FOX-1674-E3-H,83.110

& there they reade a large Indictment against mee FOX-1674-E3-H,83.111

& askt mee whether I was guilty or not . FOX-1674-E3-H,83.112

And I said att once hearinge over a paper att a great distans from mee :
I coulde not aunswer : but if they woulde lett mee see it & give mee
time to consider of it : I might aunswer : att which they were at a
stande . FOX-1674-E3-H,83.113

And at last they graunted mee time . FOX-1674-E3-H,83.114

Then I tolde y=m= I was not guilty of ye matter : & manner but I shoulde
traverse it : FOX-1674-E3-H,83.115

& soe they entred it . FOX-1674-E3-H,83.116

And many more words I had with ye Judge as may bee seene att large .
FOX-1674-E3-H,83.117

And soe they committed mee againe to close
{COM:the_word_"close"_interlineated} prison : FOX-1674-E3-H,83.118

& Coll Kirby gave order to ye goaler y=t= noe flesh alife must come att
mee FOX-1674-E3-H,83.119

for I was not fitt to bee discourst with by men . FOX-1674-E3-H,83.120

Soe I was putt uppe in a smoaky tower : where ye smoake of ye other
roomes came uppe & stood as a dew upon ye walls : where it reined in
alsoe upon my bed : FOX-1674-E3-H,83.121

& ye smoake was soe thicke as I coulde hardely see a candle sometimes
FOX-1674-E3-H,83.122

& many times lockt under 3 lockes : FOX-1674-E3-H,83.123

& ye undergoaler woulde hardely come uppe to unlock one of ye upper
doores FOX-1674-E3-H,83.124

ye smoake was soe thicke : y=t= I was almost smothered with smoake & soe
starved with colde & raine y=t= my body was almost nummed
FOX-1674-E3-H,83.125

& my body {COM:the_words_"my_body"_interlineated} swelled with ye colde
. FOX-1674-E3-H,83.126

And many times when I went to stoppe out ye raine of mee : in ye colde
winter season : my shift would bee as wett as mucke : with raine y=t=
came in upon mee : FOX-1674-E3-H,83.127

& as fast as I stopt it ye winde beinge high & feirce would blow it out
again : FOX-1674-E3-H,83.128

& in this manner did I ly all y=t= longe cold winter till ye next
assises . FOX-1674-E3-H,83.129

<P_84>

And when ye next Assises came Twisden & Turner came doune again .
FOX-1674-E3-H,84.131

And then Twisden sate upon ye crowne bench before whome I was had .
FOX-1674-E3-H,84.132

And I had Informed myselfe againe {COM:the_word_"againe"_interlineated}
of ye errors y=t= were {COM:the_words_"y=t=_were"_interlineated} In this
Indictment alsoe though {COM:the_words_"alsoe_though"_interlineated} att
ye assises before Judge Turner said to ye Courte : I pray see y=t= all
ye oath bee in ye Indictment & y=t= {COM:the_word_"y=t="_interlineated}
ye worde subject & ye day of ye month & ye yeere of ye Kinge bee in
{COM:the_words_"bee_in"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-H,84.133

for it is a shame y=t= soe many errors shoulde bee seene & founde in ye
face of ye country . FOX-1674-E3-H,84.134

And soe when they reade this 2=d= Indictment & ye oath hee tryed it & ye
rest of y=m= FOX-1674-E3-H,84.135

& therfore they thought y=t= all was safe & well . FOX-1674-E3-H,84.136

But they had made for all this as many errors : in this Indictment as in
ye other : FOX-1674-E3-H,84.137

& left out ye worde subiect & ye day of ye month alsoe
{COM:the_word_"alsoe"_interlineated} . FOX-1674-E3-H,84.138

For when I was brought before Judge Twisden I askt him whether ye oath
was to bee tendred to {COM:the_word_"to"_interlineated} ye kinges
subjects or to ye subjects of foreigne princes FOX-1674-E3-H,84.139

& hee said to ye subjects of this realme FOX-1674-E3-H,84.140

for I will speake nothinge to you but in pointe of law sayde hee
{COM:14_words_from_"for"_to_"hee"_interlineated} . FOX-1674-E3-H,84.141

Then said I : looke to your Indictment & there you may see they have
left mee out as a subject in this 2=d= Indictment FOX-1674-E3-H,84.142

& thou sayst It is not to bee tendred to foreign princes subjects but to
ye subjects of this realme . FOX-1674-E3-H,84.143

And accordinge to James ye 3=d= : It was to bee tendred to ye kinges
subjects : FOX-1674-E3-H,84.144

& in James ye 7=th= it was enacted : FOX-1674-E3-H,84.145

& therfor you haveinge left mee out as a subject you have made mee
uncapeable of takeing ye oath FOX-1674-E3-H,84.146

& ye Court is to take noe notice of it . FOX-1674-E3-H,84.147

Then cryed Twisden take him away goaler : FOX-1674-E3-H,84.148

soe I was hurled away as may bee seen of these matters mor at large : in
ye followinge relation : FOX-1674-E3-H,84.149

& ye goaler & all people lookt when I should bee brought out again
FOX-1674-E3-H,84.150

but they never brought mee foorth to ye Court any more .
FOX-1674-E3-H,84.151

And in the errors : you may see they said ye oath was putt to mee 5 days
before ye first Indictment was quasht . FOX-1674-E3-H,84.152

And Insteade of sayinge ye oath was tendred to mee at Lancaster in ye
days of Kinge Charles : they said in ye <P_85> Indictment y=t= ye oath
was putt to mee at Westminster in ye days of Kinge James then & there by
ye said Justices . FOX-1674-E3-H,85.153

Alsoe they mist ye day when it was tendred FOX-1674-E3-H,85.154

& left out ye worde subject : & some words out of ye oath againe .
FOX-1674-E3-H,85.155

But ye Judge woulde not lett mee plead to these later errors .
FOX-1674-E3-H,85.156

And hee had sworne ye Courte y=t= ye oath was putt to mee ye last
Assises there such a day : FOX-1674-E3-H,85.157

& had hee let mee pleade to my Indictment I coulde have proved ye Courte
forsworne men againe : by there Almanackes & ye Indictment .
FOX-1674-E3-H,85.158

But I hearde they had sent ye Indictment to London to see if it woulde
stande & they was Informed y=t= It woulde not stande
FOX-1674-E3-H,85.159

& soe they woulde not lett mee pleade to it . FOX-1674-E3-H,85.160

Neverthelesse they reconed mee as a premunired person
FOX-1674-E3-H,85.161

& I grew through smotheringe in a Colde & smoakey prison very weake
FOX-1674-E3-H,85.162

but ye Lords power was over all . FOX-1674-E3-H,85.163

<P_151>

And after I had finished my service for ye Lord in Irelande I came to
Dublinn FOX-1674-E3-H,151.165

& tooke shippinge FOX-1674-E3-H,151.166

& came to Liverpoole . FOX-1674-E3-H,151.167

1669 FOX-1674-E3-H,151.168

And when I came to Liverpoole I went to ye maiors house whoe kept an Inn
: FOX-1674-E3-H,151.169

& wee went Into his parlor where was many officers & magistrates .
FOX-1674-E3-H,151.170

And I walkt out againe FOX-1674-E3-H,151.171

& they caled in Ja: Lancaster FOX-1674-E3-H,151.172

& askt whether y=t= was not G: ff: FOX-1674-E3-H,151.173

hee said yes : FOX-1674-E3-H,151.174

but y=t= they had not power to medle with mee FOX-1674-E3-H,151.175

& after I had stayde about a quarter of an houre in ye house wee went
about a mile out {COM:the_word_"out"_interlineated} of ye tounde to a
freindes house FOX-1674-E3-H,151.176

& stayde a while FOX-1674-E3-H,151.177

& from thence wee went to Rich: Johnsons . FOX-1674-E3-H,151.178

And ye next day wee past to Will Barnes his house & from thence to Will
Gandys visitinge frendes FOX-1674-E3-H,151.179

& had many pretious meetinges in Lancasheere & Chesheere
FOX-1674-E3-H,151.180

& soe from thence wee came to Tho: Hammersleys : & from thence to White
Haugh where a Captain threatned to come & break uppe ye meetinge
FOX-1674-E3-H,151.181

but ye Lords power stoppt him . FOX-1674-E3-H,151.182

And soe from thence wee past through ye Countryes visitinge freindes in
there meetinges till wee came to Nailsworth in Glocestersheere :
FOX-1674-E3-H,151.183

& there it was noised all over ye Country : by ye presbyterians : y=t=
G: ff: was turned a presbyterian : FOX-1674-E3-H,151.184

& they prepared him a pulpitt FOX-1674-E3-H,151.185

& sett it in a yarde FOX-1674-E3-H,151.186

& there woulde bee a_1000 people they said y=t= woulde come to heare him
{COM:6_words_from_"y=t="_to_"him"_interlineated} ye next day beinge ye
first day : FOX-1674-E3-H,151.187

then I said : this is strange y=t= such a report shoulde bee of mee :
FOX-1674-E3-H,151.188

& as wee came farther to other frendes houses wee mett with ye same
reporte . FOX-1674-E3-H,151.189

And then wee came farther where frendes meetinge place was
FOX-1674-E3-H,151.190

& there wee stayde all night FOX-1674-E3-H,151.191

& there was ye <P_152> same report alsoe : FOX-1674-E3-H,152.192

& wee came by ye yarde where wee sawe ye pulpitt erected .
FOX-1674-E3-H,152.193

And on ye next day beinge first day
{COM:3_words_from_"beinge"_to_"day"_interlineated} there was a very
large meetinge of many hundreds of people FOX-1674-E3-H,152.194

& ye Lords power & presence was amongst us . FOX-1674-E3-H,152.195

And there was one Jo: ffox a presbyterian whose name they gave out was
G: ffox: a wicked man y=t= came to a freindes house y=t= had beene one
of ye Cheife of his hearers : FOX-1674-E3-H,152.196

& hee said : hee woulde rather have lost all his hearers : then to have
lost them & him {COM:the_words_"&_him"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-H,152.197

But they tolde him they coulde not profitt under his ministry & y=t= hee
had walkt in ye stepps of ye false prophetts preachinge for hire &
filthy lucre : FOX-1674-E3-H,152.198

& they tolde him y=t= times was harde : FOX-1674-E3-H,152.199

for there was a Company of presbyterian preists whome a woman y=t= had
ye Impropriation of ye tyths of ye parish
{COM:12_words_from_"a"_to_"parish"_interlineated} askt councell of y=m=
what to doe against our frende
{COM:3_words_from_"against"_to_"frende"_interlineated} : seeinge shee as
Impropriator tooke ye tyths of ye parish : but this freinde had refused
to pay any : FOX-1674-E3-H,152.200

& soe shee askt there councell & advice what to doe with him :
FOX-1674-E3-H,152.201

& soe they gave councell to her to sende in reapers : & cutt doune &
carry away all his corne which shee did & undid this poore man .
FOX-1674-E3-H,152.202

Then said this Jo: ffox : God blesse preachinge FOX-1674-E3-H,152.203

for y=t= bringes in money : FOX-1674-E3-H,152.204

lett times goe howe they will : FOX-1674-E3-H,152.205

& fill my belly with good {COM:the_word_"good"_interlineated} victualls
FOX-1674-E3-H,152.206

& call mee false prophett or what you will FOX-1674-E3-H,152.207

& kicke mee about ye house when you have donne : FOX-1674-E3-H,152.208

& this relation I had from ye man & womans owne mouth whoe lived neere
Sedbury in Glocestersheere whome these preists & this woman had served
soe . FOX-1674-E3-H,152.209

And in ye afternoone ye people hearinge y=t= I was soe neere : they
haveinge hearde this Jo: ffox ye forenoone in ye afternoone there came
severall hundreds of his people : to ye meetinge where I was :
FOX-1674-E3-H,152.210

& I turned y=m= to ye grace of God which woulde teach y=m= & bringe
there salvation . FOX-1674-E3-H,152.211

And soe people generally saw & where ashamed of ye forgery of ye
presbyterians FOX-1674-E3-H,152.212

& ye Lords power & truth came over all as you may se more at Large as
followeth : A: B: . {COM:11_words_from_"as"_to_"B:"_interlineated}
FOX-1674-E3-H,152.213

And After I had cleered my selfe of ye Lords service y=t=_aways I past
away FOX-1674-E3-H,152.214

& there was Tho: Atkins & his wiffe whoe lived not farr off Naylesworth
a shopkeeper : FOX-1674-E3-H,152.215

& they <P_153> tolde mee
{COM:3_words_from_"they"_to_"mee"_interlineated} there was a separate
meetinge of ye presbyterians & they tooke an oath of there people y=t=
they shoulde neither buy or sell or eate or drinke with freindes :
FOX-1674-E3-H,153.216

& ye eminenest {COM:sic} woman amongst y=m= fell sicke
FOX-1674-E3-H,153.217

& fell {COM:the_word_"fell"_interlineated} into
{COM:the_letters_"to"_in_the_word_"into"_interlineated} a benumbe
{COM:the_letters_"be"_in_the_word_"benumbe"_interlineated} condition soe
as shee could neither stirr hande or foote : FOX-1674-E3-H,153.218

& all ye Doctors coulde doe her noe good . FOX-1674-E3-H,153.219

And att last there came two or three women to Tho: Atkins wife into her
shoppe pretendinge to by somethinge of her
{COM:the_words_"of_her"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-H,153.220

& shee shewd y=m= thinges they askt for
{COM:3_words_from_"they"_to_"for"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-H,153.221

& soe they did confesse in discourse with her y=t= they had taken an
oath as aforesaid : FOX-1674-E3-H,153.222

but ye occation of there comeinge was concerneinge this woman y=t= lay
in y=t= misery to desire some helpe & advice from her as to her recovery
{COM:11_words_from_"desire"_to_"recovery"_interlineated} :
FOX-1674-E3-H,153.223

& shee askt y=m= how they coulde dispense with there oath :
FOX-1674-E3-H,153.224

& they said they must bee forct to breake it . FOX-1674-E3-H,153.225

Soe Tho: Atkins wiffe tooke ye woman in hande FOX-1674-E3-H,153.226

& cured her . FOX-1674-E3-H,153.227

And soe ye Lord broake ye wicked bonds of ye presbyterians asunder
{COM:the_word_"asunder"_interlineated} y=t= they had ensnared there
people with . FOX-1674-E3-H,153.228

And much might bee written of these thinges . FOX-1674-E3-H,153.229

And from thence wee came through ye Country FOX-1674-E3-H,153.230

& had many pretious meetinges till wee came to Bristoll where I had many
pretious meetinges FOX-1674-E3-H,153.231

when I came to Bristoll this letter mett mee there from Jo: Stubbs in
Ireland as followeth
{COM:17_words_from_"when"_to_"followeth"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-H,153.232

And there Margarett ffell: & her daughters : & son in laws mett mee :
where wee was marryed . FOX-1674-E3-H,153.233

And before wee was marryed I was moved to write foorth a paper to all ye
meetinges in England both of men & women
{COM:5_words_from_"both"_to_"women"_interlineated} & elsewhere
FOX-1674-E3-H,153.234

for all meetinges of frendes which was begotten to ye Lord was but as
one meetinge to mee . FOX-1674-E3-H,153.235

And I was moved to aske ye children whether they was all satisfyed &
whether Margarett had aunswered them {COM:the_word_"them"_interlineated}
accordinge to her husbands will to her children shee beinge a widdowe &
if her husband had left any thinge to her for ye assistans of her
children : which if shee marryed they might suffer losse therein whether
shee had aunswered y=m= in leiu of y=t= & all other thinges
{COM:4_words_from_"&"_to_"thinges"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-H,153.236

And ye children made aunswer FOX-1674-E3-H,153.237

& said : shee had doubled it & woulde not have mee to speake of those
thinges . FOX-1674-E3-H,153.238

<P_154>

And soe when it had beene layde before severall meetinges both of ye men
& women : assembled togeather for y=t= purpose
{COM:11_words_from_"both"_to_"purpose"_interlineated} & all was
satisfyed there was a large meetinge appointed of purpose : where there
was severall large testimonyes as followeth . After which I stayde in
Bristoll about a weeke & then past with Margarett Into ye Country : to
Oldstone : where Margarett past homewards towards ye North : & I past
one Into ye Country in ye worke of ye Lord Into Wiltsheere : where I had
many large & {COM:the_word_"&"_interlineated} pretious meetinges .
FOX-1674-E3-H,154.240

And from thence I past Into Barkesheere : where I had many large
pretious meetinges FOX-1674-E3-H,154.241

& soe from thence till I came Into Oxfordesheere & Buckinghamsheere
where I had many pretious meetinges all alonge till I came to London .
FOX-1674-E3-H,154.242

And soe after I had stayde a while in London & visited frendes & ye
Lords power was over all : I past doune Into Essex : & Hartfordesheere
where I had many pretious meetinges FOX-1674-E3-H,154.243

& from Hartfordesheere I passed Into Cambridgeshere & Huntingetonshere :
& Leistersheere & Warwickesheere & Darbysheere & soe through ye
Countryes visitinge freindes FOX-1674-E3-H,154.244

& had many large & pretious meetinges : amongst y=m= .
FOX-1674-E3-H,154.245

And there was one Walter Newton a neighbor to my relations whoe had
beene an auncient puritan said unto mee hee hearde I was marryed :
FOX-1674-E3-H,154.246

& askt mee ye reason : FOX-1674-E3-H,154.247

& I tolde him as a testimony y=t= all might come uppe Into ye mariage as
was in ye beginninge : & as a testimony y=t= all might come uppe out of
ye wildernesse to ye mariage of ye lamb . FOX-1674-E3-H,154.248

And hee said hee thought marriage was onely : for ye procreation of
children FOX-1674-E3-H,154.249

& I tolde him I never thought of any such thinge but onely in obediens
to ye power of ye Lord : FOX-1674-E3-H,154.250

& I Judged such thinges as below mee : though I saw such thinges &
established Marriages FOX-1674-E3-H,154.251

but I lookt on it as below mee : FOX-1674-E3-H,154.252

& though I saw such a thinge in ye seede : yett I had noe commande to
such a thinge till a halfe yeere before though people had longe talkt of
it : FOX-1674-E3-H,154.253

& there was some Jumble in some mindes abut it FOX-1674-E3-H,154.254

but ye Lords power came over all FOX-1674-E3-H,154.255

& layde all there {COM:the_word_"there"_interlineated} spiritts
FOX-1674-E3-H,154.256

& some after confest it {COM:5_words_from_"&"_to_"it"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-H,154.257

And about this time whilst I was in Leistersheere this Jo: ffox
aforesaid : did preach in a steeplehouse sometimes <P_155> in Wiltsheere
by leave of a common prayer preist FOX-1674-E3-H,155.258

& att last hee & ye other preist aforesaid : fell out :
FOX-1674-E3-H,155.259

& ye common prayer booke was cutt to peices : FOX-1674-E3-H,155.260

& great tumult was in ye steeplehouse betwixt ye presbyterians & ye
Episcopall men . FOX-1674-E3-H,155.261

And the Episcopall men sent uppe to ye parlament : FOX-1674-E3-H,155.262

& petitioned ye parlament against ye said Jo: ffox :
FOX-1674-E3-H,155.263

but Insteade of mentioninge his name : Jo: fox the presbyterians gott
his name changhed : FOX-1674-E3-H,155.264

& putt in George ffox ye quaker . FOX-1674-E3-H,155.265

And in there petion they mention y=t= ye people shoulde cry : noe kinge
but George ffox : FOX-1674-E3-H,155.266

& this was putt in ye news_booke y=t= was sent over all ye nation .
FOX-1674-E3-H,155.267

But ffreindes gott a certificate under some of ye parlamente mens handes
as aforesaid to cleere George ffox: from y=t= abuse : & how y=t= it was
Jo: ffox: ye presbyterian {COM:preceding_word_"presbyterian"_emended}
preist & not G: ff: ye quaker . FOX-1674-E3-H,155.268

And ye presbyterians {COM:preceding_word_"presbyterians"_emended}
deceitfully woulde come & aske ffreindes where was G: ffox now :
FOX-1674-E3-H,155.269

& wee woulde have ye parlament men to put ye certificate Into ye Gazette
to cleare mee FOX-1674-E3-H,155.270

but they woulde not : FOX-1674-E3-H,155.271

but ye Lords power came over y=m= all : though from this grounde :
FOX-1674-E3-H,155.272

some of ye members in parlament tooke an occasion to move in ye
parlament {COM:the_word_"parlament"_interlineated} house for ye
bringeinge foorth ye last act against seditious conventicles as they
caled it {COM:4_words_from_"as"_to_"it"_interlineated} which after a
litle while came foorth . FOX-1674-E3-H,155.273

1670 . FOX-1674-E3-H,155.274

And after {COM:the_word_"after"_interlineated} I haveinge beene in ye
Country : as I came uppe ye streetes in London ye drums beate : for
every householde to sende foorth a souldyer Into ye trained bandes : to
bee in readynesse : ye act beinge then come
{COM:the_word_"come"_interlineated} in force . FOX-1674-E3-H,155.275

And whilst I was in ye Country I hearde y=t= Margarett was haled out of
her house & carryed to Lancaster prison againe an order beinge gotten :
from ye kinge & concell : to fetch her backe Into prison againe upon her
olde praemunire : though shee was deschardged from y=t= Imprisonement by
an order from ye kinge & his Councell ye yeere before .
FOX-1674-E3-H,155.276

And upon ye first day after ye act came in force ffrendes mett as they
used to doe in ye morninge
{COM:3_words_from_"in"_to_"morninge"_interlineated} : wher every
minister declared there goeinge to ye severall meetinges <P_156> as they
was moved : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.277

& frendes askt mee to what meetinge I would goe : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.278

& I tolde y=m= Into ye high feildes to Gratious streete meetinge .
FOX-1674-E3-H,156.279

And this day all ye traine_bands was uppe : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.280

& as I past through ye streete to ye meetinge all ye street was full of
people And a guarde sett to ye meetinge house doore : to keepe out
ffreindes : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.281

& I went in ye other way : through Lunbart street FOX-1674-E3-H,156.282

& there was another guarde sett & ye Curte full of people .
FOX-1674-E3-H,156.283

And a frende was speakinge FOX-1674-E3-H,156.284

but hee had sone ended : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.285

& I was after moved of ye Lord : to stande upp on a doore thresholde in
ye Courte : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.286

& said : Saul Saul why persecutest thou mee : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.287

it was harde for him to kick against ye prickes : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.288

soe it was Sauls nature y=t= persecuted still : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.289

& y=t= it was ye birth of ye flesh y=t= persecuted ye birth borne of ye
spiritt & Itt was ye nature of doggs to teare & devoure ye sheepe .
FOX-1674-E3-H,156.290

And After I had spoaken a while to this effect
{COM:3_words_from_"to"_to_"effect"_interlineated} there came an officer
with a file of musketeers : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.291

& pulled mee out : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.292

& this officer said I was ye man hee looket for : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.293

& hee putt mee amongst his file of musketeers : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.294

& said hee must carry mee to ye Lord maiors FOX-1674-E3-H,156.295

& when hee had mee in ye streets : Tho: Lower: followed after mee & Ger.
Roberts FOX-1674-E3-H,156.296

ye people cryed to y=m= : have a care off him FOX-1674-E3-H,156.297

hee is a princely man : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.298

butt as wee came alongst ye streets to ye exchange : & there they made a
stande a while : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.299

& then they {COM:the_word_"they"_interlineated} had mee on towards
Moorefeildes FOX-1674-E3-H,156.300

& as wee was goinge alongst ye streets this officer was layinge his
hande upon mee FOX-1674-E3-H,156.301

& at last hee was askeinge Will Warwicke a question whome ye Constable
had taken prisoner ye same time alsoe
{COM:the_word_"alsoe"_interlineated} how one might know ye Scriptures :
FOX-1674-E3-H,156.302

& William did not aunswer him FOX-1674-E3-H,156.303

& I turned to him FOX-1674-E3-H,156.304

& said : by ye same spiritt y=t= they was in y=t= gave y=m= foorth .
FOX-1674-E3-H,156.305

Oh sayde hee this is a rationall man FOX-1674-E3-H,156.306

I will talke with him : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.307

then said hee : where was all these new religions abut 200 yeeres agoe :
& y=t= it woulde never bee a good worlde untill all people came to ye
good olde {COM:the_words_"good_olde"_interlineated} religion y=t= was :
200 yeeres agoe . FOX-1674-E3-H,156.308

What said I : to him art a papist : FOX-1674-E3-H,156.309

what a papist Informer FOX-1674-E3-H,156.310

for 200 yeeres agoe there was noe other religion heere but ye popish .
FOX-1674-E3-H,156.311

<P_157>

And after hee saw y=t= hee had insnared himselfe hee was vext :
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.313

& as hee went alongst in ye streets I often spoake to him
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.314

& manifested his wickednesse : FOX-1674-E3-H,157.315

& when hee came Into ye Lord maiors yarde there was severall people gott
about mee : FOX-1674-E3-H,157.316

& askt how & for what I was taken : FOX-1674-E3-H,157.317

soe I desired y=m= to goe & aske ye Informer & know what his name was :
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.318

but hee would not tell his name FOX-1674-E3-H,157.319

but began to gnawe his fingers ends : FOX-1674-E3-H,157.320

& then one of ye maiors officers lookeinge out a window spoak to him
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.321

& said hee should tell his name before hee past out of y=t= house
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.322

for ye Lord maior woulde know by what authority hee Intruded himselfe
with his souldyers : Into ye execution of those lawes which belonged to
ye civill magistrate to execute & not to ye military
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.323

& for ought hee knew hee was come to Informe against his Lord : as much
as {he_had_come_to_inform} against any other . After which words hee
was restlesse : till hee gott out : & came to ye doore keeper to lett
him foorth whoe was caled unto not to lett him goe foorth till ye Lord
maior came FOX-1674-E3-H,157.324

but hee forceablely pulled open ye doore FOX-1674-E3-H,157.325

& went out FOX-1674-E3-H,157.326

& one of ye officers caled to him FOX-1674-E3-H,157.327

& said have you brought people heere FOX-1674-E3-H,157.328

& now will you goe away before ye Lord maior comes FOX-1674-E3-H,157.329

yes said hee {COM:29_words_from_"&"_to_"hee"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.330

And noe sooner : was hee come foorth Into ye streets butt ye people made
such a shoute y=t= ye streets runge with ye noice & cryed a papist
Informer a papist Informer & fell upon him : & woulde have torne him in
peices : FOX-1674-E3-H,157.331

soe we caled to ye constable & souldyers : to rescue him out of there
handes which they did : FOX-1674-E3-H,157.332

& brought him Into ye maiors entry : FOX-1674-E3-H,157.333

& kept him awhile FOX-1674-E3-H,157.334

& then hee went FOX-1674-E3-H,157.335

& they shouted after hee came foorth againe FOX-1674-E3-H,157.336

& then they fell upon him againe FOX-1674-E3-H,157.337

& then ye soldyers rescued him againe
{COM:37_words_from_"&"_to_"againe"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-H,157.338

& gott him to change his periwigge : FOX-1674-E3-H,157.339

& then hee past away towards Moorefeildes unknowne .
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.340

Soe when ye Lord maior came home I was brought before him :
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.341

& some of ye officers of his house woulde have taken off my hatt &
{COM:3_words_from_"my"_to_"&"_interlineated} ffrendes hatts :
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.342

but hee caled to y=m= FOX-1674-E3-H,157.343

& bid y=m= lett y=m= alone & not to medle with our hatts :
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.344

for sayd hee they are not brought yett before mee in Judicature .
FOX-1674-E3-H,157.345

Soe hee caled some of ye presbyterian
{COM:preceding_word_"presbyterian"_emended} & Baptists teachers before
him FOX-1674-E3-H,157.346

& was somewhat sharpe with y=m= FOX-1674-E3-H,157.347

& convicted y=m= . FOX-1674-E3-H,157.348

<P_158>

And after hee had donne with y=m= I was brought uppe before him to the
table : FOX-1674-E3-H,158.350

& then ye officers tooke of my hatt FOX-1674-E3-H,158.351

& ye maior very loveingely said : M=r= ffox : you are an eminent man
amongst those of your profession : FOX-1674-E3-H,158.352

pray will you bee Instrumentall to disswade y=m= from meetinge in such
great numbers : FOX-1674-E3-H,158.353

ffor seeing Christ hath promised y=t= where two or three are mett in his
name hee will bee in ye midst of y=m= & ye Kinge & parlament
{COM:the_words_"&_parlament"_interlineated} are grtiously pleased to
allow of foure to meete togeather : to worshippe God : why will not you
bee content to {COM:3_words_from_"bee"_to_"to"_interlineated} pertake
both of Christs promise to two or three : & ye kinges Indulgens to foure
. Unto which I aunswered y=t= : if Christ had promised to manifest his
presence in ye midst of such an assembly where but two or three were
gathered : in his name : then how much : more : to where two or
three_hundred are gathered in his name : FOX-1674-E3-H,158.354

& would not this act have taken holde upon Christ & his Apostles &
disciples in there day : whoe often mett togeather above y=t= number of
foure whoe had 70_&_12 disciples which was a considerable number to
which ye maior said you speake to popular : FOX-1674-E3-H,158.355

then said I : is it not true
{COM:29_words_from_"of"_to_"true"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-H,158.356

Then Tho: Moore said unto ye Lord maior : hee thought y=t= was a mistake
in sayinge y=t= ye kinge & parlament in this act allowed of foure :
FOX-1674-E3-H,158.357

for though : ye act takes holde of all y=t= are mett togeather above
y=t= number : yett it doth not allow of foure : nor two : to meet
togeather to worshippe God in other manner then ye liturgy allowes :
FOX-1674-E3-H,158.358

& though if two three or foure soe mett togeather : are not punnishable
by this act : yett by severall other acts : they are :
FOX-1674-E3-H,158.359

& therfore there was noe allowans for any to meete togeather to
worshippe God : in any other manner then ye liturgy allowes : which hee
thought was very harde & unchristian to which ye Lord maior replyed M=r=
Moore I will talke with you upon this subject another time .
FOX-1674-E3-H,158.360

Then ye maior said to Jo: Burnyeat : come said hee FOX-1674-E3-H,158.361

your countenans shewes you have come lately from beyonde seas : & are
some Jesuite : FOX-1674-E3-H,158.362

but I said hee was neither Jesuite nor papist : but <P_159> an honnest
Country man : as in ye folowinge paper may bee seene more at large .
FOX-1674-E3-H,159.363

