<BEGIN_gawdy-1588-e2-h>

<P_24>

<heading:edcomment:TO_HIS_FATHER>

Sir , I receyved a note from you by my cosin Brampton meeting him by
chaunce vppon Wednesdaye at night laste past , when I vnderstood that
yow wold have certeyne trees to be sent downe . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,24.4

The tyme was very short to have sent any downe by theise carryars ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,24.5

besides the weather was not apt for removing of trees the frost falling
out to be so great . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,24.6

My skill is small in making choyse of suche thinges GAWDY-1588-E2-H,24.7

neverthelesse I will vse all the cunning I have to performe <P_25> the
most dutifull service I maye . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.8

My Cosin Bramptyn hathe directed mee to take the advise of
{HELSINKI:missing_"of"} one that hathe very great good skill , besides
some other that I do meane to make acquaynted with the choyse of the
best . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.9

I do hope to provide and make them ready in good order agaynst next
Thursday . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.10

I have allready sent yow downe your foote clothe , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.11

Bourne S=r= Edward Cleres man had charg of it . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.12

I have nowe sent you downe a cocke , ij payre of gloves , ij dosen of
poyntes , ij small bookes for a token , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.13

the one of them was gyven me that day that they rann at tilt . Divers
of them being gyven to most of the lordes , and gentlemen about the
Court , and one especially to the Quene . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.14

I was commanded w=th= some ij or iij more to wayte vnderneathe the Quene
to be employed in messages , wher it pleased her Ma=te= to vse me more
gracyously then I deserved . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.15

My oncle told me of it that night comming to him , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.16

for ij or iij of his men stood hard by in a standing .
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.17

He was wonderfully well pleased therwith , w=ch= cold not be displeasing
to me to se him any waye contented . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.18

It may be you may heare of it by some other , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.19

for it was not private . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.20

It was ffriday at night before the Quene came to my Lo. Admyralles .
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.21

Vppon Saterday was the running at the tilt very well performed , thoughe
not so full of devises and so riche as I have seene .
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.22

My L. of Essex and my L. of Cumberland wer the cheife that ranne ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.23

M=r= Gresham was well commended for the credit of Norffolk
{COM:preceding_word_"Norffolk"_emended} . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.24

Vppon Saterday at night her Ma=ie= lay at my L. Admiralles , and all
Sondaye at his charge . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.25

Vppon Mondaye she went to M=r= Seacreatoryes to dinner when in the
gallory before her going she knighted M=r= Jhon Pagington .
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.26

That night she cam to my Lo. Admiralls agayne , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.27

and dyned ther vppon Tuesday . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.28

Vppon Tuesday at night she came to my L._Chaunclers wher she hathe bene
ever since . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.29

Her entertaynment hathe bene very great ther bothe for her self and all
her trayne , w=ch= a number of vs hathe very well tasted of .
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,25.30

It is thought her Ma=tie= will tarry <P_26> ther yet this Sevenight and
hearafter at Whitehall . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.31

I have bene very little from the court all this while ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.32

yet once a day I do visitt Chauncery lane wher I report to him according
to his request suche newes as the court affordethe .
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.33

Amongst the rest of our talke he knew my writing at this present ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.34

and willed me not to forgett his very harty commendacions to your good
self . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.35

Many reasons doth leade me to follow him , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.36

and the least favor and kyndnes dothe encorage me to do him all manner
of service . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.37

Ther be no shreifes as yet knowen GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.38

nor wer not as yesternight at eleven of the clocke at night ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.39

and comming home late was the cause that my oncle Anthony Gavdy fayled
of a letter . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.40

Neither have I as yet found any messinger but the hedgehogg ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.41

and yet I have heard that the hedgehogg overran the hare ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.42

and so the carryar may overrun the post . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.43

I know not whether stale Newes may offend his eares being so long a
drawing towardes him . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.44

In the meane tyme I wold have him know this , that his Mrs. is at the
court and sending his commendacions , with yowr self and my good Brother
and his wyfe . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.45

She hathe heard nothing from him she saythe but only touching musters ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.46

she dothe not a little marvell at it . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.47

I excused him , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.48

and layde all the fault in his secretary GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.49

for thoughe he be suer , yet he is very slow . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.50

For suche thinges as my good sister wryteth for she shall receyve them
all together with a letter the next tyme . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.51

I have written to her before touching Sir Charles , and my Lady , and
divers others letters . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.52

I know not how they be delivered . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.53

Luke Woolmer hathe sent downe all her things by Mrs. Tylney ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.54

I will send downe her pipes and the rest as soon as I maye .
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.55

M=r= Jermy is travelled into a Damaske gowne , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.56

and followeth the courte day and night . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.57

I have forgott what he called my oncle Anthony in Greeke
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.58

but I thinke he will harddly prove him shreife in English .
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.59

I thanke his worshipp GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.60

I fynde him very kynde to me , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.61

and he@ @s {SIC:his} continually inquisityve of me what I heare of the
pricking of the shreifes . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.62

He travelled to the sea GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.63

and lyes alltogether at the ankor , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.64

if his kable be suer , he is like to do the better .
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.65

My Lo. of Leycester is expected for , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.66

and some newes cam out of fflaunders very latly yesternight , but
vnknowen to any but the best . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,26.67

Some letters hathe bene intercepted <P_27> of late .
GAWDY-1588-E2-H,27.68

The prince of Parma is come to Dunkerke
{COM:preceding_word_"Dunkerke"_emended}

but vnknowen for what cause , GAWDY-1588-E2-H,27.70

suspected for no good to vs . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,27.71

As yesterday the Quene going into the gallery made an old knight , S=r=
Lewes Dyves . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,27.72

And thus with my very humble duty , etc. GAWDY-1588-E2-H,27.73

London GAWDY-1588-E2-H,27.74

this xxiiij=th= of November . GAWDY-1588-E2-H,27.75

