<BEGIN_gcromw-1534-e1-h>

<P_3.1,338>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXX_GREGORY_CROMWELL_TO_HIS_FATHER,_MR._THOMAS_CROMWELL>

Most dere father , I humbly recomend me unto you ,
GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,338.4

and hertily beseche you of yowr dayly blessyng , naturally bownden
thayreunto ; for the wiche , and other yowr manifowld benefittes to me
colatyt , I am and schal@ @be yowr daly bedman , interely desyryng the
contineweans of the same ; trustyng soo to accomplysse and fulfyll yowr
parentall com~andments in the passage of myne erudicion , that yow , my
good father , schall tharewith be ryght welcontentyd by Gods helpe , the
wiche with hys grace hee send hus . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,338.5

Amen . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,338.6

Frome the howse of yowr bedman Mr. Doctor Lee
GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,338.7

thys Ester day in the mornyng . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,338.8

By yowr vigelante sone Gregori Cromewell . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,338.9

<P_3.1,339>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXI_GREGORY_CROMWELL_TO_HIS_FATHER._A_SECOND_LETTER_OF_DUTY>

Right worschypfull father , I co~mend me un_to you , desyryng you of
youre dayly blessyng , sartyfying you that I am in good helth , wyth my
cosens Bersfourd and Wellyfyd , thanks be unto God omnipotente ,
GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.12

and apply owre boks dylygently , as shall appere I trust to youre
worschyp and owre proffyts . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.13

Father , I besetch you whan ye mett wyth the ryght honorable lorde of
Oxforth , to geue thanks un_to hys Lorchyp , GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.14

for whan he came to a towne callyd Yeldam , to the parsons there of to
hunte the foxe , he sente for me and my cossyns ,
GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.15

and mad us good schere ; GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.16

and lett us see schuch game and plesure as I never sawe {TEXT:saye} in
my lyfe ; GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.17

more over father , I besetch you to geve thanks to the for_sayde parson
of Yeldam , which sens I came in to the cuntry hath dyvers tymys sente
for me and for my cossyns and mad us hygh schere , and schewyd us gret
plesure . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.18

For all other thyngs consarnyng my rayment , I beseche you geve credens
to my synguler good frende Mayster Doctor Lee .
GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.19

Thus Jhesu have you in hys kepyng . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.20

From Topsfyld GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.21

the xvii day of October . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.22

By your lowly sone Gregory Crumwell . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,339.23

<P_3.1,340>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXII_GREGORY_CROMWELL,_AGAIN_TO_HIS_FATHER>

Ryght worshypfulle father , as harte canne thynke or tong canne tell , I
hartely co~mende me vn_to you , beyng always desyrus to here of your
prosperus helth and welfare , whych I pray Jhsu long contynwe to his
pleasure , and to your moste gentillyste hartis desyre , &c.
GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,340.26

The cause of my wrytynge vn_to you at thys tyme ys , to desyre you to
send me your blessyng , which ys more treasure unto me then all the
abundance of worldly goods ; sertyfyinge you that I was in good helth at
the makynge of thys letter , thankyd be God omnipotent , and doo apply
my boke deligently , as I truste in God shall in process of tyme apere
to my proffyte , and to your contentacion and worship .
GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,340.27

I have recevid the tokyne that you sent by Master doctor Bekynsall ,
unto whome I pray you gyve thanks , GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,340.28

for at his beyng now at Topsfylde bothe mad me gret cheare and all my
fellos , GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,340.29

and gave me a crone to spende . Wherfore , I beseche you father , have
hym in your remembrance . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,340.30

Thus Jhesu preserve you in his goodnes . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,340.31

Frome Topsfylde GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,340.32

the xxv day of October . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,340.33

By your lowly sone Gregori Crumwell . GCROMW-1534-E1-H,3.1,340.34

