<BEGIN_harley-1629-e2-h>

<P_1>

<heading>

TO MY DEARE HUSBAND S=R= ROBART HARLEY , KNIGHT OF THE BATHE .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,1.4

<$$heading>

S=r= - Docter Barker has put my sister into a cours of ientell fisek ,
which I hope by God's bllsing will doo her much good .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,1.6

My sister giues you thankes for seending him to her .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,1.7

I pray you remember that I recken the days you are away {COM:sic} ;
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,1.8

and I hope you are nowe well at Heariford , wheare it may be , this
letter will put you in minde of me , and let you knowe , all your frinds
heare are well ; HARLEY-1629-E2-H,1.9

and all the nwes I can seend you is , that my Lo. Brooke is nowe at
Beaethams Court . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,1.10

My hope is to see you heare this day senet , or to-morrowe senet ,
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,1.11

and I pray God giue vs a happy meeting , and presarfe you safe ; which
will be the great comfort of Your most true affectionat wife , Brilliana
Harley <font> Ragly : HARLEY-1629-E2-H,1.12

the 30 of Sep. 1625 . <$$font> HARLEY-1629-E2-H,1.13

<heading>

TO MY DEARE HOUSBAND S=R= ROBART HARLEY , KNIGHT , IN BLACKFRIERS , AT
MY LO. LEWSON@ @S HOWES . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,1.15

<$$heading>

Deare S=r= - I thanke you for your letter which you sent me from
Tuddington : which gaue me satisfaction of your being well , so fare on
your journey : which ascurance of your health is the beest nwes <P_2> I
can heare , except that of your comeing home . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.17

I ernestly desire to heare howe you came to Loundon ;
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.18

and doo thinke your men stay longe : HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.19

but I hope they will bringe me good nwes of you , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.20

and then I shall be well pleased . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.21

Ned , I thanke God , is very well , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.22

and you will beleeve me , if I say he looses non of his grandfather loue
, whoo is better than you leeft him . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.23

And no more to you at this time ; HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.24

but I beceache the Allmighty presarue you , and giue you happy meeting
with Your most faithfull affectionat wife , Brilliana Harley .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.25

<font> Brompton , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.26

the 10th of Phe. 1625 . <$$font> HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.27

<heading>

TO MY DEARE HOUSBAND S=R= ROBART HARLEY , KNIGHT .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.29

<$$heading>

S=r= - I thanke you for sending me word , I may hope to see you at
Easter , which time will be much longed for by me .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.31

I hope the parlament has spent as much time as will satisfy them in
dooing nothing : so that nowe some good frute of theare meeting will be
brought to ripnes , which is the effect of our prayers .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.32

This day I deleverd the 100 +L {TEXT:+L100} to my father : which he has
payed to Mr. Davis : HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.33

that mony that was wanting of it , was made vp with the 50 pounde
{TEXT:+L50_pounde} Mr. Lacy payed for wood . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.34

The payling of the nwe parke is made an end of . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.35

Yesterday your company only was at Heariford , to shewe what they had
lerned , whear Sr. Jhon Skidemore and Mr. Vahan weare judges ;
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.36

and so they meane to be of the reest of the companis ,
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.37

and they haue apointed teen of your company to learne the vse of theiare
armes and so to teache the reest . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.38

This last night I not being very well , made me seend this day for the
midwife , which I thinke I should haue defered to longe .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.39

I asure myself I haue your prayers , becaus you haue so great a part of
mine : HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.40

and I blls God that you injoy your health , which I beeg of you to take
care of . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.41

I thanke God , Ned is well , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.42

and I beeg your bllsing for him : HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.43

and I pray God preserue you well and giue you a happy and speedy meeting
with Your most faithful affectionat wife , Brilliana Harley .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,2.44

<P_3>

I pray you present my humbell duty to my father , and my lady .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.46

My cosen Thomkins remembers her loue to you . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.47

<font> Brompton , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.48

the 17 of Mar. 1625 . <$$font> HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.49

<heading>

TO MY DEARE HUSBAND S=R= ROBERT HARLEY . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.51

<$$heading>

Deare S=r= - Your two leters , on from Hearifort and the other from
Gloster , weare uery wellcome to me : HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.53

and if you knwe howe gladly I reseaue your leters , I beleeue you would
neeuer let any opertunity pase . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.54

I hope your cloche did you saruis betwne Gloster and my brother Brays ,
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.55

for with vs it was a very rainy day , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.56

but this day has bine very dry and warme , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.57

and so I hope it was with you ; HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.58

and to-morowe I hope you will be well at your journis end , wheare I
wisch my self to bide you wellcome home . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.59

You see howe my thoughts goo with you : HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.60

and as you haue many of mine , so let me haue some of yours .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.61

Beleeue me , I thinke I neuer miste you more then nowe I doo ,
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.62

or ells I haue forgoot what is past . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.63

I thanke God , Ned and Robin are well ; HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.64

and Ned askes every day wheare you are , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.65

and he says you will come to-morowe . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.66

My father is well , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.67

but goos not abrode , becaus of his fiseke . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.68

I haue sent you vp a litell hamper , in which is the box with the
ryteings and boouckes you bide me send vp , with the other things ,
sowed up in a clothe , in the botome of the hamper .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.69

I haue sent you a partriche pye , which has the two pea chikeins in it ,
and a litell runlet of meathe , that which I toold you I made for my
father . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.70

I thinke within this muthe , it will be very good drinke .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.71

I sende it vp nowe becaus I thinke carage when it is ready to drincke
dous it hurt ; HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.72

thearefore , and please you to let it rest and then taste it ;
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.73

if it be good , I pray you let my father haue it , because he spake to
me for such meathe . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.74

I will nowe bide you god night , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.75

for it is past a_leauen a cloke . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.76

I pray God presarue you and giue you good sugsess in all your biusnes ,
and a speady and happy meeting . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.77

Your most faithfull affectinat wife , Brilliana Harley .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,3.78

<P_4>

I must beeg your bllsing for Ned and Rob. HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.80

and present you with Neds humbell duty . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.81

<font> Bromton , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.82

the 5 of October , 1627 . <$$font> HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.83

<heading>

TO MY DEARE HUSBAND S=R= ROBERT HARLEY , KNIGHT . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.85

<$$heading>

My deare S=r= - I ame glad of this opertuenity to present you with the
remembranc of my deare loue . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.87

I hope you came well to Bristo ; HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.88

and I much longe to heare from you , but more a_thousand times to see
you , which I presume you will not beleeue , becaus you can@ @not
poscibilly measure my loue . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.89

I thanke God your father is well , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.90

and so are your three soons . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.91

Ned presents his humbell duty to you , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.92

and I beeg your {HELSINKI:you} bllsing for them all ;
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.93

and I pray God giue you a happy and speady meeting with Your most
affectinat wife , Brill. Harley . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.94

If I thought it would hasten your comeing home , I would intreat you to
doo soo . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.95

I pray you remember me to Mr. Pirson . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.96

I thanke God all at his howes are well . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.97

<font> Bromton , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.98

the 7th , 1628 . <$$font> HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.99

<heading>

TO MY DEARE HUSBAND S=R= ROBERT HARLEY , KNIGHT .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.101

<$$heading>

My deare S=r= - I thanke you for your letter , which I reseaued this
weake by the carrier , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.103

and I thanke God for my father's health . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.104

I trust in our good God , in his owne good time , he will giue a happy
end to your biusness . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.105

I haue rwitten a letter to my father , which I send you heare inclosed .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.106

If you thinke it will not displeas him , and it may any thinge at all
seet forward your biusnes , I pray you deleuer it to him .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.107

If you do deleuer it to my father , I pray you seale it first .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.108

Allas ! my deare S=r= , I knowe you doo not to the on halfe of my
desires , desire to see me , that loues you more then any earthly thinge
. HARLEY-1629-E2-H,4.109

I should be glad if you would but rwite me <P_5> word , when I should
hope to see you . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.110

Need has bine euer sence Sunday trubled with the rume in his fase very
much . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.111

The swelling of his face made him very dull ; HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.112

but nowe , I thanke God , he is better , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.113

and begins to be merry . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.114

He inquires for Jhon Walls comeing downe : HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.115

for he thinkes he will bringe him a letter . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.116

I must desire you to send me downe a littell Bibell for him .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.117

He would not let me be in peace , tell I promised him to send for on .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.118

He begings nowe to delight in reading : HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.119

and that is the booke I would haue him place his delight in .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.120

Tom has still a greate coold ; HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.121

but he is not , I thanke God , sike with it . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.122

Brill and Robin , I thanke God , are well ; HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.123

and Brill has two teethe . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.124

Ned presents his humble duty to you , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.125

and I beeg your bllsing for them all : HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.126

and I beceach the Allmighty to prosper you all you doo , and to giue you
a happy meeting with Your most faithfull affectinat wife , Brilliana
Harley . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.127

I pray you , S=r= , send downe no silke grogram .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.128

I hope you haue reseuefed the siluer candell-stike .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.129

Your father , I thanke God , is much better than he was .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.130

I pray you , S=r= , present my beest loue to my sister Wacke .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.131

<font> Desem 4 1629 . <$$font> HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.132

<heading>

TO MY DEARE HUSBAND S=R= ROBERT HARLEY , KNIGHT , AT HIS HOWES IN
ALLDERMANBERY . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.134

<$$heading>

My dearest S=r= - Your men came to Bromton on thursday last .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.136

I thanke God that you haue your halth . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.137

I hope the Lord will giue vs bothe faith to waite vpon him ;
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.138

and I trust that in his mercy he will give a good end to your biusnes .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.139

It pleases God that I continue ill with my coold ,
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.140

but it is , as they say , a nwe disceas : HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.141

it trubelles me much , more becaus of my being with childe ;
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.142

but I hope the Lord will deale in mercy with me ; HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.143

and , deare S=r= , let me haue your prayers , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.144

for I haue need of them . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.145

Docter Barker is nowe with me . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.146

I thanke God the childeren are all well , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.147

and Need and Robine are very glad of theire boose ,
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.148

and Ned is much discontended that you come not downe .
HARLEY-1629-E2-H,5.149

I beeg your bllssing for <P_6> them all , beceaching the Allmighty to
presarue you , and to giue you a joyefull and happy meeting with your
Most faithfull affectinat wife , Bril. Harley . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,6.150

I pray present my humbell duty to my father . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,6.151

This day theare came a man from Ragley to feetche my cosen Hunkes to her
mother , whoo is very sike . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,6.152

<font> Bromton , HARLEY-1629-E2-H,6.153

the 8 of May , 1630 <$$font> . HARLEY-1629-E2-H,6.154

