<BEGIN_harman-1568-e1-h>

<P_36>

<heading>

A ROGE . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,36.4

CAP. 4 . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,36.5

<$$heading>

A Roge is neither so stoute or hardy as the vpright man .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,36.7

Many of them will go fayntly and looke piteously when they see , either
meete any person , hauing a kercher , as white as my shooes , tyed about
their head , with a short staffe in their hand , haltinge , although
they nede not , requiring almes of such as they <P_37> meete , or to
what house they shal com . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.8

But you may easely perceiue by their colour that thei cary both health
and hipocrisie about them , wherby they get gaine , when others want
that can@ @not fayne and dissemble . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.9

Others there@ @bee that walke sturdely about the countrey , and faineth
to seke a brother or kinsman of his , dwelling within som part of the
shire ; - ether that he hath a letter to deliuer to som honest
housholder , dwelling out of an other Shyre , and will shewe you the
same fayre sealed , with the superscription to the partye he speaketh of
, because you shall not thinke him to runne idelly about the countrey ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.10

- either haue they this shyfte , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.11

they wyll cary a cirtificate or pasport about them from som Iusticer of
the peace , with his hand and seale vnto the same , howe hee hath bene
whipped and punished for a vacabonde according to the lawes of this
realme , and that he muste returne to .T. , where he was borne or last
dwelt , by a certayne daye lymited in the same , whiche shal@ @be a good
longe daye . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.12

And all this fayned , bycause without feare they woulde wyckedly wander
, and wyll renue the same where or when it pleasethe them ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.13

for they haue of their affinity that can wryte and read .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.14

These also wyll picke and steale as the vpright men ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.15

and hath their women and metinges at places apoynted ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.16

and nothinge to them inferiour in all kynde of knauery .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.17

There bee of these Roges Curtales , wearinge shorte clokes , that wyll
chaunge their aparell , as occation seruethe . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.18

And their end is eyther hanginge , whiche they call trininge in their
language , or die miserably of the pockes . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.19

There was not long sithens two Roges that alwaies did associate them
selues together , and would neuer seperat them selues , vnles it were
for some especiall causes , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.20

for they were sworn brothers , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.21

and were both of one age , and much like of favour :
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.22

these two , trauelinge into east kent , resorted vnto an ale house there
, being weried with traueling , saluting with short curtisey , when they
came into the house , such as thei sawe sitting there , in whiche
company was the parson of the parish ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.23

and callinge for a pot of the best ale , sat downe at the tables ende :
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.24

the lykor liked them so well , that they had pot vpon pot ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.25

and sometyme , for a lytle good maner , would drinke and offer the cup
to such as they best fancied ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,37.26

and to be short , they sat <P_38> out al the company ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.27

for eche man departed home aboute their busines .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.28

When they had well refreshed them selues , then these rowsy roges
requested the good man of the house wyth his wyfe to sit downe and
drinke with them , of whome they inquired what priest the same was , and
where he dwelt : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.29

then they fayninge that they had an vncle a priest , and that he should
dwel in these partes , which by all presumptions it should be he , and
that they came of purpose to speake with hym , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.30

but because they had not sene hym sithens they were sixe yeares olde ,
they durst not be bold to take acquayntance of him vntyl they were
farther instructed of the truth , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.31

and began to inquier of his name , and how longe he had dwelt there ,
and how farre his house was of from the place they were in :
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.32

the good wyfe of the house , thynkinge them honest men without disceit ,
because they so farre enquyred of their kinseman , was but of a good
zelous naturall intent , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.33

shewed them cherefully that hee was an honest man and welbeloued in the
parish , and of good welth , and had ben there resident xv. years at
the least ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.34

" but , " saith she , " are you both brothers ? "
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.35

" yea , surely , " said they , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.36

" we haue bene both in one belly , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.37

and were twinnes . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.38

" Mercy , god ! " quoth this folish woman ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.39

" it may wel be , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.40

for ye be not much vnlike , " - HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.41

and wente vnto her hall windowe , callinge these yong men vnto her ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.42

and loking out therat , pointed with her fingar HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.43

and shewed them the house standing alone , no house nere the same by
almoste a quarter of a myle ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.44

" that , " sayd she , " is your vncles house . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.45

" Nay , " saith one of them , " he is not onely my vncle , but also my
godfather . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.46

" It may well be , " quoth she , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.47

" nature wyll bind him to be the better vnto you . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.48

" Well , " quoth they , " we be weary , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.49

and meane not to trouble our vncle to-night ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.50

but to-morowe , god willinge , we wyll see him and do our duty :
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.51

but , I pray you , doth our vncle occupy husbandry ?
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.52

what company hath he in his house . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.53

" Alas ! " saith she , " but one old woman and a boy ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.54

he hath no occupying at al : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.55

tushe , " quoth this good wife , " you be mad men ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.56

go to him this night , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.57

for hee hath better lodging for you then I haue , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.58

and yet I speake folishly against my own profit , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.59

for by your taring here I should gaine the more by you . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,38.60

" Now , by my troth , " quoth one of them , " we thanke <P_39> you ,
good hostes , for your holsome councel , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.61

and we meane to do as you wyll vs : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.62

we wyl pause a whyle , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.63

and by that tyme it wyl@ @be almost night ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.64

and I praye you geue vs a reckeninge , " - HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.65

so , manerly paying for that they toke , bad their hoste and hostes
farewell with takinge leaue of the cup , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.66

marched merelye out of the dores towardes this parsones house ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.67

vewed the same well rounde about , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.68

and passed by two bowshotes of into a younge wodde , where they laye
consultinge what they shoulde do vntyll midnight .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.69

Quoth one of them , of sharper wyt and subtyller then the other , to hys
fellowe , " thou seest that this house is stone_walled about , and that
we can@ @not well breake in , in any parte thereof ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.70

thou seest also that the windowes be thicke of mullions , that ther is
no kreping in betwene : wherefore we must of necessytie vse some policye
when strength wil not serue . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.71

I haue a horse locke here about me , " saith he ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.72

" and this I hope shall serue oure turne . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.73

So when it was aboute xii. of the clocke , they came to the house
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.74

and lurked nere vnto his chamber wyndowe : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.75

the dog of the house barked a good , that with the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} noise , this priest waketh out of his
sleepe , and began to cough and hem : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.76

then one of these roges stepes forth nerer the window
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.77

and maketh a ruful and pityful noise , requiring for Christ sake some
reliefe , that was both hongry and thirstye , and was like to ly
with_out the dores all nighte and starue for colde , vnles he were
releued by him with some small pece of money . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.78

" Where dwellest thou ? " quoth this parson . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.79

" Alas ! sir , " saithe this roge , " I haue smal dwelling ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.80

and haue com out of my way ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.81

and I should now , " saith he , " go to any towne nowe at this time of
night , they woulde set me in the stockes and punishe me . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.82

" Well , " quoth this pitifull parson , " away from my house ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.83

either lye in some of my out_houses vntyll the morning ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.84

and holde , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.85

here is a couple of pence for thee . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.86

" A god rewarde you , " quoth this roge ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.87

" and in heauen may you finde it . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.88

The parson openeth his wyndowe , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,39.89

and thrusteth out his arme to geue his almes to this Roge that came
whining to receiue it , and quickly taketh holde of his hand , and
calleth his fellowe to him , whiche was redye at hande with the horse
locke , and clappeth the same about the wrest of his arme , that the
mullions standing so close together for strength , that for his <P_40>
life he could not plucke in his arme againe , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.90

and made him beleue , vnles he would at the least geue them .iii. li.
, they woulde smite of his arme from the body . So that this poore
parson , in feare to lose his hand , called vp his olde woman that lay
in the loft ouer him , and wylled her to take out all the money he had ,
which was iiij. markes , which he saide was all the money in his house
, HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.91

for he had lent vi. li. to one of his neighbours not iiij daies before
. HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.92

" Wel , " quoth they , " master parson , if you haue no more , vpon this
condicion we wil take of the locke , that you will drinke .xij. pence
for our sakes to-morow at the alehouse wher we found you , and thank the
good wife for the good chere she made vs . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.93

He promised faithfully that he would so do ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.94

so they toke of the locke , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.95

and went their way so farre ere it was daye , that the parson coulde
neuer haue any vnderstanding more of them . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.96

Now this parson , sorowfully slumbering that night betwene feare and
hope , thought it was but folly to make two sorrowes of one ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.97

he vsed contentacion for his remedy , not forgetting in the morning to
performe his promise , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.98

but went betims to his neighbour that kept tiplinge ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.99

and asked angerly where the same two men were that dranke with her
yester_daye . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.100

" Which two men ? " quoth this good wife . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.101

" The straungers that came in when I was at your house wyth my
neighbores yesterday . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.102

" What ! your neuewes ? " quoth she . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.103

" My neuewes ? " quoth this parson ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.104

" I trowe thou art mad . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.105

" Nay , by god ! " quoth this good wife , " as sober as you ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.106

for they tolde me faithfully that you were their vncle :
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.107

but , in fayth , are you not so in dede ? HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.108

for , by my trouth , they are straungers
{COM:preceding_word_"straungers"_emended} to me .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.109

I neuer saw them before . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.110

" O , out vpon them ! " quoth the parson ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.111

" they be false theues , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.112

and this night thei compelled me to geue them al the money in my house .
" HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.113

" Benedicite ! " quoth this good wife , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.114

" and haue they so in dede ? HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.115

as I shall aunswere before god , one of them told me besides that you
were godfather to him , and that he trusted to haue blessinge before he
departed . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.116

" What ! did he ? " quoth this parson ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.117

" a halter blesse him for me ! " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.118

" Me thinketh , by the masse , by your countenance you loked so wildly
when you came in , " quoth this good wife , " that somthing was amis .
" HARMAN-1568-E1-H,40.119

" I vse not to gest , " <P_41> quoth this parson , " when I speake so
earnestly . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.120

" Why , all your sorrowes goe with it , " quoth this good wife ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.121

" and sitte downe here , and I will fil a freshe pot of ale shall make
you mery agayne . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.122

" Yea , " saith this parson , " fill in , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.123

and geue me some meat ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.124

for they made me sweare and promise them faithfully that I shoulde
drinke xii. pence with you this day . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.125

" What ! dyd they ? quoth she ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.126

" now , by the mary_masse , they be mery knaues .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.127

I warraunt you they meane to bye no land with your money ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.128

but how could they come into you in the night , your dores being shut
fast ? HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.129

your house is very stronge . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.130

Then this parson shewed her all the hole circumstance , how he gaue them
his almes oute at the wyndowe , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.131

they made such lamentable crye that it pytied him at the hart ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.132

for he sawe but one when he put oute his hand at the windowe .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.133

" Be ruled by me , " quoth this good wyfe . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.134

" Wherin ? " quoth this parson . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.135

" By my troth , neuer speake more of it : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.136

when they shal vnderstand of it in the parish , they wyll but laugh you
to skorne . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.137

" Why , then , " quoth this parson , " the deuyll goe with it , " -
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.138

and their an end . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.139

<heading>

A WYLDE ROGE . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.141

CAP. 5 . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.142

<$$heading>

A Wilde Roge is he that is borne a Roge : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.144

he is a more subtil and more geuen by nature to all kinde of knauery
then the other , as beastely begotten in barne or bushes , and from his
infancye traded vp in trechery ; yea , and before ripenes of yeares doth
permyt , wallowinge in lewde lechery , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.145

but that is counted amongesth them no sin . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.146

For this is their custome , that when they mete in barne at night ,
euery one getteth a make to lye wythall , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.147

and their chaunce to be twentye in a companye , as their is sometyme
more and sometyme lesse : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.148

for to one man that goeth abroad , there are at least two women , which
neuer make it straunge when they be called , although she neuer knewe
him before . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.149

Then when the day doth appeare , he rouses him vp ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.150

and shakes his eares , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.151

and awaye wanderinge where he may gette oughte to the hurte of others .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,41.152

Yet before he skyppeth oute of hys couche and departeth from his darling
, if he like her well , he will apoint her where to mete shortlye <P_42>
after , with a warninge to worke warely for some chetes , that their
meting might be the merier . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.153

Not long sithens , a wild roge chaunced to mete a pore neighbour of mine
, who for honesty and good natur surmounteth many .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.154

This poore man , riding homeward from London , where he had made his
market , this roge demaunded a peny for gods sake , to kepe him a true
man . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.155

This simple man , beholding him wel , and sawe he was of taule personage
with a good quarter staffe in his hand , it much pitied him , as he sayd
, to se him want ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.156

for he was well able to serue his prince in the wars .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.157

Thus , being moued with pytie , and loked in his pursse to finde out a
penye ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.158

and in loking for the same , he plucked oute viii. shyllinges in whyte
money , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.159

and raked therin to finde a single peny ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.160

and at the last findinge one , doth offer the same to this wylde roge :
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.161

but he , seinge so much mony in this simple mans hand , being striken to
the hart with a couetous desire , bid him forth_wyth delyuer al that he
had , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.162

or els he woulde with his staffe beat out his braynes .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.163

For it was not a penye would now quench his thirst , seing so much as he
dyd : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.164

thus , swallowinge his spittel gredely downe , spoyled this poore man of
al the money that he had , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.165

and lept ouer the hedge into a thicke wode , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.166

and went his waye as merely as this good simple man came home sorowfully
. HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.167

I once rebuking a wyld roge because he went idelly about , he shewed me
that he was a beggar by enheritance - HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.168

his Grandfather was a beggar , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.169

his father was one , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.170

and he must nedes be one by good reason . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,42.171

<P_67>

<heading>

A WALKING MORT . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,67.174

CAP. 19 . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,67.175

<$$heading>

These walkinge Mortes bee not maryed : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,67.177

these for their vnhappye yeares doth go as a Autem_Morte ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,67.178

and wyll saye their husbandes died eyther at Newhauen , Ireland , or in
some seruice of the Prince . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,67.179

These make laces vpon staues , and purses , that they cary in their
hands , and whyte vallance for beddes . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,67.180

Manye of these hath hadde and haue chyldren : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,67.181

when these get ought , wither with begging , bychery , or brybery , as
money or apparell , they are quickly shaken out of all by the vpright
men , that they are in a meruelous feare to care any thinge aboute them
that is of any valure . Where fore , this pollicye they vse ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,67.182

they leaue their money now with one and then with a nother trustye
housholders , eyther with the good man or good wife , some tyme in one
shiere , and then in another , as they <P_68> trauell :
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.183

this haue I knowne , that iiij. or v. shyllinges , yea x. shyllinges
, lefte in a place , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.184

and the same wyll they come for againe within one quarter of a yeare ,
or some tyme not in halfe a yeare ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.185

and all this is to lytle purpose , for all their peuyshe pollycy ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.186

for when they bye them lynnen or garmentse , it is taken awaye from them
, and worsse geuen them , or none at all . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.187

The last Sommer , Anno domini . 1566 , being in familiare talke with a
walking Mort that came to my gate , I learned by her what I could ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.188

and I thought I had gathered as much for my purpose as I desired .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.189

I began to rebuke her for her leud lyfe and beastly behauor , declaring
to her what punishment was prepared and heaped vp for her in world to
come for her fylthy lyuinge and wretched conuersation .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.190

" God helpe , " quoth she , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.191

" how should I lyue ? HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.192

none wyll take me into seruice ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.193

but I labour in haruest time honestly . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.194

" I thinke but a whyle with honestie , " quoth I .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.195

" Shall I tell you , " quoth she , " the best of vs all may be amended ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.196

but yet , I thanke god , I dyd one good dede within this twelue monthes
. " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.197

" Wherein ? " quoth I . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.198

Sayth she , " I woulde not haue it spoken of agayne . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.199

" Yf it be meete and necessary , " quod I , " it shall lye vnder my
feete . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.200

" What meane you by that ? " quoth she . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.201

" I meane , " quod I , " to hide the same , and neuer to discouer it to
any . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.202

" Well , " quoth she , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.203

and began to laugh as much as she could , and sweare by the masse that
if I disclosed the same to any , she woulde neuer more tell me any
thinge . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.204

" The last sommer , " quoth she , " I was greate with chylde ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.205

and I traueled into east kent by the sea coste , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.206

for I lusted meruelously after oysters and muskels ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.207

and gathered many , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.208

and in the place where I found them , I opened them
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.209

and eate them styll : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.210

at the last , in seking more , I reached after one ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.211

and stept into a hole , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.212

and fel in into the wast , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.213

and their dyd stycke , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.214

and I had bene drowned if the tide had come , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.215

and espyinge a man a good waye of , I cried as much as I could for helpe
. HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.216

I was alone , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.217

he hard me , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.218

and repaired as fast to me as he might , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.219

and finding me their fast stycking , I required for gods sake his helpe
; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.220

and whether it was with stryuinge and forcing my selfe out , or for ioye
I had of his comminge to me , I had a great couller in my face ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.221

and loked red and well_coullered . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,68.222

<P_69>

And , to be playne with you , he lyked me so well <paren> as he sayd
<$$paren> that I should there lye styll , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.224

and I would not graunt him , that he might lye with me .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.225

And , by my trouth , I wist not what to answeare , I was in such a
perplexite ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.226

for I knew the man well ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.227

he had a very honest woman to his wyfe , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.228

and was of some welth ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.229

and , one the other syde , if I weare not holpe out , I should there
haue perished , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.230

and I graunted hym that I would obeye to his wyll :
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.231

then he plucked me out . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.232

And because there was no conuenient place nere hande , I required hym
that I might go washe my selfe , and make me somewhat clenly ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.233

and I would come to his house and lodge all night in his barne , whether
he mighte repaire to me , and accomplyshe hys desire ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.234

' but let it not be , ' quoth she , ' before nine of the clocke at
nyghte HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.235

for then there wyl@ @be small styrring . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.236

And I may repaire to the towne , ' quoth she , ' to warme and drye my
selfe ' ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.237

for this was about two of the clocke in the after_none .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.238

' Do so , ' quoth hee ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.239

' for I must be busie to looke oute my cattell here by before I can come
home . ' HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.240

So I went awaye from hym , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.241

and glad was I . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.242

" And why so ? " quoth I . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.243

" Because , " quoth she , " hys wife , my good dame , is my very freend
, HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.244

and I am much beholdinge to her . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.245

And she hath donne me so much good or this , that I weare loth nowe to
harme her any waye . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.246

" Why , " quoth I , " what and it hadde beene any other man , and not
your good dames husbande ? " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.247

" The matter had bene the lesse , " quoth shee .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.248

" Tell me , I prey the , " quoth I , " who was the father of thy childe
? " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.249

She stodyd a whyle , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.250

and sayde that it hadde a father . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.251

" But what was hee ? " quoth I . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.252

Nowe , by my trouth , I knowe not , " quoth shee ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.253

" you brynge me out of my matter so , you do . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.254

" Well , saye on , " quoth I . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.255

" Then I departed strayght to the towne , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.256

and came to my dames house , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.257

And shewed her of my mysfortune , also of her husbands vsage , in all
pointes , and that I showed her the same for good wyll ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.258

and byde her take better heede to her husbande , and to her selfe :
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.259

so shee gaue me great thankes , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.260

and made me good cheere , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.261

and byd me in anye case that I should be redye at the barne at that tyme
and houre we had apoynted ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.262

' for I knowe well , ' quoth this good wyfe , ' my husband wyll not
breake wyth the . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,69.263

And one thinge I warne the , that thou <P_70> geue me a watche worde
a_loud when hee goeth aboute to haue his pleasure of the ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.264

and that shall bee " fye , for shame , fye , " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.265

and I wyll bee harde by you wyth helpe . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.266

But I charge the keepe thys secret vntyll all bee fynesed ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.267

and holde , ' saythe thys good wyfe , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.268

' here is one of my peticotes I geue thee . ' HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.269

' I thanke you , good dame , ' quoth I , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.270

' and I warrante you I wyll bee true and trustye vnto you . '
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.271

So my dame lefte me settinge by a fyre with meate and drynke ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.272

and wyth the oysters I broughte with me , I hadde greate cheere :
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.273

shee wente strayght HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.274

and repaired vnto her gossypes dwelling there by ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.275

and , as I dyd after vnderstande , she made her mone to them , what a
naughtye , lewed , lecherous husbande shee hadde , and howe that she
coulde not haue hys companye for harlotes , and that she was in feare to
take some fylthy dysease of hym , he was so commen a man , hauinge lytle
respecte whome he hadde to do with all ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.276

' and , ' quoth she , ' nowe here is one at my house , a poore woman
that goeth aboute the countrey that he woulde haue hadde to doe withall
; wherefore , good neyghboures and louinge gossypes , as you loue me ,
and as you would haue helpe at my hand another tyme , deuyse some remedy
to make my husband a good man , that I may lyue in some suerty without
disease , and that hee may saue his soule that God so derelye bought .
' HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.277

After shee hadde tolde her tale , they caste their persinge eyes all
vpon her , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.278

but one stoute dame amongst the rest had these wordes -
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.279

' As your pacient bearinge of troubles , your honest behauiour among vs
your neyghbours , your tender and pytifull hart to the poore of the
parysh , doth moue vs to lament your case , so the vnsatiable carnalite
of your faithelesse husbande doth instigate and styre vs to deuyse and
inuent some speedy redresse for your ease and the amendement of hys lyfe
. Wherefore , this is my councell and you wyll bee aduertysed by me ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.280

for I saye to you all , vnlesse it be this good wyfe , who is cheefely
touched in this matter , I haue the nexte cause ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.281

for hee was in hande wyth me not longe a_goe , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.282

and companye had not bene present , which was by a meruelous chaunce ,
he hadde , I thinke , forced me . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.283

For often hee hath bene tempering with me , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,70.284

and yet haue I sharpely sayde him <P_71> naye : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.285

therefore , let vs assemble secretly into the place where hee hathe
apuynted to meete thys gyllot that is at your house , and lyrke preuelye
in some corner tyll hee begyn to goe aboute his busines .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.286

And then me thought I harde you saye euen nowe that you had a watche
word , at which word we wyll all step@ @forth , being fiue of vs besydes
you , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.287

for you shal@ @be none because it is your husbande ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.288

but gette you to bed at your accustomed houre . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.289

And we wyll cary eche of vs good byrchen rodde in our lappes ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.290

and we will all be muffeled for knowing , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.291

and se that you goe home and acquaynt that walking Morte with the matter
; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.292

for we must haue her helpe to hold , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.293

for alwaies foure must hold and two lay one . ' HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.294

' Alas ! ' sayth this good wyfe , ' he is to stronge for you all .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.295

I would be loth , for my sake you should receaue harme at his hande . '
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.296

' feare you not , ' quoth these stout wemen , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.297

' let her not geue the watch word vntyl his hosen be abaut his legges .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.298

And I trowe we all wyl@ @be with him to bring before he shall haue
leasure to plucke them vp againe . ' HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.299

They all with on voyce agred {COM:preceding_word_"agred"_emended} to the
matter , that the way she had deuised was the best :
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.300

so this good wife repaired home ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.301

but before she departed from her gossypes , she shewed them at what
houre they should preuely come in on the backsid , and where to tary
their good our : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.302

so by the time she came in , it was all_most night ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.303

and found the walking Morte still setting by the fyre ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.304

and declared to her all this new deuyse aboue sayd , which promised
faythfully to full_fyll to her small powre as much as they hadde deuysed
: HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.305

within a quarter of an oure after , in commeth the good man , who said
that he was about his cattell . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.306

" Why , what haue we here , wyfe , setting by the fyre ?
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.307

and yf she haue eate and dronke , send her into the barne to her lodging
for this night , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.308

for she troubeleth the house . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.309

" Euen as you wyll husbande , " sayth his wyfe ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.310

" you knowe she commeth once in two yeres into these quarters .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.311

Awaye , " saythe this good wyfe , " to your lodginge . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.312

" Yes , good dame , " sayth she , " as fast as I can : "
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.313

thus , by loking one on the other , eche knewe others mynde ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.314

and so departed to her comely couche : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.315

the good man of the house shrodge hym for Ioye , thinking to hym selfe ,
I wyll make some pastyme with you anone . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,71.316

And calling to his wyfe for hys sopper , set <P_72> him downe ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.317

and was very plesant , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.318

and dranke to his wyfe , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.319

and fell to his mammerings , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.320

and mounched a_pace , nothing vnderstanding of the bancquet that was
preparing for him after sopper , and according to the prouerbe , that
swete meate wyll haue sowre sawce : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.321

thus , when he was well refreshed , his sprietes being reuyued , entred
into familiare talke with his wife , of many matters , how well he had
spent that daye to both there proffytes , sayinge some of his cattell
were lyke to haue ben drowned in the dyches , dryuinge others of his
neyghbours cattell out that were in his pastures , and mending his
fences that were broken downe . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.322

Thus profitably he had consumed the daye , nothinge talking of his
helping out of the walkinge Morte out of the myre , nether of his
request nor yet of her promisse . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.323

Thus feding her with frendly fantacyes , consumed two houres and more .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.324

Then fayninge howe hee would se in what case his horse were in and howe
they were dressed , Repaired couertly into the barne , where as his
freendlye {COM:preceding_word_"freendlye"_emended} foes lyrked preuely ,
vnlesse it were this manerly Morte , that comly couched on a bottell of
strawe . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.325

" What , are you come ? " quoth she ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.326

" by the masse , I would not for a_hundreth pound that my dame should
knowe that you were here , eyther any els of your house . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.327

" No , I warrant the , " sayth this good man , " they be all safe and
fast ynough at their woorke , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.328

and I wyl@ @be at mine anon . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.329

And laye downe by her , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.330

and strayght would haue had to do with her . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.331

" Nay , fye , " sayth she , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.332

" I lyke not this order : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.333

if ye lye with me , you shall surely vntrus you and put downe your hosen
, HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.334

for that way is most easiest and best . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.335

" Sayest thou so ? " quoth he , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.336

" now , by my trouth agred . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.337

And when he had vntrussed him selfe and put downe , he began to assalt
the vnsatiable fort HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.338

" Why , " quoth she , that was with_out shame , sauinge for her promes ,
" HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.339

And are you not ashamed ? HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.340

" neuer a whyte , " sayth he , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.341

" lye downe quickely . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,72.342

" Now , fye , for shame , fye , " sayth shee a_loude , whyche was the
watche word . At the which word , these fyue furious , sturdy ,
muffeled gossypes flynges oute , and takes sure holde of this be_trayed
parson , sone pluckinge his hosen downe lower , and byndinge the same
fast about his feete ; <P_73> then byndinge his handes , and knitting a
hande charcher about his eyes , that he shoulde not see ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.343

and when they had made hym sure and fast , Then they layd him one vntyll
they weare windles . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.344

" Be good , " sayth this Morte , " vnto my maister , for the passion of
God , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.345

" and layd on as fast as the rest , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.346

and styll seased not to crye vpon them to bee mercyfull vnto hym ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.347

and yet layde on a_pace ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.348

and when they had well beaten hym , that the bloud braste plentifullye
oute in most places , they let hym lye styll bounde . With this
exhortation , that he shoulde from that tyme forth knowe his wyfe from
other mens , and that this punishment was but a flebyting in respect of
that which should followe , yf he amended not his manners .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.349

Thus leuynge hym blustering , blowing , and fominge for payne , and
malyncolye that hee neither might or coulde be reuenged of them , they
vanyshed awaye , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.350

and hadde thys Morte with them , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.351

and safely conuayde her out of the towne : HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.352

sone after commeth into the barne one of the good mans boyes , to fet
some haye for his horse . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.353

And fyndinge his maister lyinge faste bounde and greuouslye beaten with
rodes , was sodenly abashed HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.354

and woulde haue runne out agayne to haue called for helpe ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.355

but his maister bed hym come vnto hym and vnbynd hym ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.356

" and make no wordes , " quoth he , " of this . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.357

I wyl@ @be reuenged well inoughe ; " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.358

yet not_with_standinge , after better aduyse , the matter beinge
vnhonest , he thought it meter to let the same passe , and , not , as
the prouerbe saythe , to awake the sleping dogge .
HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.359

" And , by my trouth , " quoth this walkinge Morte , " I come nowe from
that place , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.360

and was neuer there sythens this parte was playde , whiche is some what
more then a yeare . HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.361

And I here a very good reporte of hym now , that he loueth his wyfe well
, and vseth hym selfe verye honestlye ; HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.362

and was not this a good acte ? HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.363

nowe , howe saye you ? HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.364

" " It was pretely handeled , " quoth I , HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.365

" and is here all ? " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.366

" Yea , " quoth she , " here is the ende . " HARMAN-1568-E1-H,73.367

