<BEGIN_hayward-1612-e2-h>

<P_2>

During this tyme , a Parliament was held at London , where the Nobility
of the Realme remayned with a more constant countenance , eyther as
holding themselves assured , or for that they would not descend to any
other seeming . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,2.3

When they received certaine intelligence of the death of Queene Mary ,
they assembled together in the upper howse , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,2.4

and , after a short debatement , sent to the Speaker of the Parliament ,
desiring him to come to them forthwith , accompanyed with the whole body
of the lower house , <em> for that they had <$$em> to impart a matter of
importance unto them . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,2.5

When they were come , and had setled themselves to attentione , Doctor
Heath , Archbishop of Yorke , and Lord Chauncelor of England , with a
composed countenance and voice , as neither glad at the death of the old
Prince , nor discontended at the new , declared to them the assured
advertisement of the death of the Queene : That albeit the Parliament by
this heavy accident did dissolve , yet for that they had bin elected to
represent the common people <P_3> of the Realme , and to deale for them
in matters of estate , they could noe waye better dischardge that trust
, then in joyninge with the Lords to publish the next Successour to the
Crowne : That the right and title of Lady Elizabeth , sister to the
deceased Queene , and onely daughter then surviving of King Henry the
Eighth , was esteemed by the Lords free from all quarrell , free from
all questione and doubt : that in no case expeditione is more expedient
, than in these high passages of State , for extinguishing as well the
vayne hopes of enemyes , as the false and needelesse feares of friendes
: that for this cause the Lords had desired their presence , that , with
joynt consent of the whole assembly , the Lady Elizabeth might forthwith
be proclaymed Queene . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,3.6

The Knights and Burgesses gave easy consent to that which they sawe noe
reason to deny . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,3.7

If happily some few had noe inclination that waye , yet , beeing unable
to stay the course of so greate a current , they were content not to
shew a will to affect that which they had no power to effect .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,3.8

Soe the same day shee was proclaymed Queene by the principall
Heraalts-at-Armes - first , at the Pallace at Westminster , directly
before the Hall-dore , afterwards at the Crosse in Cheape , and in other
places of the Citye . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,3.9

This ceremony was performed upon Thursday , the seventeenth day of
November , in the yeare 1558 , in the five-and-twentieth yeare of her
age , when shee had been well instructed by experience and adversity ,
two excellent teachers for her , who had a judgment farre beyond her
yeares . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,3.10

The same daye Reygnold Poole , Cardinall , and not long before made
Archbishop of Canterbury , departed this life , doubtfull whether <P_4>
by naturall disease , or by violence of griefe , or by some other
strange inforcement . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,4.11

He was one of the younger sonnes of Margaret , Countesse of Salisbury ,
daughter to George , Duke of Clarence , brother to King Edward the
Fourth . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,4.12

Hee was learned and eloquent , of noe comely presence , but of good
grace in delivering his speach : herewith haughty , ambitious , and
vehement in the pursuite of his purposes . Whereupon , as he had been
formerly impatient for not atteyning to the full degrees of his desires
and hopes , so now , most of all , in fore-seeing the abatement of his
honour , and the alteratione of the relligeone which hee did professe ;
for establishment whereof , in former times , he had practised so farr
that he had reasone to conceive he could not be indured in the change .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,4.13

For the change in Religion which then insued , and had alsoe happened
not long before , was easily fore-seene by men of understanding , not
onely by reasone of the consciences of the Princes , formed in them by
education , but alsoe out of their particular interests and endes .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,4.14

For King Henry the eighth had taken to wife Katherine of Arragon , who
had beene formerly marryed to Prince Arthur his elder brother ; for
which marriage <paren> being within the degrees expressely prohibited in
Leviticus <$$paren> the Bishop of Rome gave a dispensatione .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,4.15

Now King Henry , following the opinione of those Divines <paren> as well
Catholickes as Protestants <$$paren> who judged those prohibitiones to
bee naturall and morall , and that noe power uppon earth had power to
grant a dispensatione against them , put away Queen Katherine ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,4.16

and marryed Queene Anne Bullen , whilest she still remained in life .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,4.17

Of this Katherine he had issue Mary ; of Anne Bullen , Elizabeth .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,4.18

So it was a marveilous motive for Queen Mary to embrace and advance the
authority of the Bishop of Rome , for that the validity of King Henryes
marryage with Queene Katherine her mother , was thereupon grounded :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,4.19

And this hath not bin the weakest threed in the Pope's net , by
dispensing in <P_5> such prohibited marriages to hoald Princes obnoxious
unto him . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,5.20

But on the other side , because yf the Bishop of Rome had power to
dispense in the first marriage of King Henry the eyght , then was the
subsequent marriage with Anne Bullen voyde ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,5.21

besides the command of conscience , it was alsoe an inducement in
reasone for Queene Elizabeth to reject his authority .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,5.22

And , albeit many greate Princes doe neyther so easily resist , nor so
moderately follow their desires as other men , because , by how much
more they are accustomed to be honoured and obeyed , by so much lesse
<paren> advancing their wills above other respects <$$paren> are they
able to indure to have their purposes eyther frustrated or delayed : yet
was not this alteratione brought in sodaynly <paren> as in other places
it was usually done <$$paren> but by a more felt than seene manner of
proceeding . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,5.23

Yea , some colour of hope was conceived , that noe alteratione should be
made at all ; for that a Proclamatione was presently set foorth , that
no man should alter any Rites or Ceremonyes at that tyme used in the
Church : HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,5.24

And , because , in such divisione of opinions , the Pulpits often serve
as drummes and fiffes , to inflame fury , Proclamatione was made , that
noe man might preach , but such as should be allowed by authority :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,5.25

and thes alsoe were charged to forbeare treating of controversyes in
Religion not to move dispute touching governement , eyther for altering
or reteyning the present forme . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,5.26

Hereuppon no Sermon was preached at Paules <P_6> Crosse , untill the
Rehearsall Sermon was made upon the Sunday after Easter : at which tyme
when the Preacher was ready to mount into the Pulpet , the keye could
not be found : HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.27

and when , by commandement of the Lord Mayor , it was opened by a smyth
, the place was very filthy and uncleane . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.28

Alsoe the Ports and Havens were diligently kept , that noe man might
passe forth of the Realme , or enter therein , without eyther licence or
notice at the least , whereby many suspiciones and doubtes , and happily
some dangeres , were prevented . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.29

Lastly , inhibitione was straightly given that no monyes should be made
over by exchange for a tyme . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.30

And , for that the presence of the Prince is of greatest moment to
establish affayres , the Queene , the next day after her title was
proclaimed , removed from Hatfield , in Hartfordshire , where shee then
lay , towardes London ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.31

and was upon the way incountred and intertained in all places with such
a concourse of people , with soe lively representationes of love , joy
and hope , that it farr exceeded her expectatione .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.32

The people of all sorts <paren> even such whose fortunes were unlike
either to bee amended or impaired by change <$$paren> went many myles
out of the City to see her , some uppon particular affectione to her
person , others upon opinione of good to the State , some uppon an
ordinary levity and delight in change , and not a few because they would
doe as others did ; all with like fervency contending who should most
neerly approach unto her , who should most cherefully bestow uppon her
all honourable titles and happy wishes . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.33

Now , if ever any persone had eyther the gift or the stile to winne the
hearts of people , it was this Queene ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.34

and if ever shee did expresse the same , it was at that present , in
coupling mildnesse with majesty as shee did , and in stately stouping to
the meanest sort . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.35

All her facultyes were in motione , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.36

and every motione seemed a well_guided actione ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.37

her eye was set upon one , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.38

her eare listened to another , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.39

her judgement ranne uppon a third , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,6.40

to a fourth shee addressed <P_7> her speech , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.41

her spiritt seemed to be every-where , and yet so intyre in her selfe ,
as it seemed to bee noe where else . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.42

Some shee pityed , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.43

some shee commended , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.44

some shee thanked , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.45

at others shee pleasantly and wittily jeasted , contemning noe person ,
neglecting noe office ; and distributing her smiles , lookes , and
graces , soe artificially , that thereupon the people againe redoubled
the testimonyes of their joyes ; and afterwards , raising every thing to
the highest straine , filled the eares of all men with immoderate
extolling their Prince . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.46

Shee was a Lady , upon whom nature had bestowed , and well placed , many
of her fayrest favores ; of stature meane , slender , streight , and
amiably composed ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.47

of such state her carriage , as every motione of her seemed to beare
majesty : HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.48

her haire was inclined to pale yellow , her foreheade large and faire ,
a seemeing sete for princely grace ; her eyes lively and sweete , but
short-sighted ; her nose somewhat rising in the middest ; the whole
compasse of her countenance somewhat long , but yet of admirable beauty
, not so much in that which is tearmed the flower of youth , as in a
most delightfull compositione of majesty and modesty in equall mixture .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.49

But without good qualityes of mynde , the gifts of nature are like
paynted floweres , without eyther vertue or sappe ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.50

yea , sometymes they grow horrid and loathsome . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.51

Now her vertues were such as might suffice to make an Aethiopian
beautifull , which , the more a man knowes and understands , the more he
shall admire and love . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.52

In life , shee was most innocent ; in desires , moderate ; in purpose ,
just ; of spirit , above credit and almost capacity of her sexe ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.53

of divine witt , as well for depth of judgment , as for quicke conceite
and speedy expeditione ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.54

of eloquence , as sweete in the utterance , soe ready and easie to come
to the utterance : HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,7.55

of wonderfull knowledge both in <P_8> learning and affayres ; skilfull
not only in the Latine and Greeke , but alsoe in divers other forraine
languages : HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.56

none knew better the hardest art of all others , that is , of commanding
men , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.57

nor could more use themselves to those cares without which the royall
dignity could not be supported . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.58

She was relligeous , magnanimous , mercifull and just ; respective of
the honour of others , and exceeding tender in the touch of her owne .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.59

Shee was lovely and loving , the two principall bands of duty and
obedience . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.60

Shee was very ripe and measured in counsayle and experience , as well
not to lett goe occasiones , as not to take them when they were greene .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.61

Shee maintained Justice at home , and Armes abroad , with great wisdome
and authority in eyther place . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.62

Her majesty seemed to all to shine though courtesy :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.63

but as shee was not easy to receive any to especiall grace , so was shee
most constant to those whom shee received ; and of great judgment to
know to what point of greatnesse men were fit to bee advanced .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.64

Shee was rather liberall than magnificent , making good choys of the
receivoures ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.65

and for this cause was thought weake by some against the desire of money
. HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.66

But it is certaine that beside the want of treasure which shee found ,
her continuall affayres in Scottland , France , the Low Countries , and
in Ireland , did occasione greate provisione of money , which could not
bee better supplyed , than by cutting off eyther excessive or
unnecessary expence at home . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.67

Excellent Queene ! HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.68

what doe my words but wrong thy worth ? HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,8.69

what doe I but guild gold ? what but shew the sunne <P_9> with a candle
, in attempting to prayse thee , whose honor doth flye over the whole
world upon the two wings of Magnanimity and Justice , whose perfection
shall much dimme the lustre of all other that shall be of thy sexe ?
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,9.70

I will no longer staye upon generall descriptiones , but proceede to
such particular acts as shall manifest much more than I have said .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,9.71

When shee came to London , shee was lodged the first night in the
Charter-howse , where many greate persones , eyther for birth , or
worthinesse , <em> or place in the State , <$$em> resorted unto her ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,9.72

and now , rising from dejected feares to ambitious hopes , contended who
should catch the first hold of her favour . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,9.73

The Queene did beare her selfe moderately and respectively to all ,
desiring them , if they would not be deceived in her , that they would
not be the first to deceive themselves : that they would not prejudice
her in their opiniones , as not by uncourteous suspicions and doubts ,
so not by immoderate expectationes and hopes , promisinge unto
themselves out of a suddayne likeing more then is fitt , or peradventure
possible , to be performed : the fayleance whereof would eyther change
or abate theyr loves : that they would lay aside all fore-taken conceits
, <P_10> which , like painted glasse , doth colour all things which are
seene through it . Lastly , that they would not too rashly judge of her
actions , as being privie neither to the occasiones of them , nor to
their endes . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.74

So , after shee had passed the offices of court done to her by the
Nobility and others , the day following , in the afternoone , shee rode
from thence to the Tower . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.75

At the Charter-howse gate the Mayor of the city met her ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.76

and the Recorder with a short speech saluted her in the name of the
whole city . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.77

Shee rode in great state through Barbican , the Mayor riding with Garter
King_at_Armes , and carrying a Scepter before her :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.78

shee entered at Cripplegate , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.79

and so passed by the Wall to Bishoppes-gate . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.80

This gate was richly hanged , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.81

and thereuppon the Wayts of the City sounded loud Musicke .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.82

At the head of the streete a scholler of Paul's Schoole made to her a
short speach in Latine Verses ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.83

next unto him stood the Company of Mercers within their rayles , and
after them all the other Companyes , extending to the furthest end of
Mart lane . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.84

When she entred Mart lane a peale of ordnance began at the Tower , which
continued halfe an hour or thereabouts . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.85

The presence of the Queene gave perfectione and life to all thes
solemnityes . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.86

Shee answeared such speaches as wer made unto her ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.87

shee graced every persone eyther of dignity or employment ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.88

shee soe cheerfully both observed and accepted every thing , that in the
judgement of all men , all these honours were esteemed too meane for her
worth . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.89

When shee was entred into the Tower , shee thus spake to those about her
: " Some have fallen from being Princes of this land , to be prisoners
in this place ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,10.90

I am raysed from beeing prisoner in this <P_11> place , to bee Prince of
this land . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,11.91

That dejectione was a worke of God's justice ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,11.92

this advancement is a worke of his mercy ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,11.93

as they were to yeeld patience for the one , so I must beare my selfe
towards God thankfull , and to men mercifull and beneficiall for the
other . " HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,11.94

<P_60>

This advise beinge taken , battery was forthwith made with nine peices
of ordinance against the steples , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,60.96

and although they lay a quarter of a mile of , yet the peices that lay
upon St. Anthonie's steple were by them dismounted ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,60.97

and within six or seaven tyre after , the peices on St. Nicholas steple
were likewise cast downe , togither with a gunner that stode by one of
them . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,60.98

The battery continued all that daie , and especially against St.
Nicholas Church , which the enimies had made their stoorehowse for
provision , so as the walles and roofe were torne , and the steple
altogither defaced . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,60.99

And bycause the trenches were unfitt , in regard both of distance and
scituation , to do anie great harme to the walles on that side of the
towne , the pioners , as well Englishe as Scotts , were imploied to cast
newe trenches , and to raise a mount on the south and south-west of the
towne . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,60.100

The daie after the begininge of this worke , about 300 or 400 shot of
the French were secretly sett out of Lieth under covert of a place
called litle London , ready to breake forth as occasion should invite
them ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,60.101

after this a fewe horsemen issued forth , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,60.102

and lightly hovered upon the Englishe armie . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,60.103

At the last certeyne Englishe lances charged upon them , whereupon they
retired , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,60.104

and drewe the Englishe within danger of <P_61> their shot ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.105

but they agayne were as hotly saluted , partely by a supplie of smale
shot from the armie , and partlie by the artillery from the trenches ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.106

and , albeit the French did behave themselves bravelie that daie , in
skirmishinge almost two howers in the face of the cannon , yet were they
enforced with much expence of blood to retyre themselves into the towne
. HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.107

Diverse like games of fortune were plaied , with some losse to both
parties , the French beinge desirous to give impediment to the Englishe
pioneers , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.108

but , either by their naturall rashenes , or ill fortune , they returned
, for the most part , with disadvantage . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.109

At the last the trenches were finished , whereof some drewe so nere to
the towne , that a harquebuze might reach them that were in the grene
bullwarke close to the walles . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.110

Then was the armie removed to the newe trenches ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.111

and , as they passed , manie peces of artillery were discharged from the
towne against them ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.112

as they were busied in setlinge their campe , the French salied forth ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.113

and offered skirmishe , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.114

but the Englishe , beinge then both divided in companie and otherwise
imploied , held them selues within their strength .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.115

Presently after this the Englishe assaulted a trench , which the French
men had made without the towne , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.116

slue the skout and diuerse soldiers that were within it ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.117

and made themselves masters of the place . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.118

Then they gave a great alarme to the towne both by land and by water ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.119

and in the meane time , the newe trenches were planted with canon .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.120

This done , the battery began on that part of the towne against the
walles , with effect answerable to the assaylant's desire .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.121

On a certeyne daie , whilest this battery continued , a sodaine fire was
raised towards eveninge in Lieth , which was no sooner espied by the
Englishe , but they discharged their ordinance against the same place ,
so , as helpe beinge dangerous , and the winde growinge , the flame
mightilie encreased and raged all that night , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,61.122

and imbraced also some of their stoore howses , so as much of their
<P_62> provision was consumed : HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.123

the sodainenes of the adventure , and the darckenes of the night brought
a great feare and confusion upon them within the towne .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.124

Notwithstandinge , the French regarded lesse their safety than their
glory , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.125

salied forth at the same tyme HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.126

and maineteyned skirmishe almost two howres . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.127

They manned the walles also , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.128

and prepared all thinges , as if the assault should presently have bene
given . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.129

But the breach was not then held reasonable , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.130

and therefore an alarme onlie was made , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.131

and certeyne soldiers entered the ditch to veiwe exactly the state of
the walles . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.132

After this two trenches were made ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.133

the one was planted with great ordinance , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.134

in the other certeyne shot were lodged , to beate of those who should
appeare in defence of the walles . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.135

Then were two false assaults given , onlie to discover where the
flanckes {TEXT:flanckees} of the breach did lie ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.136

and no sooner had the Englishe approched the ditch , but two or three
voleyes of shot were discharged against them from the flanckees ,
whereby about twenty of them were slaine or hurt .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.137

Hereupon the battery was bent against the flanckees ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.138

and in the greatest fury thereof , the French made a salie upon the newe
trenches , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.139

and so lyvelie charged the Englishe , that they constreyned them to give
grownd a good waye , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.140

and , notwithstandinge , redublinge in courage upon the importance of
their danger , they drave the French againe home to the towne ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.141

and in the meane tyme , the great artillery did much hurt on both sides
. HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.142

In the very heat of these hurliments , the English burnt one of the
milles beyond the water , and the daie followinge the other , which ,
when the French endeavoured to save , they were so galed by two
demie-culveringes from the trenches , that they were constreyned to
abandon the enterprise . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.143

And nowe the artillery had executed so well , that , by the opinion of
the Englishe commanders , the breach was faire , and the towne in fit
state to be assaulted : HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,62.144

and thus it was comonly concluded by some , bycause they demed so inded
; by others , through <P_63> a rashe impaciencie , more apt to contemne
dangers , then able to judge them ; by the rest , to show themselves
valiant , in things which perteyne to the hasard more of the soldieres
then themselves ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,63.145

and herein also they were supported by manie bold blouds amonge the
comon soldieres , who confirmed this devise with all sorts of hopes
which men followed with fortunate succes do no lesse usually then
vainely frame . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,63.146

Hereupon the generall , reposinge so great assurance both in the courage
and fortune of his soldiers , commanded them , upon the sixt daie of
Maie , towards the eveninge , that they should be readie in armes by
midnight , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,63.147

and , in the meane season , gave order that the battery should not cease
: HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,63.148

he encouraged them also that euery man should go to his charge , and
shewe the same will to execute the enterprise which they had done to
undertake it ; that they had no more neede to doubt of the victorie ,
then they had to doubt of their owne valour ; that it was in vaine to
have so often chased their enimies to their burrowes , if then they
could not ferret them out of their hoales ; that , if they vanquished
the first bruit of danger , which , like a storme , would be furious and
short , the residue of the enterprise would be easy to attcheive .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,63.149

On the other side , the French , haveinge often tasted the tough temper
of the Englishe , omitted no preparacion for their defence , knowinge
right well , that there is no greater token of receyving a blowe then
when men esteme to much of themselves and to litle of their enimies ,
presuminge also that manie former good fortunes of the Englishe began to
bred a presuminge boldnes . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,63.150

The next morninge by ij of the clocke diverse bands of Englishe , with
greater courage then preparacion , advanced towardes the towne .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,63.151

The lancers and light horsemen were appoynted to girde the feild ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,63.152

the residue of the foote were left to defend the trenches , and to
endanger those who should make appearance upon the walles .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,63.153

The assailants pressed forwards HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,63.154

and entered the <P_64> ditches with boldenes inoughe , some approchinge
the walles , some the bulwarks , others attemptinge the breach besids
the milles . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,64.155

But when they came to the impe of their exploite , the breach was fownd
in good condition of defence , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,64.156

and for the bulwarks and the walles , the ladders were too short by two
yards and more . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,64.157

Besids , the French had stopped the current of the river that night ,
whereby the ditches were so anoyed with water , that they were
troublesome to passe , albeit no other impediment should have bene
offered . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,64.158

<P_86>

This yeare , in Aprill , one William Geffry was whipped from the
Marshall-sea , in Southwarke , untill he came to Bedlame , without
Bishopsgate , for affirming that one John More , whoe then laye in
Bedlame , was Jesus Christ , and that the same Geffrye was his disciple
; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,86.160

uppon his heade was sett a paper , wherein was expressed the quality of
his offence , in thes wordes - " William <P_87> Geffrye , a most
blasphemous hereticke , denying Christ our Saviour <em> to be <$$em> in
heaven . " HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.161

At Bedlame , John More was brought fourth , before whom Geffrye was
whipped , untill he confessed that Jesus Christ was in heaven .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.162

Then was More examined , who answearing both stoutly and crosly , was
commanded to put offe his apparrell , which he readily perfourmed ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.163

and then was tyed to a cart . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.164

But scarce had he bin whipped one bow-shott in length , but he confessed
that Jesus Christ was in heaven , and that he , the sayd More , was a
miserable man . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.165

Then was More returned prisoner to Bedlame , and Geffrye to the
Marshall-sea , where they had remayned prisoneres about a yeere and a
halfe before . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.166

I have sett downe this as a notable president to convince and reclayme
hereticks both obstinate and absurd , especially when they rise to any
high pitch of madnesse ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.167

for , from some degree , without exceptione , I exempt none .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.168

Uppon the fourth of June , in the afternoone , the steeple of Paules ,
in London , was fired by lightening . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.169

The fire was seene to breake foorth about two or three yardes beneath
the foote of the Crosse , not much greater in appearance then the flame
of a candle , from whence it burned downward , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.170

and in short tyme imbraced the whole spire of the steeple , and all the
rooffes of the church . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.171

This fire was the more terrible , by reasone it was in a conspicuous
place , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.172

and threatned danger unto many , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.173

and was alltogether unapproacheable for remedy , as well in regard of
the height of the church as of the falling downe of the moulten lead .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.174

The flames flew over many partes of the city ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.175

sparkes , and small coales , were cast soe farr as the conduite in
Fleete streete ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.176

the channelles about the church wer stopped , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.177

and the streetes seemed to be paved with leade .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,87.178

The people , being strooke with amazement , filled all places with
tumult and confusione , expecting a generall calamity of the city , and
, thereuppon , buysying themselves to remove such goodes out of ther
howses as they wer <P_88> most desirous to save .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.179

The fury of the fire was soe greate , that , within the space of fowre
howres , it burned downe the spire of the steeple and all the rooffes of
the church . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.180

The timber worke was consumed , the leade moulten , the belles cast
downe , which made a hideous noyse in the fall ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.181

the stone work , alsoe , especially towardes the topp , was sore shaken
and weakened with the force of the fire . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.182

And herein wer two things especially admired and observed by some :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.183

one was , the sodayne encrease of the fire , for that it was noe sooner
begunne , but foorthwith it was at the highest ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.184

the other was , that , as if it had beene destined onely for the ruine
of that place , it beganne at the topp of the spire of the steeple , and
from thence fastened uppon every part of the rooffes of the church , and
yet fell not from the rooffes <paren> where the fire did most rage
<$$paren> uppon any of the buildings underneath .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.185

Hereuppon strange conjectures wer conceived , as of secret causes , soe
of vayne events , which did never ensue . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.186

Immediately uppon this misadventure , the Queene directed her letteres
to the Lord Mayor and citizens of London to take speedy order for the
repayring of thes harmes ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.187

and , for ther better encouragement , shee delivered foorthwith
one_thousand markes in gould toward the charge , and a warrant for
one_thousand loades of timber , to be taken out of her woodes or parkes
wheresoever . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.188

The citizenes of London granted a benevolence , and three fifteenes , to
be presently payd . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.189

The clergie of the province of Canterbury granted the fortieth part of
the yearely valew of thos benefices which payd first fruites , and of
those which payd noe first fruits , the thirtieth part .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.190

The clergie of the diocesse of London granted the thirtieth part of the
yearely valew of such benefices as were charged with first fruites , and
the twentieth part of thos that were charged . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.191

All this , being collected together , with many other voluntary
contributiones besides , amounted to the sum of 5,968@ @=li=. 16@ @=s=.
1@ @=d=. ob. HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,88.192

Two of the clergie of the <P_89> church of St. Paule , and sixe
citizenes of London , wer appoynted to oversee and sett forward the
worke , who used such diligence in ther charge , that , within one month
after the firing of the church , all the fower greate roofes wer covered
with a sleight roofe of boordes and leade , onely to preserve the walles
, floores , and vaultes , from the enjurie of the rayne .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,89.193

And , before the yeare was expired , all the long rooffes wer raysed of
new and strong timber , the most part whereof was framed in Yorkshire ,
and by sea conveyed to London : the charges of which worke amounted to
the summe of 5,982@ @=li=. 13@ @=s=. 4@ @=d= ob.
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,89.194

Soe the receites wer fully expended ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,89.195

and yett the two crosse-roofes , which stand north and south , were not
finished , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,89.196

but remayned still covered with boardes untill the yeare 1564 . At
which tyme they wer raysed and perfected at the onely charge of Edmund
Grindall , then Bishopp of London , whoe expended , out of his proper
estate , 720@ @=li=. in finishing that worke .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,89.197

This Bishopp was a man famous , whilest he lived , for his deepe
judgment , both in learning and affayres of the world ; famous , alsoe ,
both for his industry and gift in preaching ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,89.198

but cheifly he was famous for his magnanimous courage , in that it was
noe lesse easy to divert the sunne from his proper course , then to
pervert him to indirect actiones . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,89.199

Hereuppon , because he stoode inflexible , eyther to a bad cause or from
a good , because his authority could not be made serviceable eyther to
the ambitione or lustes of otheres , certayne greate persones wer
displeased against him , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,89.200

and drew uppon him some displeasure from the Queene .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,89.201

But , for that he was not fearefull of the losse of his dignity , he was
esteemed by her the more worthy to retayne it .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,89.202

And yet I am not assured that the memory of his vertues would not have
worne out , if this the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} last worke
<paren> worthie of any account <$$paren> which , since that tyme , hath
hitherto bin bestowed uppon the church of St. Paule , had not beene an
occasione to preserve them in lyfe . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,89.203

<P_90>

The Church of St. Paule in London was first built by Ethelbert , the
first Christiane King of the Saxones , wherein Melitus <paren> one of
those fowre whoe wer sent by Pope Gregory to convert the Saxones
<$$paren> was appoynted to have his sea . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.205

This church was ruined in the 20=th= yeare of William the Victor , by a
raging fire , which did prostrate the greatest part of the city of
London . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.206

Hereupon Maurrice , at that tyme Bishopp of London , beganne the
foundatione of the new Church of St. Paule ; a worke so admirable that
many conjectured it would never have bin finished .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.207

Rychard , his next successor , as well in vertue as in place , purchased
the ground about the church , whereuppon many buildings did stand ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.208

and incloased it with a strong wall of stone for a place of buriall , of
which walle many partes continue at this tyme on both sides of the
church , but covered and obscured with dwelling houses .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.209

He expended all the revenues of his Bishopricke in advancing the
building of this church , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.210

and maynteyned himselfe uppon his patrimony and freindes ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.211

and yet all which he could doe , made noe greate shew .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.212

And albeit the succeedinge Bishoppes did with all diligence drive on the
worke , yet was not the building of the steeple finished untill the
sixth yeare of King Henry the Third , HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.213

neyther could it be made fitt for dedicatione untill the 24=th= yeare of
the same King's reigne . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.214

In that yeare it was dedicated by Roger Bishopp of London , the King
beeing present , attended with many personages of honour , whoe wer all
feasted by the bishopp and canonnes of the same church .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.215

The length of this churche is 720 foote , the bredth thereof 130 ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.216

the height of the steeple was 520 foote , whereof the stone worke ,
which still remayneth , is 260 , and the spire , now burned , was
likewise 260 . HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.217

The bodye of the church is a_150 foote in height .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-H,90.218

