<BEGIN_henry-1524-e1-h>

<P_1.1,236,E>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXXXIII_KING_HENRY_THE_EIGHTH_TO_THE_EARL_OF_SURREY>

Henry R. By the King . HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,236,E.4

Right trusty and right welbiloved Cousin we grete you wel ;
HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,236,E.5

and have receyved your Lettres bearing date the iij=de=. and iiij=th=.
dayes of this instant moneth , the first mencyonyng the siege laide by
the Duke of Albany unto the Castel of Werke with the assaulte geven unto
the same , and the valiant defence therof by Sir William Lisle capitain
of that place ; and how , upon knowledge geven to the said Duke that ye
with our hole armye was coming to the rescue , he shamefully and
cowardly removed his siege and fled , but to what place ye then knewe
not . HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,236,E.6

By the ij=de=. Lettre apperith upon the reaporte of the Priores of
Calstreme howe that on Tuesday at nyght last past about mydnyzt the said
Duke being then at Eccles informed that our armye passed the Ryver after
hym , removed from thens , toke his ordenance away , and is clerely
departed ; the truthe wherof ye doubted not to be advertised from
diverse wayes by the next daye : at whiche tyme uppon the more knowledge
had , ye wolde assemble al the noble men to divise and determyne what ye
and they sholde further do , desiring that after <P_1.1,237,E> the Duks
army skaled , we in consideration of your desease and seknes wolde
discharge you , geving you licence to retourne : and thinking the lord
Dacres as@ @wel for his strenght as experience in those parties most
mete to take the charge of offyce of wardyn til suche tyme as that we
shal appoint som other therunto ; and finally requiryng that bothe money
and our lettres of Thanks may be sent , as in the said lettres is
conteyned more at large . HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,237,E.7

As herunto we signifie unto you , like as thancked be almyzty God ,
thise newes be right good , comfortable , and honorable unto us and this
our Realme ; so they be and shal@ @be unto the said Duke of Albany@ @'s
perpetual reproche , shame , and losse of reputacion bothe in Fraunce ,
Scotland , and elliswhere , and to the no little abashement and
discorage of the Frenche King , besids the alienation percase of the
mynds of the Lords of Scotland more facily then afore from the faction
of France unto our devotion . HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,237,E.8

And for the grete travaile , labor , studie , payn , and diligence by
you with al effect right actively , valiauntly , and with perfite corage
, discrecion , and good conduyte taken and used by many substancial ,
discrete , and politique wayes for resistence of the said Duke of Albany
, with deliberation and intent to have geven hym bataile in cace he
durst have abyden the same we geve unto you our most cordial and herty
thanks ; assuring you that amongst many your high and notable service
done unto us , we shal have <P_1.1,238,E> this in our contynual and
perfite remembrance to your weale , exaltation , honor , and profite as
your merits and deserts condignely and worthely do requyre . Praying
you also to geve on our behalf special thanks unto all the lords ,
capitains , and other whiche to their grete payn and travaile have right
towardly , benivolently , and conformably served us under you in this
Jorney , for whose more corage and comforte , we at this tyme sende
suche lettres of thanks as ye desire . HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,238,E.9

Over this we having tendre respect unto your helthe and comfort , have
resolved and determyned that upon advertisement receyved from you of
skaling of the said duks armye , and aunswer therupon geven unto you ,
with ordre for establishing of suche garnisons and other direction to be
taken there as for the suretie and weale of that countrey shal@ @be
thought expedient , ye shal then have our Lettres of discharge of your
office there and retorne unto us accordingly ; being myndyd according to
your advice and opynyon that our right trusty counsaillor the Lorde
Dacres whom we thinke most mete and able therfor , shal exercise also
th'@ @office of Wardeyn of our Est and Myddel Marches for a season , to
whom we shall then with our lettres sende sufficient commyssion
accordingly . HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,238,E.10

Having no doubte but that by suche direction as our most entierly
welbeloved counsaillour the Lord Legate Cardinal Archebisshop of Yorke
and our Chauncelor hathe <P_1.1,239,E> advertised you , ye be before
this tyme sufficiently furnished of money for defraying of that our
Armye as shal appertayn . HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,239,E.11

Yeven under our Signet at our manor of Woodstok the xij=th=. day of
November . HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,239,E.12

To our right trusty and right welbeloved Cousin and Counsaillor th'@
@Erle of Surrey our Treasorer and Admiralle of England .
HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,239,E.13

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXXXIV_KING_HENRY_THE_EIGHTH_TO_THE_CITIZENS_OF_LONDON,_ON_THEIR_NEGLECTING_TO_PROVIDE_HORSES_FOR_THE_CARRIAGE_OF_HIS_WINES_AND_PROVISIONS>

Henry R. HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,239,E.15

Trusty and welbiloved we grete you wele . Signifieng unto you it is
shewed unto us that albeit our welbiloved servant Edward Vaux , oon of
the purveyors of our wynes , hath been with you sundry tymes in our name
to cause provision to be made for cariage of our wynes from that our
Citie of London , for th'@ @expenses of our Household , into these
parties : yet neverthelesse ye have litle regarded the said provision ,
as it is sayed , whereby we be destitute of suche wynes as we wold have
here : of the which your demeanur herin we can@ @not a litle mervaile :
wherfor we advertise you of the same , willing and commaunding you that
<P_1.1,240,E> whansoever any our Surveyors either for Wynes or other
stuf , from hensforth , shall reasorte unto you in our name for
provision of cariage of the same hither or elliswhere where it shall
fortune us to be , ye will effectually endevoir yourself for the qwyk
expedicion therof , without any failing as ye entende to please us .
HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,240,E.16

Yeven under our Signet at our Monasterie of Abendon the xj=th=. day of
Aprill . HENRY-1524-E1-H,1.1,240,E.17

