<BEGIN_hooker-b-1614-e2-h>

<P_36>

7

<font> Edifie your selues . <$$font> HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.4

The speech is borrowed fro~ material builders , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.5

and must be spiritually vnderstood . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.6

It appeareth in the 6. of <font> S. Iohns <$$font> gospel by the Iewes
, that their mouthes did water too much for bodilie food ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.7

<font> Our Fathers <$$font> , say they , <font> did eate Manna in the
Desert , as it is written , He gave them bread from heaven to eate ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.8

Lord , evermore giue vs of this bread <$$font> !
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.9

Our Saviour , to turne their appetite another way , maketh the this
answere , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.10

<font> I am the bread of life , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.11

hee that co~meth to me shall not hunger , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.12

and hee that beleeveth in mee , shall never thirst <$$font> .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.13

8

An vsuall practise it is of Satan to cast heapes of worldly baggage in
our way , that whilest we desire to heape vp gold as dust , wee may be
brought at the length to esteeme vilely that spiritual blisse .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.15

Christ , in the 6. of <font> Matthew <$$font> , to correct this evill
affection , putteth vs in minde to lay vp treasure for our selues in
heaven . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.16

The Apostle , <font> 1. Tim. 3. chapt. <$$font> misliking the vanity
of those wome~ , which attired themselues more costly , then beseemed
the heavenly calling of such as professed the fear of God , willeth them
to cloath themselues with shamefastnes and modestie , and to put on the
apparel of good workes . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.17

Tabiter pigmentatae Deum habebitis amatorem , saith <font> Tertullian
<$$font> . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.18

Put on righteousnesse as a garment : in steed of Civit haue Faith ,
which may cause a favour of life to issue from you , and God shall be
enamoured , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.19

he shall be ravished with your beauty . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.20

These are the ornaments , & bracelets , and jewels , which inflame the
loue of Christ , and set his hart on fire vpon his spowse .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,36.21

We see , how he <P_37> breaketh out in the Canticles at the beholding of
this attire , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.22

How faire art thou , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.23

and how pleasant art thou , O my loue , in these pleasures !
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.24

9

And perhaps <font> S. Iude <$$font> exhorteth vs here not to build our
houses but our selues , foreseeing by the spirit of the Almighty , which
was with him , that there should be men in the last daies like to those
in the first , which should encourage and stirre vp each other to make
bricke & to burne it in the fire , to build houses huge as cities , and
towers as high as heaven , thereby to get them a name vpon earth ; men
that shoulde turne out the poore , and the fartherlesse , and the widdow
to build places of rest for dogs & swine in their roomes ; men that
should lay houses of praier even with ground , and make the~ stables
where Gods people haue worshipped before the Lord .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.26

Surely this is a vanity of all vanities , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.27

and it is much amongst men , a speciall sicknesse of this age .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.28

What it should meane , I know not , except God haue set the~ on worke to
provide sewel against that day , when the Lord Iesus shal show himselfe
from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.29

What good commeth vnto the owners of these things , saith <font> Solomon
<$$font> , but only the beholding thereof with their eies ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.30

<font> Martha , Martha , thou busiest thy selfe about many things ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.31

One thing is necessarie . <$$font> HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.32

Yee are too busie , my brethren , with timber , and bricke ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.33

They haue chosen the better part , they haue taken a better course ,
that build themselues . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.34

Yee are the Temples of the living God ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.35

as God hath said , I wil dwel in them , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.36

and will walke in them , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,37.37

& they shal <P_38> be my people , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,38.38

and I wil be their God . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,38.39

10

Which of you wil gladly remaine , or abide in a mishapen , a ruinous ,
or a broken house ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,38.41

And shal we suffer sinne , and vanity to drop in at our eies , and at
our eares , at every corner of our bodies , & of our soules , knowing
that we are the Temples of the holy Ghost ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,38.42

Which of you receiveth a guest , whom he honoureth , or whom he loveth ,
and doth not sweepe his chamber against his comming ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,38.43

And shal we suffer the chamber of our hearts and consciences to lie full
of vomiting , full of filth , ful of garbidge , knowing that Christ hath
said , I , and my Father will come , and dwell with you ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,38.44

Is it meete for your Oxen to lay in parlours , and your selues to lodge
in cribs ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,38.45

Or is it seemely for your selues to dwell in your setled houses and the
house of the Almighty to lie wast , whose house yee are your selues ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,38.46

Do not our eies behold , how God every day overtaketh the wicked in
their iourneies , how suddenly they pop downe into the pit ? how Gods
iudgements for their times come so swiftly vpon them , that they haue
not the leasure to crie , Alas ? how their life is cut off like a
threed in a moment ? how they passe like a shadow ? how they open
their mouthes to speake , and God taketh them even in the midst of a
vaine or an idle word ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,38.47

And dare we for all this lay downe , take our rest , eate our meat
securely and carelessly in the midst of so great and so many ruines ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,38.48

Blessed and praised for ever and ever be his name , who perceiuing of
how senselesse & heavy mettall we are made , hath instituted in his
Church a <P_39> spirituall supper , and an holy communion , to be
celebrated often , that we might thereby bee occasioned often to examine
these buildings of ours , in what case they stand .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,39.49

For sith God doth not dwell in Temples which are vncleane , sith a
shrine can@ @not be a sanctuary vnto him ; and this supper is receaued
as a seale vnto vs , that we are his house and his sanctuarie , that his
Christ is as truly vnited to me , and I to him , as my arme is united
and knit vnto my shoulder , that hee dwelleth in me as verily as the
elements of bread and wine abide within me , which perswasion , by
receiving these dreadfull mysteries , we professe our selues to haue ; a
due comfort , if truly , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,39.50

and if in hypocrisie then woe worth vs . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,39.51

Therefore ere wee put forth our hands to take this blessed Sacrament ,
we are charged to examine , and to trie our hearts whether God bee in vs
of a truth or no : and if by faith and loue vnfained we be found the
temples of the holy Ghost , then to iudge , whether we haue had such
regard every one to our building , that the spirit which dwelleth in vs
hath no way beene vexed , molested , and grieued .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,39.52

Or if it haue , as no doubt sometimes it hath by incredulitie ,
sometimes by breach of charitie , sometimes by want of zeale , sometimes
by spots of life , even in the best and most perfect amongst vs ,
<paren> for who can say , his heart is cleane ? <$$paren> O then to fly
vnto God by vnfained repentance , to fall downe before him in the
humilitie of our soules , begging of him whatsoever is needfull to
repaire our decaies , before wee fall into that desolation , whereof the
Prophet speaketh , saying <P_40> <font> Thy breach is great like the sea
, HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.53

who can heale thee <$$font> ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.54

11

Receiving the sacrament of the Supper of the Lord , after this sort
<paren> you that are spiritual , iudge what I speake <$$paren> is not
all other wine like the water of <font> Marah <$$font> , being compared
to the cup , which we blesse ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.56

Is not <font> Manna <$$font> like to gall , and our bread like to <font>
Manna <$$font> ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.57

Is there not a tast , a tast of Christ Iesus in the hart of him that
eateth ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.58

Doth not hee which drinketh , behold plainely in this cup , that his
soul is bathed in the blood of the lambe ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.59

O beloued in our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ , if yee will tast how
sweet the Lord is , if yee will receaue the king of glory , <font> Build
your selues <$$font> . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.60

12

<font> Young men <$$font> , I speake this to you ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.62

for yee are his house , because by faith , yee are conquerers over
<font> Satan <$$font> , and haue overcome that evill .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.63

<font> Fathers <$$font> , I speake it also to you ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.64

yee are his house , because yee haue knowne him , which is from the
beginning . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.65

Sweete <font> Babes <$$font> , I speake it even to you also ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.66

yee are his house , because your sinnes are forgiven you for his
namesake . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.67

<font> Matrons <$$font> and <font> Sisters <$$font> , I may not hold it
from you , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.68

yee are also the Lords building , and , as S. <font> Peter <$$font>
speaketh , heires of the grace of life as well as we .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.69

Though it be forbidden you to open your mouthes in publike assemblies ,
yet yee must bee inquisitiue in things concerning this building , which
is of God , with your husbands and friends at home , not as <font>
Dalila <$$font> with <font> Sampson <$$font> , but as <font> Sara
<$$font> with <font> Abraham <$$font> , whose daughters yee are , whilst
yee doe well , and build your selues . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,40.70

13

Having spoken thus farre of the exhortation , <P_41> as whereby we are
called vpon to edifie and build our selues . It remaineth now , that
wee consider the thing prescribed , namely wherein we must bee built .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,41.72

This pr.scription standeth also vpon two points , the <font> thing
<$$font> prescribed , and the <font> adiuncts <$$font> of the <font>
thing <$$font> . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,41.73

And that is our most pure , and <font> holy faith <$$font> .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,41.74

14

The thing prescribed is <font> Faith <$$font> .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,41.76

For as in a chaine , which is made of many linkes , if you pull the
first , you drawe the rest ; and as in a ladder of many staues , if you
take away the lowest , all hope of ascending to the highest will be
remoued , So because all the precepts and promises in the law and in the
Gospell doe hang vpon this , <font> Beleeue <$$font> ; and because the
last of the graces of God doth so follow the first , that he glorifieth
none , but whom he hath iustified , nor iustifieth any , but whom he
hath called to a true , effectual , and liuely faith in Christ Iesus ,
therefore S <font> Iude <$$font> exhorting us to <font> build our selues
<$$font> , mentioneth here expresly only faith , as the thing wherein we
must be edified , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,41.77

for that faith is the ground and the glorie of all the welfare of this
building . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,41.78

15

<font> Yee are not strangers & forrainers , but citizens with the Saints
, and of the houshold of God <$$font> , saith the Apostle ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,41.80

<font> and are built vpon the foundation of the Prophets & Apostles ,
Iesus Christ himselfe being the cheefe corner stone , in whom all the
building being coupled together , groweth vnto an holy Temple in the
Lord , in whom we also are built together to be the habitation of God by
the spirit <$$font> . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,41.81

And we are the habitation of God by the spirit , if we beleeue .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,41.82

For it is written , whosoever confesseth <P_42> that Iesus is the sonne
of God , in him God dwelleth , and he in God . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.83

The strength of this habitatio~ is great ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.84

it prevaileth against Satan ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.85

it conquereth sinne ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.86

it hath death in derision ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.87

neither principalities , nor powers can throwe it downe ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.88

it leadeth the world captiue , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.89

& bringeth every enimie , that riseth vp against it , to co~fusion and
shame , and all by faith ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.90

for this is the victorie that overcommeth the world , even our faith .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.91

Who is it that overco~meth the world , but hee which beleeueth , that
Iesus is the sonne of God ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.92

16

The strength of every building , which is of God , standeth not in any
mans armes or legs : HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.94

it is only in our faith , as the valour of <font> Sampson <$$font> lay
only in his haire . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.95

This is the reason , why wee are so earnestly called vpon to <font>
edifie our selues in faith <$$font> . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.96

Not as if this bare action of our minds , whereby wee beleeue the Gospel
of Christ , were able in it selfe , as of it selfe , to make vs
vnconquerable and invincible , like stones , which abide in the building
for ever and fall not out . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.97

No , it is not the worthinesse of our beleeuing ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.98

it is the vertue of him in whom we beleeue , by which we stand sure as
houses that are builded vpon a rocke . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.99

He is a wise man , which hath builded his house vpon a rocke ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.100

for he hath chosen a good foundation , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.101

and no doubt his house will stand . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.102

But how shall it stand ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.103

verily by the strength of the rocke which beareth it , & by nothing else
. HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.104

Our fathers , whom God delivered out of the land of Egypt , were a
people , that had no peeres amongst the nations of the earth , because
they were built by faith vpon the rocke , which rocke is Christ .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,42.105

<P_43>

<font> And the rocke <$$font> , saith the Apostle in the first to the
<font> Corinthians <$$font> , the tenth Chapter , <font> did follow him
<$$font> . Whereby we learne not only this , that being built by faith
on Christ as on a rocke , and grafted into him as into an Oliue , wee
receiue all our strength and fatnesse from him , but also that this
strength and fatnesse of ours ought to be no cause why we should be
high_minded and not worke out our salvation with a reverent , tre~bling
, and holy feare . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,43.107

For if thou boastest thy selfe of thy faith , knowe this that Christ
chose his Apostles , his Apostles chose not him ; that Israel followed
not the rocke , but the rocke followed Israel , and that thou bearest
not the roote , but the root thee . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,43.108

So that every heart must thus {SIC:this} thinke , and every tongue must
thus speake , <font> Not vnto vs , O Lord , not vnto vs <$$font> , nor
vnto any thing which is within vs , but vnto thy name onely , only to
thy name belongeth all the praise of al the treasures and riches of
every Temple which is of God . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,43.109

This excludeth al boasting and vaunting of our faith .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,43.110

17

But this must not make vs carelesse to edifie our selues in faith .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,43.112

It is the Lord that delivereth mens soules from death , but not except
they put their trust in his mercy . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,43.113

It is God that hath given vs eternall life , but no otherwise then thus
, If wee beleeue in the name of the sonne of God ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,43.114

for hee that hath not the sonne of God hath not life .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,43.115

It was the spirit of the Lord which came vpon <font> Sampson <$$font> ,
& made him strong to teare a lion as a man would rent a kid :
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,43.116

but his strength forsooke him , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,43.117

and he became like other men <P_44> when the razer had touched his head
. HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,44.118

It is the power of God whereby the faithfull haue subdued kingdomes ,
wrought righteousnesse , obtained the promises , stopped the mouthes of
Lions , quenched the violence of fire , escaped the edge of the sword :
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,44.119

But take away their faith , and doth not their strength forsake them ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,44.120

are they not like vnto other men ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,44.121

18

If yee desire yet farther to knowe how necessarie and needfull it is ,
that we edifie and build vp our selues in faith , marke the words of the
blessed Apostles , <font> without faith it is impossible to please God
<$$font> . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,44.123

If I offer vnto God all the sheepe and oxen , that are in the world , if
all the Temples , that were builded since the dayes of <font> Adam
<$$font> till this houre , were of my foundation , if I breake my very
heart with calling vpon God , and weare out my tongue with preaching ,
if I sacrifice my body and my soule vnto him , <font> and haue no faith
<$$font> all this availeth nothing . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,44.124

<font> Without faith it is impossible to please God . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,44.125

Our Lord and Saviour therefore being asked in the sixt of S. <font>
Iohns <$$font> Gospell , <font> What shall we doe that we might worke
the workes of God <$$font> , maketh answer , <font> This is the worke of
God , that yee beleeue in him , whom hee hath sent <$$font> .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,44.126

19

That no worke of ours , no building of our selues in any thing can be
available or profitable vnto vs , except we be edified & built in faith
, what need we to seeke about for long proofe ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,44.128

looke vpon Israel once the very chosen and peculiar to God , to whom the
adoption of the faithfull , and the glory of Cherubins , and the
covenants of mercy , and the lawe of <P_45> <font> Moses <$$font> , and
the service of God , and the promises of Christ were made impropriate ,
who not onely were the ofspring of <font> Abraham <$$font> , father vnto
all them which doe beleeue , but Christ their ofspring , which is God to
be blessed for evermore . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-H,45.129

