<BEGIN_hooker-a-1614-e2-h>

<P_1>

The occasion wherevpon , together with the ende wherefore , this Epistle
was written , is opened in the front & entrie of the same .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,1.3

There were then , as there are now , many evill and wickedly disposed
persons , not of the mysticall body , yet within the visible bounds of
the Church , men which were of old ordained to co~demnation , vngodly
men which turned the grace of our God into wantonnesse and denied the
Lord Iesus . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,1.4

For this cause the spirit of the Lord is in the hand of Iude , the
servant of Iesus and brother of Iames , to exhort them that are called ,
and sanctified of God the father , that they would earnestly contend to
maintaine <P_2> the faith ; which was once delivered vnto the Saints .
Which faith because wee can@ @not maintaine except wee knowe perfectly ,
first against whom , secondly in what sort it must be maintained ;
therefore in the former three verses of that parcell of Scripture which
I haue read , the enimies of the crosse of Christ are plainely described
; HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.5

and in the later two , they that loue the Lord Iesus haue a sweet lesson
giuen them how to strengthen & stablish themselues in the faith .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.6

Let vs first therefore examin the description of these reprobates
concerning faith ; and afterwards come to the words of the exhortation ;
wherein Christians are taught how to rest their hearts on Gods eternall
and everlasting truth . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.7

The description of these godlesse persons is two_fold ; <font> Generall
<$$font> and <font> Speciall <$$font> . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.8

The <font> generall <$$font> doth point them out and shew what manner of
men they should be . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.9

The <font> particular <$$font> pointeth at them ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.10

and saith plainely these are they . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.11

In the <font> generall <$$font> description we haue to consider of these
things . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.12

<font> First , when <$$font> they were described , <font> they were told
of before . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.13

Secondly <$$font> , the men by whom they were described , <font> They
were spoken of by the Apostles of our Lord Iesus Christ .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.14

Thirdly <$$font> , the daies when they should bee manifested vnto the
world , they told you they <font> should bee in the last time .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.15

Fourthly <$$font> , their disposition and whole demeanure , <font>
mockers and walkers after their own vngodly lusts <$$font> .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.16

2

In the third to the Philippians , the Apostle describeth certaine .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.18

<font> They are men <$$font> , saith hee <font> of whom I haue told you
often , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.19

and now with teares I tell you of them , their God is their belly ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,2.20

their glorying and reioycing is in <P_3> their owne shame ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.21

they mind earthly things . <$$font> HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.22

These were enimies of the crosse of Christ , enimies whom he saw ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.23

& his eies gusht out with teares to behold them .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.24

But we are taught in this place , how the Apostles spake also of enimies
, whom as yet they had not seen , described a family of me~ as yet
vnheard of , a generation reserved for the end of the world , & for the
last time , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.25

they had not onely declared what they heard and saw in the daies wherein
they lived , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.26

but they haue propheci'd also of me~ in time to come .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.27

And <font> you doe well <$$font> , saith S. Peter , <font> in that yee
take heed , to the words of prophecie , so that yee first know this ,
that no prophecie in the Scripture commeth of any mans owne resolution
<$$font> . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.28

No prophecie in Scripture commeth of any mans owne resolution .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.29

For all prophecy , which is in Scripture , came by the secret
inspiration of God . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.30

But there are prophecies which are no scripture ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.31

yea there are prophecies against the Scripture : HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.32

my brethren beware of such prophecies , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.33

and take heed you heed them not . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.34

Remember the things that were spoken of before ; but spoken of before by
the Apostles of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.35

Take heed to prophecies , but to prophecies which are in scripture .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.36

For both the manner and the matter of those prophecies doth shew
plainely that they are of God . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,3.37

3

Touching the manner , how men by the spirit of prophecie in holy
Scripture haue spoken & written of things to come , wee must vnderstand
, that as the knowledge of that they spake , so likewise the vtterance
of that they knewe came not by these vsuall <P_4> and ordinary meanes
whereby we are brought to vnderstand the mysteries of our salvation ,
and are wont to instruct others in the same . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,4.39

For whatsoever wee know , we haue it by the hands and ministrie of men ,
which lead vs along like children from a letter to a syllable , from a
syllable to a word , from a word to a line , from a line to a sentence ,
from a sentence to a side , and so turne over . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,4.40

But God himselfe was their instructour , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,4.41

he himselfe taught the~ partly by dreames and visions in the night ,
partly by revelations in the daie , taking them aside from amongst their
brethre~ , and talking with them , as a man would talke with his
neighbour in the way . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,4.42

Thus they became acquainted even with the secret and hidden counsels of
God . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,4.43

They saw things which themselues were not able to vtter ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,4.44

they beheld that whereat men and Angels are astonished .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,4.45

They vnderstood in the beginning , what should come to passe in the last
daies . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,4.46

4

God , which lightned thus the eies of their vnderstanding giving them
knowledge by vnvsuall and extraordinarie meanes , did also miraculously
himself frame and fashion their wordes and writings , in_so_much that a
greater difference there seemeth not to bee betweene the manner of their
knowledge , then there is between the manner of their speech & ours .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,4.48

When we haue conceiued a thing in our hearts and throughlie vnderstand
it , as wee thinke within our selues , yet we can vtter it in such sort
that our brethre~ may receaue instruction or comfort at our mouths , how
great , how long , how earnest meditation are <P_5> we forced to vse ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.49

And after much travaile , and much paines , when we open our lips to
speake of the wonderfull workes of God , our tongues doe faulter within
our mouthes , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.50

yea many times wee disgrace the dreadfull mysteries of our faith ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.51

and grieue the spirit of our hearers by words vnsavory , and vnseemely
speeches . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.52

<font> Shall a wise man fill his bellie with the easterne wind <$$font>
, saith <font> Eliphaz , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.53

shall a wise man dispute with words not comely ? or with talke that is
not profitable <$$font> ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.54

Yet behold , even they that are wisest amongst us living , co~pared with
the Prophets , seem no otherwise to talke of God , then as if the
children which are caried in armes should speake of the greatest matters
of state . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.55

They whose words doe most shew forth their wise vnderstanding , and
whose lips doe vtter the purest knowledge , so as long as they
vnderstand and speake as men , are they not faine sundry waies to excuse
themselues ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.56

Sometimes acknowledging with the wise ma~ , <font> hardly can we
discerne the things that are on earth , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.57

and with great labour finde wee out the things that are before vs ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.58

who can then seeke out the things that are in heauen <$$font> ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.59

Sometimes confessing with <font> Iob <$$font> the righteous , in
treating of things too wonderfull for vs , we haue spoke~ we wist not
what . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.60

Sometimes ending their talke , as doth the history of the Macchabees ,
if we haue done wel , & as the cause required , it is that we desire ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.61

if we haue spoke~ slenderly and barely , we haue done what we could .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.62

But <font> God hath made my mouth like a sword <$$font> , saith <font>
Esay <$$font> . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,5.63

And <font> we haue received <$$font> , saith the Apostle , <font> not
the spirit of the world , but the spirit which is of God , that <P_6>
wee might know the things , which are given to vs of God which things
also we speake , not in words , which mans wisdome teacheth , but which
the holy Ghost doth teach <$$font> . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.64

This is that which the Prophets mean by those books writte~ ful within ,
& without ; which books were so often delivered the~ to eat , not
because God fed the~ with inke , & paper , but to teach vs , that so oft
as he employed them in this heavenly worke , they neither spake , nor
wrote any word of their owne , but vttered sillable by sillable as the
spirit put it into their mouths , no otherwise then the Harp or the Lute
doth giue a sound according to the discretion of his hands that holdeth
& striketh it with skill . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.65

The difference is only this . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.66

An instrument whether it be a pipe or harpe maketh a distinction in the
times and sounds , which distinction is well perceived of the hearer ,
the instrumente it selfe vnderstanding not what is piped or harped .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.67

The Prophets and holy men of God not so . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.68

<font> I opened my mouth <$$font> , saith <font> Ezechiel <$$font> ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.69

and <font> God reached me a scroule , saying , son of man cause thy
belly to eat HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.70

& fill thy bowels with this I giue thee , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.71

I eate it , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.72

and it was sweet in my mouth as hony <$$font> , saith the Prophet .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.73

Yea sweeter , I am perswaded , then either hony or the hony_combe .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.74

For herein they were not like Harps or Lutes , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.75

but they felt , they felt the power and strength of their owne words .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.76

Whe~ they spake of our peace , every corner of their hearts , was filled
with joy . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.77

Whe~ they prophecied of mournings , lamentations , and woes , to fall
vpon vs , they wept in the bitternes and indignation of spirit , the
arme of the Lord being mighty and strong vpon them .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,6.78

<P_7>

5

On this manner were all the prophecies of holy scripture . Which
prophecies , although they containe nothing which is not profitable for
our instruction , yet as one starre differeth from another in glory , so
every word of prophecy hath a treasure of matter in it ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,7.81

but all matters are not of like importance , as al treasures are not of
equal price . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,7.82

The chiefe & principal matter of prophecie is the promise of
righteousnesse , peace , holinesse , glory , victory , immortality vnto
every soule which beleeveth , that Iesus is Christ , of the Iew first ,
and of the Gentile . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,7.83

Nowe because the doctrine of salvation to bee looked for by faith in him
, who was in outward appearance as it had beene a man forsaken of God ,
in him who was numbred , Iudged , and condemned with the wicked , in him
whom men did see buffited on the face , scoft at by Souldiers , scourged
by tormentours , hanged on the crosse , pearced to the heart , in him
whom the eies of many witnesses did behold , when the anguish of his
soule enforced him to roare as if his hart had rent in sunder , <font> O
my God , my God why haste thou forsaken me <$$font> ? I say , because
the doctrine of salvatio~ by him is a thing improbable to a natural man
, that whether we preach it to the Gentile , or to the Iew , the one
condemneth our faith as madnes , the other as blasphemy , therefore to
establish and confirme the certainety of this saving trueth in the harts
of men ; the Lord togither , with their preachings , whom hee sent
immediatly from himselfe , to reveale these things vnto the world ,
mingled prophecies of things both civill <P_8> and Ecclesiasticall ,
which were to come in everie age from time to time , till the very last
of the latter daies ; that by those things , wherein we see daily their
words fulfilled and done , we might haue strong consolation in the hope
of things which are not seene , because they haue revealed as well the
one as the other . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,8.84

For when many things are spoken of before in scripture , whereof we see
first one thing accomplished , and then another , and so a third ,
perceiue wee not plainely , that God doeth nothing else but lead vs
along by the hand , til he haue setled vs vpon the rocke of an assured
hope , that no one iote or title of his word shall passe till all be
fulfilled ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,8.85

It is not therefore saide in vaine , that these godlesse wicked ones
were <font> spoken of before <$$font> . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,8.86

6

But by whom ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,8.88

By them whose words , if men or Angels from heauen gainesaie , they are
accursed ; HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,8.89

by them , whom whosoever despiseth , despiseth not them , but me , saith
Christ . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,8.90

If any man therefore doth loue the Lord Iesus <paren> and woe worth him
that loueth not the Lord Iesus ! <$$paren> hereby wee may know that hee
loveth him indeed , if hee despise not the things that are spoken of by
his Apostles ; whom many haue despised even for the basenesse and
simplenesse of their persons . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,8.91

For it is the propertie of fleshly and carnall men , to honour and
dishonour , credit , and discredit the words and deeds of every man
according to that he wanteth or hath without . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,8.92

If a man with gorgeous apparell come amongst vs , although he bee a
theefe or a murtherer <paren> for there are theeues and murtherers <P_9>
in gorgeous apparell <$$paren> be his heart whatsoever , if his coat be
of purple , or velvet , or tissue , every one riseth up ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.93

and all the reverent solemnities wee can vse , are too little .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.94

But the man that serveth God , is contemned and despised amongst vs for
his povertie . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.95

<font> Herod <$$font> speaketh in iudgement , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.96

and the people cry out , <font> The voice of God and not of man .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.97

Paul <$$font> preacheth Christ , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.98

they tearme him a trifler . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.99

Harken beloued : hath not God chosen the poore of this world , that they
should be rich in faith ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.100

hath hee not chosen the refuse of the world to be heires of his kingdome
, which hee hath promised to them that loue him ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.101

hath he not chosen the ofscowrings of men to be the lights of the world
, and the Apostles of Jesus Christ . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.102

Men vnlearned , yet how fully replenished with vnderstanding ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.103

fewe in number , yet how great in power ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.104

contemptible in shew , yet in spirit how strong ? how wonderfull ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.105

<font> I would faine learne the mysterie of the eternall generation of
the sonne of God <$$font> , saith <font> Hilary <$$font> .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.106

Whom shall I seeke ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.107

shall I get me to the schooles of the <font> Grecians <$$font> ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.108

why ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.109

I haue read , vbi sapiens ? vbi scriba ? vbi conquisitor huius seculi
? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.110

These wise men in the world must needs bee dumbe in this , because they
haue reiected the wisdome of God . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.111

Shall I beseech the Scribes and Interpreters of the law , to become my
teachers ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.112

how can they knowe this , sith they are offended at the crosse of Christ
? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,9.113

It is death for me to be ignorant of the vnsearchable misterie of the
sonne of God : of which misterie notwithstanding I should haue been
ignorant , but that a poore fisherman , vnknowne , vnlearned , <P_10>
new come from his bote with his cloathes wringing wet , hath opened his
mouth and taught me , <font> In the beginning was the word ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,10.114

and the word was with God , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,10.115

& the word was God <$$font> . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,10.116

These poore sillie creatures haue made vs rich in the knowledge of the
mysteries of Christ . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-H,10.117

