<BEGIN_hooke-1665-e3-h>

<P_44>

<heading>

OBSERV. VIII . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.4

OF THE FIERY SPARKS STRUCK FROM A FLINT OR STEEL . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.5

<$$heading>

It is a very common Experiment , by striking with a Flint against a
Steel , to make certain fiery and shining Sparks to fly out from between
those two compressing Bodies . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.7

About eight years since , upon casually reading the Explication of this
odd <font> Phaenomenon <$$font> , by the most Ingenious <font> Des
Cartes <$$font> , I had a great desire to be satisfied , what that
Substance was that gave such a shining and bright Light :
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.8

And to that end I spread a sheet of white Paper , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.9

and on it , observing the place where several of these Sparks seemed to
vanish , I found certain very small , black , but glistering Spots of a
movable Substance , each of which examining with my <font> Miscrocope
<$$font> , I found to be a small round <font> Globule <$$font> ; some of
which , as they looked prety small , so did they from their Surface
yield a very bright and strong reflection on that side which was next
the Light ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.10

and each look'd almost like a prety bright Iron-Ball , whose Surface was
prety regular , such as is represented by the Figure A .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.11

In this I could perceive the Image of the Window prety well , or of a
Stick , which I moved up and down between the Light and it .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.12

Others I found , which were , as to the bulk of the Ball , prety
regularly round , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.13

but the Surface of them , as it was not very smooth , but rough , and
more irregular , so was the reflection from it more faint and confused .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.14

Such were the Surfaces of B. C. D. and E . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.15

Some of these I found cleft or cracked , as C , others quite broken in
two and hollow , as D. which seemed to be half the hollow shell of a
Granado , broken irregularly in pieces . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.16

Several others I found of other shapes ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,44.17

but that which is represented by E , I observed to be a very big Spark
of Fire , which went out upon one side of the Flint that I struck fire
withall , to <P_45> which it stuck by the root F , at the end of which
small Stem was fastened on {TEXT:fastened-on} a <font> Hemisphere
<$$font> , or half a hollow Ball , with the mouth of it open from the
stemwards , so that it looked much like a Funnel , or an old_fashioned
Bowl without a foot . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.18

This night , making many tryals and observations of this Experiment , I
met , among a multitude of the Globular ones which I had observed , a
couple of Instances , which are very remarkable to the confirmation of
my <font> Hypothesis <$$font> . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.19

And the First was of a pretty big Ball fastened on to the end of a small
sliver of Iron , which Compositum seemed to be nothing else but a long
thin chip of Iron , one of whose ends was melted into a small round
Globul ; the other end remaining unmelted and irregular , and perfectly
Iron . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.20

The Second Instance was not less remarkable then the First ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.21

for I found , when a Spark went out , nothing but a very small thin long
sliver of Iron or Steel , unmelted at either end . So that it seems ,
that some of these Sparks are the slivers or chips of the Iron <font>
vitrified <$$font> , Others are only the slivers melted into Balls
without vitrification , And the third kind are only small slivers of the
Iron , made red-hot with the violence of the stroke given on the Steel
by the Flint . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.22

He that shall diligently examine the <font> Phaenomena <$$font> of this
Experiment , will , I doubt not , find cause to believe , that the
reason I have heretofore given of it , is the true and genuine cause of
it , namely , That <font> the Spark appearing so bright in the falling ,
is nothing else but a small piece of the Steel or Flint , but most
commonly of the Steel , which by the violence of the stroke is at the
same time sever'd and heatt red-hot , and that sometimes to such a
degree , as to make it melt together into a small Globule of steel ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.23

and sometimes also is that heat so very intense , as further to melt it
and vitrifie it ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.24

but many times the heat is so gentle , as to be able to make the sliver
only red_hot , which notwithstanding falling upon the tinder <$$font>
<paren> that is only a very curious small Coal made of the small threads
of Linnen burnt to coals and char'd <$$paren> <font> it easily sets it
on fire <$$font> . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.25

Nor will any part of this <font> Hypothesis <$$font> seem strange to him
that considers , First , that either hammering , or filing , or
otherwise violently rubbing of Steel , will presently make it so hot as
to be able to burn ones fingers . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.26

Next , that the whole force of the stroke is exerted upon that small
part where the Flint and Steel first touch : HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.27

For the Bodies being each of them so very hard , the puls can@ @not be
far communicated , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.28

that is , the parts of each can yield but very little ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.29

and therefore the violence of the concussion will be <font> exerted
<$$font> on that piece of Steel which is cut off by the Flint .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.30

Thirdly , that the filings or small parts of Steel are very apt , as it
were , to take fire , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.31

and are presently red_hot , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.32

that is , there seems to be a very <font> combustible sulphureous
<$$font> Body in Iron or Steel , which the Air very readily preys upon ,
as soon as the body is a little violently heated .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.33

And this is obvious in the filings of Steel or Iron cast through the
flame of a Candle ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.34

for even by that sudden transitus of the small chips of Iron , they are
heat red_hot , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.35

and that <font> combustible sulphureous <$$font> Body is presently
prey'd upon and devoured by the <font> aereal <$$font> incompassing
<font> Menstruum <$$font> , whose office in this Particular I have shewn
in the Explication of Charcole . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,45.36

<P_46>

And in prosecution of this Experiment , having taken the filings of Iron
and Steel , and with the point of a Knife cast them through the flame of
a Candle , I observed where some conspicuous shining Particles fell ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,46.38

and looking on them with my <font> Microscope <$$font> , I found them to
be nothing else but such round Globules , as I formerly found the Sparks
struck from the Steel by a stroke to be , only a little bigger ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,46.39

and shaking together all the filings that had fallen upon the sheet of
Paper underneath , and observing them with the <font> Microscope
<$$font> , I found a great number of small Globules , such as the former
, though there were also many of the parts that had remained untoucht ,
and rough filings or chips of Iron . So that , it seems , Iron does
contain a very <font> combustible sulphureous <$$font> Body , which is ,
in all likelihood , one of the causes of this <font> Phaenomenon
<$$font> , and which may be perhaps very much concerned in the business
of its hardening and tempering : of which somewhat is said in the
Description of <font> Muscovy-glass <$$font> . So that , these things
considered , we need not trouble our selves to find out what kind of
Pores they are , both in the Flint and Steel , that contain the <font>
Atoms of fire <$$font> , nor how those <font> Atoms <$$font> come to be
hindred from running all out , when a dore or passage in their Pores is
made by the concussion : HOOKE-1665-E3-H,46.40

nor need we trouble our selves to examine by what <font> Prometheus
<$$font> the Element of Fire comes to be fetcht down from above the
Regions of the Air , in what Cells or Boxes it is kept , and what <font>
Epimetheus <$$font> lets it go : Nor to consider what it is that causes
so great a conflux of the atomical Particles of Fire , which are said to
fly to a flaming Body , like Vultures or Eagles to a putrifying Carcass
, and there to make a very great pudder . Since we have nothing more
difficult in this <font> Hypothesis <$$font> to conceive , first , as to
the kindling of Tinder , then how a large Iron-bullet , let fall red or
glowing hot upon a heap of Small-coal , should set fire to those that
are next to it first : HOOKE-1665-E3-H,46.41

Nor secondly , is this last more difficult to be explicated , then
{to_say} that a Body , as Silver for Instance , put into a weak <font>
Menstruum <$$font> , as unrectified Aqua fortis should , when it is put
in a great heat , be there dissolved by it , and not before ; which
<font> Hypothesis <$$font> is more largely explicated in the Description
of Charcoal . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,46.42

To conclude , we see by this Instance , how much Experiments may conduce
to the regulating of <font> Philosophical notions <$$font> .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,46.43

For if the most Acute <font> Des Cartes <$$font> had applied himself
experimentally to have examined what substance it was that caused that
shining of the falling Sparks struck from a Flint and a Steel , he would
certainly have a little altered his <font> Hypothesis <$$font> ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,46.44

and we should have found , that his Ingenious Principles would have
admitted a very plausible Explication of this <font> Phaenomenon
<$$font> ; whereas by not examining so far as he might , he has set down
an Explication which Experiment do's contradict . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,46.45

But before I leave this Description , I must not forget to take notice
of the Globural form into which each of these is most curiously formed .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,46.46

And this <font> Phaenomenon <$$font> , as I have elsewhere more largely
shewn , proceeds from a propriety which belongs to all kinds of fluid
Bodies more or less , and is caused by the Incongruity of the Ambient
and included Fluid , which so acts and modulates each other , that they
acquire , as neer as is <P_47> possible , a <font> sperical <$$font> or
<font> globular <$$font> form , which propriety and several of the
<font> Phaenomena <$$font> that proceed from it , I have more fully
explicated in the sixth Observation . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.47

One Experiment , which does very much illustrate my present Explication
, and is in it self exceeding pretty , I must not pass by :
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.48

And that is a way of making small <font> Globules <$$font> or <font>
Balls <$$font> of Lead , or Tin , as small almost as these of Iron or
Steel , and that exceeding easily and quickly , by turning the filings
or chips of those Metals also into perfectly round Globules .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.49

The way , in short , as I received it from the <font> Learned Physitian
Doctor <$$font> I. G. is this ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.50

Reduce the Metal you would thus shape , into exceeding fine filings ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.51

the finer the filings are , the finer will the Balls be :
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.52

<font> Stratifie <$$font> these filings with the fine and well dryed
powder of quick Lime in a <font> Crucible <$$font> proportioned to the
quantity you intend to make : HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.53

When you have thus filled your <font> Crucible <$$font> , by continual
<font> stratifications <$$font> of the filings and powder , so that , as
neer as may be , no one of the filings may touch another , place the
<font> Crucible <$$font> in a <font> gradual fire <$$font> ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.54

and by degrees let it be brought to a heat big enough to make all the
filings , that are mixt with the quick Lime , to melt , and no more ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.55

for if the fire be too hot , many of these filings will joyn and run
together ; whereas if the heat be proportioned , upon washing the
Lime-dust in fair Water , all those small filings of the Metal will
subside to the bottom in a most curious powder , consisting all of
exactly round <font> Globules <$$font> , which if it be very fine , is
very excellent to make Hour-glasses of . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.56

Now though quick Lime be the powder that this direction makes choice of
, yet I doubt not , but that there may be much more convenient ones
found out , one of which I have made tryal of , and found very effectual
; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.57

and were it not for discovering , by the mentioning of it , another
Secret , which I am not free to impart , I should have here inserted it
. HOOKE-1665-E3-H,47.58

<P_112>

<heading>

OBSERV. XVIII . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,112.61

OF THE SCHEMATISME OR TEXTURE OF CORK , AND OF THE CELLS AND PORES OF
SOME OTHER SUCH FROTHY BODIES . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,112.62

<$$heading>

I took a good clear piece of Cork , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,112.64

and with a Pen-knife sharpen'd as keen as a Razor , I cut a piece of it
off , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,112.65

and thereby left the surface of it exceeding smooth ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,112.66

then examining it very diligently with a <font> Microscope <$$font> , me
thought I could perceive it to appear a little porous ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,112.67

but I could not so plainly distinguish them , as to be sure that they
were pores , much less what Figure they were of : HOOKE-1665-E3-H,112.68

But judging from the lightness and yielding quality of the Cork , that
certainly the texture could not be so <P_113> curious , but that
possibly , if I could use some further diligence , I might find it to be
discernable with a <font> Microscope <$$font> , I with the same sharp
Pen-knife , cut off from the former smooth surface an exceeding thin
piece of it , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,113.69

and placing it on a black object Plate , because it was it self a white
body , and casting the light on it with a deep <font> plano-convex Glass
<$$font> , I could exceeding plainly perceive it to be all perforated
and porous , much like a Honey-comb , but that the pores of it were not
regular ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,113.70

yet it was not unlike a Honey-comb in these particulars .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,113.71

First , in that it had a very little solid substance , in comparison of
the empty cavity that was contain'd between , as does more manifestly
appear by the Figure A and B of the XI. <font> Scheme <$$font> ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,113.72

for the Interstitia , or walls <paren> as I may so call them <$$paren>
or partitions of those pores were neer as thin in proportion to their
pores , as those thin films of Wax in a Honey-comb <paren> which enclose
and constitute the <font> sexangular cells <$$font> <$$paren> are to
theirs . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,113.73

Next , in that these pores , or cells , were not very deep , but
consisted of a great many little Boxes , separated out of one continued
long pore , by certain <font> Diaphragms <$$font> , as is visible by the
Figure B , which represents a sight of those pores split the long-ways .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,113.74

I no sooner discern'd these <paren> which were indeed the first <font>
microscopical <$$font> pores I ever saw , and perhaps , that were ever
seen , for I had not met with any Writer or Person , that had made any
mention of them before this <$$paren> but me thought I had with the
discovery of them , presently hinted to me the true and intelligible
reason of all the <font> Phaenomena <$$font> of Cork ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,113.75

As , First , if I enquir'd why it was so exceeding light a body ? my
<font> Microscope <$$font> could presently inform me that here was the
same reason evident that there is found for the lightness of froth , an
empty Honey-comb , Wool , a Spunge , a Pumice-stone , or the like ;
namely , a very small quantity of a solid body , extended into exceeding
large dimensions . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,113.76

Next , it seem'd nothing more difficult to give an intelligible reason ,
why Cork is a body so very unapt to suck and drink in Water , and
consequently preserves it self , floating on the top of Water , though
left on it never so long : and why it is able to stop and hold air in a
Bottle , though it be there very much condens'd and consequently presses
very strongly to get a passage out , without suffering the least bubble
to pass through its substance . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,113.77

For , as to the first , since our <font> Microscope <$$font> informs us
that the substance of Cork is altogether fill'd with Air , and that that
Air is perfectly enclosed in little Boxes or Cells distinct from one
another . It seems very plain , why neither the Water , nor any other
Air can easily insinuate it self into them , since there is already
within them an <language> intus existens <$$language> , and consequently
, why the pieces of Cork become so good floats for Nets , and stopples
for Viols , or other close Vessels . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,113.78

And thirdly , if we enquire why Cork has such a springiness and swelling
nature when {SIC:whem} compress'd ? and how it comes to suffer so great
a compression , or seeming penetration of dimensions , so as to be made
a substance as heavie again and more , bulk for bulk , as it was before
compression , and yet suffer'd to return , is found to extend it self
again into the same space ? Our <font> Microscope <$$font> will easily
inform us , that the whole mass <P_114> consists of an infinite company
of small Boxes or Bladders of Air , which is a substance of a springy
nature , and that will suffer a considerable condensation <paren> as I
have several times found by divers trials , by which I have most
evidently condens'd it into less then a twentieth part of its usual
dimensions neer the Earth , and that with no other strength then that of
my hands without any kind of forcing Engine , such as Racks , Leavers ,
Wheels , Pullies , or the like , but this onely by and by <$$paren>
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,114.79

and besides , it seems very probable that those very films or sides of
the pores , have in them a springing quality , as almost all other kind
of Vegetable substances have , so as to help to restore themselves to
their former position . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,114.80

And could we so easily and certainly discover the <font> Schematisme
<$$font> and <font> Texture <$$font> even of these films , and of
several other bodies , as we can these of Cork ; there seems no probable
reason to the contrary , but that we might as readily render the true
reason of all their <font> Phaenomena <$$font> , as namely , what were
the cause of the springiness , and toughness of some , both as to their
flexibility and restitution . What , of the friability or brittleness
of some others , and the like ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,114.81

but till such time as our <font> Microscope <$$font> , or some other
means , enable us to discover the true <font> Schematism <$$font> and
<font> Texture <$$font> of all kinds of bodies , we must grope , as it
were , in the dark , and onely ghess at the true reasons of things by
similitudes and comparisons . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,114.82

But , to return to our Observation . I told several lines of these
pores , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,114.83

and found that there were usually about threescore of these small Cells
placed end-ways in the eighteenth part of an Inch in length , whence I
concluded there must be neer eleven_hundred of them , or somewhat more
then a_thousand in the length of an Inch , and therefore in a square
Inch above a_Million , or 1166400 . and in a Cubick Inch , above
twelve_hundred_Millions , or 1259712000 . a thing almost incredible ,
did not our <font> Microscope <$$font> assure us of it by ocular
demonstration ; nay , did it not discover to us the pores of a body ,
which were they <font> diaphragm'd <$$font> , like those of Cork , would
afford us in one Cubick Inch , more then ten times as many little Cells
, as is evident in several charr'd Vegetables ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,114.84

so prodigiously curious are the works of Nature , that even these
conspicuous pores of bodies , which seem to be the channels or pipes
through which the Succus {SIC:suceus} nutritius , or natural juices of
Vegetables are convey'd , and seem to correspond to the veins , arteries
and other Vessels in sensible creatures , that these pores I say , which
seem to be the Vessels of nutrition to the vastest body in the World ,
are yet so exceeding small , that the <font> Atoms <$$font> which <font>
Epicurus <$$font> fancy'd would go neer to prove too bigg to enter them
, much more to constitute a fluid body in them . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,114.85

And how infinitely smaller then must be the Vessels of a Mite , or the
pores of one of those little Vegetables I have discovered to grow on the
back-side of a Rose-leaf , and shall anon more fully describe , whose
bulk is many millions of times less then the bulk of the small shrub it
grows on ; and even that shrub , many millions of times less in bulk
then several trees <paren> that have heretofore grown in <font> England
<$$font> , and are this day flourishing in other hotter Climates , as we
are very credibly inform'd <$$paren> if at least the pores of this small
Vegetable should keep any such proportion to the body of it , as we have
found these pores <P_115> of other Vegetables to do to their bulk .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,115.86

But of these pores I have said more elsewhere . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,115.87

To proceed then , Cork seems to be by the transverse constitution of the
pores , a kind of Fungus or Mushrome , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,115.88

for the pores lie like so many Rays tending from the center , or pith of
the tree , outwards ; so that if you cut off a piece from a board of
Cork transversly , to the flat of it , you will , as it were , split the
pores , and they will appear just as they are express'd in the Figure B
of the XI. <font> Scheme <$$font> . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,115.89

But if you shave off a very thin piece from this board , parallel to the
plain of it , you will cut all the pores transversly ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,115.90

and they will appear almost as they are express'd in the Figure A , save
onely the solid Interstitia will not appear so thick as they are there
represented . So that Cork seems to suck its nourishment from the
subjacent bark of the Tree immediately , and to be a kind of excrescence
, or a substance distinct from the substances of the entire Tree ,
something <font> analogus <$$font> to the Mushrome , or Moss on other
Trees , or to the hairs on Animals . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,115.91

And having enquir'd into the History of Cork , I find it reckoned as an
excrescency of the bark of a certain Tree , which is distinct from the
two barks that lie within it , which are common also to other trees ;
That 't@ @is some time before the Cork that covers the young and tender
sprouts comes to be discernable ; That it cracks , flaws , and cleaves
into many great chaps , the bark underneath remaining entire ; That it
may be separated and remov'd from the Tree , and yet the two under-barks
<paren> such as are also common to that with other Trees <$$paren> not
at all injur'd , but rather helped and freed from an external injury .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,115.92

Thus <font> Ionstonus <$$font> in <font> Dendrologia <$$font> , speaking
de Subere , says , Arbor est procera , Lignum est robustum , dempto
cortice in aquis non fluitat , Cortice in orbem detracto juvatur ,
crascescens enim praestringit & strangulat , intra triennium iterum
repletur : Caudex ubi adolescit crassus , cortex superior densus
carnosus , duos digitos crassus , scaber , rimosus , & qui nisi
detrahatur dehiscit , alioque subnascente expellitur , interior qui
subest novellus ita rubet ut arbor minio picta videatur .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,115.93

Which Histories , if well consider'd , and the tree , substance , and
manner of growing , if well examin'd , would , I am very apt to believe
, much confirm this my conjecture about the origination of Cork .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,115.94

Nor is this kind of Texture peculiar to Cork onely ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,115.95

for upon examination with my <font> Microscope <$$font> , I have found
that the pith of an Elder , or almost any other Tree , the inner pulp or
pith of the Cany hollow stalks of several other Vegetables : as of
Fennel , Carrets , Daucus , Bur-docks , Teafels , Fearn , some kinds of
Reeds , &c. have much such a kind of <font> Schematisme <$$font> , as I
have lately shewn that of Cork , save onely that here the pores are
rang'd the long-ways , or the same ways with the length of the Cane ,
whereas in Cork they are transverse . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,115.96

The pith also that fills that part of the stalk of a Feather that is
above the Quil , has much such a kind of texture , save onely that which
way soever I set this light substance , the pores seem'd to be cut
transversly ; so that I ghess this pith which fills the Feather , not to
consist of abundance of long pores separated with Diaphragms , as Cork
does , but to be a kind <P_116> of solid or hardned froth , or a <font>
congeries <$$font> of very small bubbles consolidated in that form ,
into a pretty stiff as well as tough concrete , and that each Cavern ,
Bubble , or Cell , is distinctly separate from any of the rest , without
any kind of hole in the encompassing films , so that I could no more
blow through a piece of this kinde of substance , then I could through a
piece of Cork , or the sound pith of an Elder . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,116.97

But though I could not with my <font> Microscope <$$font> , nor with my
breath , nor any other way I have yet try'd , discover a passage out of
one of those cavities into another , yet I can@ @not thence conclude ,
that therefore there are none such , by which the Succus nutritius , or
appropriate juices of Vegetables , may pass through them ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,116.98

for , in several of those Vegetables , whil'st green , I have with my
<font> Microscope <$$font> , plainly enough discover'd these Cells or
Poles fill'd with juices , and by degrees sweating them out : as I have
also observed in green Wood all those long <font> Microscopical <$$font>
pores which appear in Charcoal perfectly empty of any thing but Air .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,116.99

Now , though I have with great diligence endeavoured to find whether
there be any such thing in those <font> Microscopical <$$font> pores of
Wood or Piths , as the <font> Valves <$$font> in the heart , veins , and
other passages of Animals , that open , and give passage to the
contain'd fluid juices one way , and shut themselves , and impede the
passage of such liquors back again , yet have I not hitherto been able
to say any thing positive in it ; though , me thinks , it seems very
probable , that Nature has in these passages , as well as in those of
Animal bodies , very many appropriated Instruments and contrivances ,
whereby to bring her designs and end to pass , which 't@ @is not
improbable , but that some diligent Observer , if help'd with better
<font> Microscopes <$$font> , may in time detect .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,116.100

And that this may be so , seems with great probability to be argued from
the strange <font> Phaenomena <$$font> of sensitive Plants , wherein
Nature seems to perform several Animal actions with the same <font>
Schematism <$$font> or <font> Orginization <$$font> that is common to
all Vegetables , as may appear by some no less instructive then curious
Observations that were made by divers Eminent Members of the <font>
Royal Society <$$font> on some of these kind of Plants , whereof an
account was delivered in to them by the most Ingenious and Excellent
<font> Physician <$$font> , Doctor <font> Clark <$$font> , which ,
having that liberty granted me by that most Illustrious Society , I have
hereunto adjoyn'd . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,116.101

<P_210>

<heading>

OBSERV. LIII . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.104

OF A FLEA . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.105

<$$heading>

The strength and beauty of this small creature , had it no other
relation at all to man , would deserve a description .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.107

For its strength , the <font> Microscope <$$font> is able to make no
greater discoveries of it then the naked eye , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.108

but onely the curious contrivance of its leggs and joints , for the
exerting that strength , is very plainly manifested , such as no other
creature , I have yet observ'd , has any thing like it ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.109

for the joints of it are so adapted , that he can , as 't@ @were , fold
them short one within another , and suddenly stretch , or spring them
out to their whole length , that is , of the fore-leggs ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.110

the part A , of the 34. <font> Scheme <$$font> , lies within B , and B
within C , parallel to , or side by side each other ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.111

but the parts of the two next , lie quite contrary , that is , D without
E , and E without F , but parallel also ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.112

but the parts of the hinder leggs , G , H and I , bend one within
another , like the parts of a double_jointed Ruler , or like the foot ,
legg and thigh of a man ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.113

These six leggs he clitches up altogether , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.114

and when he leaps , springs them all out , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.115

and thereby exerts his whole strength at once . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.116

But , as for the beauty of it , the <font> Microscope <$$font> manifests
it to be all over adorn'd with a curiously polish'd suit of <font> sable
<$$font> Armour , neatly jointed , and beset with multitudes of sharp
pinns , shap'd almost like Porcupine's Quills , or bright conical
Steel-bodkins ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.117

the head is on either side beautify'd with a quick and round black eye K
, behind each of which also appears a small cavity , L , in which he
seems to move to and fro a certain thin film beset with many small
transparent hairs , which probably may be his ears ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.118

in the forepart of his head , between the two fore-leggs , he has two
small long jointed feelers , or rather smellers , M M , which have four
joints , and are hairy , like those of several other creatures ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,210.119

between these , it has a small proboscis , or <font> probe <$$font> , N
N O , that seems to consist of a <P_211> tube N N , and a tongue or
sucker O , which I have perceiv'd him to slip in and out .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.120

Besides these , it has also two chaps or biters P P , which are somewhat
like those of an Ant , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.121

but I could not perceive them tooth'd ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.122

these were shap'd very like the blades of a pair of round_top'd Scizers
, HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.123

and were opened and shut just after the same manner ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.124

with these Instruments does this little busie Creature bite and pierce
the skin , and suck out the blood of an Animal , leaving the skin
inflamed with a small round red spot . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.125

These parts are very difficult to be discovered , because , for the most
part , they lye covered between the fore-legs . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.126

There are many other particulars , which , being more obvious , and
affording no great matter of information , I shall pass by , and refer
the Reader to the Figure . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.127

<heading>

OBSERV. LIV . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.129

OF A LOUSE . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.130

<$$heading>

This is a Creature so officious , that 't@ @will be known to every one
at one time or other , so busie , and so impudent , that it will be
intruding it self in every ones company , and so proud and aspiring
withall , that it fears not to trample on the best , and affects nothing
so much as a Crown ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.132

feeds and lives very high , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.133

and that makes it so saucy , as to pull any one by the ears that comes
in its way , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.134

and will never be quiet till it has drawn blood :
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.135

it is troubled at nothing so much as {it_is_troubled} at a man that
scratches his head , as knowing that man is plotting and contriving some
mischief against it , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.136

and that makes it oftentime sculk into some meaner and lower place , and
run behind a mans back , though it go very much against the hair ; which
ill conditions of it having made it better known then trusted , would
exempt me from making any further description of it , did not my
faithful <font> Mercury <$$font> , my <font> Microscope <$$font> , bring
me other information of it . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.137

For this has discovered to me , by means of a very bright light cast on
it , that it is a Creature of a very odd shape ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.138

it has a head shap'd like that exprest in 35. <font> Scheme <$$font>
marked with A , which seems almost Conical , but is a little flatted on
the upper and under sides , at the biggest part of which , on either
side behind the head <paren> as it were , being the place where other
Creatures ears stand <$$paren> are placed its two black shining goggle
eyes B B , looking backwards , and fenced round with several small
<font> cilia <$$font> or hairs that incompass it , so that it seems this
Creature has no very good foresight : HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.139

It does not seem to have any eye-lids , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.140

and therefore perhaps its eyes were so placed , that it might the better
cleanse them with its fore-legs ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.141

and perhaps this may be the reason , why they so much avoid and run from
the light behind them , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.142

for being made to live in the shady and dark recesses of the hair , and
thence probably their eye having a great aperture , the open and clear
light , especially that of the Sun , must needs very much offend them ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,211.143

to secure these eyes from receiving any injury from the hairs through
which it passes , it has <P_212> two horns that grow before it , in the
place where one would have thought the eyes should be ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.144

each of these C C hath four joynts , which are fringed , as 't@ @were ,
with small brisles , from which to the tip of its snout D , the head
seems very round and tapering , ending in a very sharp nose D , which
seems to have a small hole , and to be the passage through which he
sucks the blood . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.145

Now whereas if it be plac'd on its back , with its belly upwards , as it
is in the 35. <font> Scheme <$$font> , it seems in several Positions to
have a resemblance of chaps , or jaws , as is represented in the Figure
by E E , yet in other postures those dark strokes disappear ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.146

and having kept several of them in a box for two or three dayes , so
that for all that time they had nothing to feed on , I found , upon
letting one creep on my hand , that it immediately fell to sucking , and
did neither seem to thrust its nose very deep into the skin , nor to
open any kind of mouth , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.147

but I could plainly perceive a small current of blood , which came
directly from its snout , and past into its belly ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.148

and about A there seem'd a contrivance , somewhat resembling a Pump ,
pair of Bellows , or Heart , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.149

for by a very swift <font> systole <$$font> and <font> diastole <$$font>
the blood seem'd drawn from the nose , and forced into the body .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.150

It did not seem at all , though I viewed it a good while as it was
sucking , to thrust more of its nose into the skin then the very snout D
, HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.151

nor did it cause the least discernable pain , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.152

and yet the blood seem'd to run through its head very quick and freely ,
so that it seems there is no part of the skin but the blood is dispers'd
into , nay , even into the cuticula ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.153

for had it thrust its whole nose in from D to C C , it would not have
amounted to the supposed thickness of that <font> tegument <$$font> ,
the length of the nose being not more then a three_hundredth part of an
inch . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.154

It has six legs , covered with a very transparent shell , and joynted
exactly like a Crab's , or Lobster's ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.155

each leg is divided into six parts by these joynts ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.156

and those have here and there several small hairs ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.157

and at the end of each leg it has two claws , very properly adapted for
its peculiar use , being thereby inabled to walk very securely both on
the skin and hair ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.158

and indeed this contrivance of the feet is very curious ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.159

and could not be made more commodiously and compendiously , for
performing both these requisite motions , of walking and climbing up the
hair of a mans head , then it is : HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.160

for , by having the lesser claw <paren> a <$$paren> set so much short of
the bigger <paren> b <$$paren> when it walks on the skin the shorter
touches not , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.161

and then the feet are the same with those of a Mite , and several other
small Insects , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.162

but by means of the small joynts of the longer claw it can bend it round
, and so with both claws take hold of a hair , in the manner represented
in the Figure , the long transparent Cylinder F F F , being a Man's hair
held by it . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.163

The Thorax seem'd cas'd with another kind of substance then the belly ,
namely , with a thin transparent horny substance , which upon the
fasting of the Creature did not grow flaccid ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.164

through this I could plainly see the blood , suck'd from my hand , to be
variously distributed , and mov'd to and fro ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.165

and about G there seem'd a pretty big white substance , which seem'd to
be moved within its thorax ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,212.166

besides , there appear'd very many small milk-white vessels , which
crost over the breast <P_213> between the legs , out of which , on
either side , were many small branchings , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.167

these seemd to be the veins and arteries , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.168

for that which is analogus to blood in all Insects is milk-white .
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.169

The belly is covered with a transparent substance likewise , but more
resembling a skin then a shell , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.170

for 't@ @is grain'd all over the belly just like the skin in the palms
of a man's hand , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.171

and when the belly is empty , grows very flaccid and wrinkled ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.172

at the upper end of this is placed the stomach H H ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.173

and perhaps also the white spot I I may be the liver or <font> pancreas
<$$font> , which by the <font> peristaltick <$$font> motion of the guts
, is a little mov'd to and fro , not with a <font> systole <$$font> and
<font> diastole <$$font> , but rather with a thronging or justling
motion . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.174

Viewing one of these Creatures , after it had fasted two dayes , all the
hinder part was lank and flaccid , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.175

and the white spot I I hardly mov'd , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.176

most of the white branchings disappear'd , and most also of the redness
or sucked blood in the guts , the <font> peristaltick <$$font> motion of
which was scarce discernable ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.177

but upon the suffering it to suck ; it presently fill'd the skin of the
belly , and of the six scolop'd embosments on either side , as full as
it could be stuft ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.178

the stomach and guts were as full as they could hold ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.179

the <font> peristaltick <$$font> motion of the gut grew quick , and the
justling motion of I I accordingly ; HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.180

multitudes of milk-white vessels seem'd quickly filled , and turgid ,
which were perhaps the veins and arteries , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.181

and the Creature was so greedy , that though it could not contain more ,
yet it continued sucking as fast as ever , and as fast emptying it self
behind : HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.182

the digestion of this Creature must needs be very quick ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.183

for though I perceiv'd the blood thicker and blacker when sucked
{SIC:suckd} , yet , when in the guts , it was of a very lovely ruby
colour , HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.184

and that part of it , which was digested into the veins , seemed white ;
whence it appears , that a further digestion of blood may make it milk ,
at least of a resembling colour : HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.185

What is else observable in the figure of this Creature , may be seen by
the 35. <font> Scheme <$$font> . HOOKE-1665-E3-H,213.186

