<BEGIN_hoole-1660-e3-h>

<P_1>

<heading>

CHAP. I . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,1.4

HOW A CHILDE MAY BE HELPED IN THE FIRST PRONOUNCIATION OF HIS LETTERS .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,1.5

<$$heading>

My aim being to discover the old Art of teaching Schoole , and how it
may be improved in every part suteable to the years and capacities of
such children as are now commonly taught ; I shall first begin my
discourse concerning a petty-Schoole , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,1.7

& here or else where I shall not busie my self or Reader about what a
childe of an extraordinary towardliness , and having a teacher at home ,
may attain unto , and in how short a space , but onely shew how a
multitude of various wits may be taught all together with abundance of
profit and delight to every one , w=ch= is the proper and main work of
our ordinary Schooles . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,1.8

Whereas then , it is usual in Cities and <P_2> greater Towns to put
children to Schoole about four or five years of age , and in Country
villages , because of further distance , not till about six or seven ; I
conceive , <font> The sooner a child is put to School , the better it is
<$$font> , both to prevent ill habits , which are got by play and
idleness , and to enure him betimes to affect learning and well_doing .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,2.9

Not to say , how the great uncertainty of parents lives , should make
them careful of their Childrens early education , which is like to be
the best part of their patrimony , what ever good thing else they may
leave them in this World . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,2.10

I observe that betwixt three and four years of age a childe hath great
propensity to peep into a book , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,2.11

and then is the most seasonable time <paren> if conveniences may be had
otherwise <$$paren> for him to begin to learn ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,2.12

and though perhaps then he can@ @not speak so very distinctly , yet the
often pronounciation of his letters , will be a means to help his speech
, especially if one take notice in what organ or instrument he is most
defective , and exercise him chiefly in those letters which belong unto
it . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,2.13

Now there are five organs or instruments of speech , in the right
hitting of which , as the breath moveth from within , <P_3> through the
mouth , a true pronunciation of every letter is made , viz. the lips ,
the teeth , the tongue , the roof of the mouth , and the throat ;
According to which if one rank the twenty_four letters of our <font>
English <$$font> Alphabet , he shall find that <font> A , E , I , O , V
, <$$font> proceed by degrees from the throat , along betwixt the tongue
and the roof of the mouth to the lips contracted , and that <font> Y
<$$font> is somewhat like <font> I <$$font> , being pronounced with
other letters , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,3.14

but if it be named by it self , it requireth some motion of the lips .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,3.15

<font> B , F , M , P , W <$$font> , and <font> V <$$font> consonant ,
belong to the lips . <font> C , S , X , Z , <$$font> to the teeth .
<font> D , L , N , T , R , <$$font> to the tongue . <font> B {COM:sic}
, H , K , Q , <$$font> to the roof of the mouth . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,3.16

But the sweet and natural pronunciation of them is gotten rather by
imitation then precept , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,3.17

and therefore the teacher must be careful to give every letter its
distinct and clear sound , that the childe may get it from his voice ,
and be sure to make the child open his mouth well as he uttereth a
letter , lest otherwise he drown or hinder the sound of it .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,3.18

For I have heard some foreiners to blame us <font> English-men <$$font>
for neglecting this mean to a plain and audible speaking , saying , that
the cause , why we generally do not speak so fully as they , proceeded
from an ill <P_4> habit of mumbling , which children got at their first
learning to read ; which it was their care ; therfore to prevent or
remedy betimes , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,4.19

and so it should be ours , seeing <font> Pronounciation is that that
sets out a man , and is sufficient of it self to make one an Oratour
<$$font> . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,4.20

<heading>

CHAP. II . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,4.22

How a childe may be taught with delight to know all his letters in a
very little time . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,4.23

<$$heading>

The usual way to begin with a child , when he is first brought to
Schoole , is to teach him to know his letters in the Horn-book , where
he is made to run over all the letters in the Alphabet or
Christ-cross-row both forwards & backwards , until he can tel any one of
them , which is pointed at , and that in the <font> English <$$font>
character . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,4.25

This course we see hath been very effectual in a short time , with some
more ripe_witted children , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,4.26

but othres of a slower apprehension <paren> as the most and best
commonly are <$$paren> have been thus learning a whole year together ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,4.27

<paren> and though they have been much chid and beaten too for want of
heed <$$paren> could scarce <P_5> tell six of their letters at twelve
moneths end , who , if they had been taught in a way more agreeable to
their meane apprehensions <paren> w=ch= might have wrought more readily
upon the senses , and affected their mindes with what they did <$$paren>
would doubtlesse have learned as cheerfully , if not as fast as the
quickest . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,5.28

I shall therefore mention sundry ways that have been taken to make a
childe know his letters readily , out of which the discreet Teacher may
chuse what is most likely to suit his Learner . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,5.29

I have known some that <paren> according to <font> Mr. Brinsley's
<$$font> direction <$$paren> have taught little ones to pronounce all
the letters , and to spell pretty well , before they knew one letter in
a book ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,5.30

and this they did , by making the childe to sound the five vowels <font>
a , e , i , o , u , <$$font> like so many bells upon his fingers ends ,
and to say which finger was such or such a vowel , by changes .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,5.31

2

Then putting single consonants before the vowels , <paren> leaving the
hardest of them till the last <$$paren> and teaching him how to utter
them both at once , as <font> va , ve , vi , vo , vu , da , de , di , do
, du . <$$font> HOOLE-1660-E3-H,5.33

3 . and again , by putting the vowels before a consonant to make him
say , <font> as , es , is , os , us , ad , ed , id , od , ud . <$$font>
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,5.34

Thus ; they have proceeded from syllables of two or three ; or <P_6>
more letters , till a child hath been pretty nimble in the most .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,6.35

But this is rather to be done in a private house , then a publick
Schoole ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,6.36

how ever this manner of exercise now and then amongst little Scholars
will make their lessons more familiar to them . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,6.37

<font> The greatest trouble at the first entrance of children is to
teach them how to know their letters one from another , when they see
them in the book altogether <$$font> ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,6.38

for the greatnesse of their number and variety of shape do puzle young
wits to difference them , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,6.39

and the sence can but be intent upon one single object at once , so as
to take its impression , and commit it to the imagination and memory .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,6.40

Some have therefore begun but with one single letter ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,6.41

and after they have shewed it to the childe in the Alphabet , have made
him to finde the same any where else in the book , till he knew that
perfectly ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,6.42

and then they have proceeded to another in like manner , and so gone
through the rest . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,6.43

Some have contrived a piece of ivory with twenty_four flats or squares ,
in every one of which was engraven a several letter ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,6.44

and by playing with a childe in throwing this upon a table , and shewing
him the letter onely which lay uppermost , <P_7> have in few dayes
taught him the whole Alphabet . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,7.45

Some have got twenty_four pieces of ivory cut in the shape of dice ,
with a letter engraven upon each of them , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,7.46

and with these they have played at vacant hours with a childe , till he
hath known them all distinctly . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,7.47

They begin first with one , then with two , afterwards with more letters
at once , as the childe got knowledge of them . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,7.48

To teach him likewise to spell , they would place consonants before or
after a vowel , and then joyn more letters together so as to make a word
, and sometimes divide it into syllables , to be parted or put together
; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,7.49

now this kind of letter sport may be profitably permitted among your
{SIC:you} beginers in a School HOOLE-1660-E3-H,7.50

& in stead of ivory , they may have white bits of wood , or small
shreads of paper or past-board , or parchment with a letter writ upon
each to play withall amongst themselves . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,7.51

Some have made pictures in a little book or upon a scroll of paper wrapt
upon two sticks within a box of iceing-glass , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,7.52

and by each picture have made three sorts of that letter , with which
its name beginneth ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,7.53

but those being too many at once for a childe to take notice on , have
proved not so useful as was intended . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,7.54

<P_8>

Some likewise have had pictures and letters printed in this manner on
the back side of a pack of cards , to entice children , that naturally
love that sport , to the love of learning their books .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,8.56

Some have writ a letter in a great character upon a card , or chalked it
out upon a trencher , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,8.57

and by telling a child what it was , and letting him strive to make the
like , have imprinted it quickly in his memory , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,8.58

and so the rest one after another . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,8.59

One having a Son of two years and a half old , that could but even go
about the house , and utter some few gibberish words in a broken manner
; observing him one day above the rest to be busied about shells , and
sticks , and such like toys , which himself had laid together in a chair
, and to misse any one that was taken from him , he saw not how , and to
seek for it about the house ; became very desireous to make experiment
what that childe might presently attain to in point of learning ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,8.60

Thereupon he devised a little wheel , with all the Capital Romane
letters made upon a paper to wrap round about it , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,8.61

and fitted it to turn in a little {SIC:little_a} round box , which had a
hole so made in the side of it , that onely one letter might be seen to
peep out at once ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,8.62

<P_9>

This he brought to the childe , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,9.64

& showed him onely the letter O , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,9.65

and told him what it was ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,9.66

The childe being overjoyed with his new gamball , catcheth the box out
of his Fathers hand , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,9.67

and run's with it to his playfellow a year younger then himself ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,9.68

and in his broken language tell's him there was an O , an O ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,9.69

And when the other asked him where , he said , in a hole , in a hole ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,9.70

and shewed it him ; which the lesser childe then took such notice of ,
as to know it againe ever after from all the other letters .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,9.71

And thus by playing with the box , and enquiring concerning any letter
that appeared strange to him , what it was , the childe learnt all the
letters of the Alphabet in eleven dayes , being in this Character <font>
A B C <$$font> , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,9.72

and would take pleasure to shew them in any book to any of his
acquaintance that came next . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,9.73

By this instance you may see what a propensity there is in nature
betimes to learning , could but the Teachers apply themselves to their
young Scholars tenuity ; and how by proceeding in a cleare & facil
method , that all may apprehend , every one may benefit more or less by
degrees . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,9.74

According to these contrivances to forward children , I have published
<font> a New Primar <$$font> ; in the first leafe , whereof I have
<P_10> set the Roman Capitalls <paren> because that Character is now
most in use , & those letters the most easie to be learn't <$$paren>
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,10.75

and have joyned therewith the pictures or images of some things whose
names begins with that letter , by which a childs memory may be helped
to remember how to call his letters ; as A , for an Ape , B. for a Bear
, &c. HOOLE-1660-E3-H,10.76

This Hieroglyphicall devise doth so affect Children <paren> who are
generally forward to communicate what they know <$$paren> that I have
observed them to teach others , that could not so readily learn , to
know all the letters in a few houres space , by asking them , what
stands A. for ? HOOLE-1660-E3-H,10.77

and so concerning other letters backwards and forwards , or as they best
liked . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,10.78

Thus when a childe hath got the names of his letters , & their several
shapes withall in a playing manner , he may be easily taught to
distinguish them in the following leaf , which containeth first the
greater , and then the smaller Roman Characters , to be learned by five
at once or more , as the childe is able to remember them ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,10.79

other Characters I would have forborn , till one be well acquainted with
these , because so much variety at the first doth but amaze young wits ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,10.80

and our English characters , <paren> for <P_11> the most part <$$paren>
are very obscure , & more hard to be imprinted in the memory .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,11.81

And thus much for the learning to know letters ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,11.82

we shall next <paren> and according to Order in Teaching <$$paren>
proceed to an easie way of distinct spelling . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,11.83

<P_23>

<heading>

CHAP. V . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,23.86

WHEREIN CHILDREN , FOR WHOM THE LATINE TONGUE IS THOUGHT TO BE
UNNECESSARY , ARE TO BE EMPLOYED AFTER THEY CAN READ ENGLISH WELL .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,23.87

<$$heading>

It is a fond conceit of many , that have either not attained , or by
their <P_24> own negligence have utterly lost the use of the Latine
Tongue , to think it altogether unnecessary for such children to learn
it , as are intended for Trades , or to be kept as drudges at home , or
employed about husbandry . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,24.89

For first there are few children , but <paren> in their playing-years ,
and before they can be capable of any serious employment in the meanest
calling that is <$$paren> may be so far grounded in the Latine , as to
finde that little smattering they have of it , to be of singular use to
them , both for the understanding of the English Authors <paren> which
abound now_a_dayes with borrowed words <$$paren> and the holding
discourse with a sort of men that delight to flant it in Latine .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,24.90

Secondly , Besides I have heard it spoken to the great commendation of
some Countries , where care is had for the well education of children ,
that every Peasant <paren> almost <$$paren> is able to discourse with a
stranger in the Latine tongue ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,24.91

and why may not we here in <font> England <$$font> obtain the like
praise , if we did but as they , continue our children at the Latine
Schoole , till they be well acquainted with that language , and thereby
better fitted for any calling . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,24.92

<P_25>

Thirdly , And I am sorry to adde , that the non-improvement of childrens
time after they can read English any whit well , throweth open a gap to
all loose kinde of behaviour ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,25.94

for being then <paren> as it is too commonly to be seen , especially
with the poorer sort <$$paren> taken from the Schoole , and permitted to
run wildeing up and down without any control , they adventure to commit
all manner of lewdnesse , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,25.95

and so become a shame and dishonour to their Friends and Countrey .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,25.96

If these or the like reasons therefore might prevail to perswade them
that have a prejudice against Latine , I would advise that all children
might be put to the Grammar-Schoole , so soon as they can read English
well ; and suffered to continue at it , till some honest calling invite
them thence ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,25.97

but if not , I would wish them rather to forbear it ; then to become
there an hinderance to others , whose work it is to learn that
profitable Language . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,25.98

And that they may not squander away their time in idleness , it were
good if they were put to a Writing-Schoole , where they might be , First
helped to keep their English , by reading of a chapter <paren> at least
<$$paren> once a day ; and <P_26> second . taught to write a fair hand
; and thirdly afterwards exercised in Arithmatique , and such
preparative Arts , as may make them compleatly fit to undergoe any
ordinary calling . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,26.99

And being thus trained up in a way of discipline , they will afterwards
prove more easily plyable to their Masters commands .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,26.100

Now , forasmuch as few Grammar-Schooles of note will admit children into
them , till they have learn't their Accidents ; the teaching of that
book , also becometh for the most part a work for a Petty-Schoole ,
where many that undertake to teach it , being altogether ignorant of the
Latine Tongue , do sorrily performe that taske , and spend a great deal
of time about it to little or no purpose . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,26.101

I would have that book , therefore by such let alone , and left to the
Grammar-School , as most fitting to be taught there onely , because it
is intended as an introduction of Grammar , to guide children in a way
of reading ; writing , and speaking Latine , and the Teachers of the
Grammar-Art are most deeply concerned to make use of it for that end .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,26.102

And in stead of the Accidents , which they do neither understand nor
profit by , they may be <P_27> benefitted in reading Orthodoxal
Catechismes and other Books , that may instruct them in the Duties of a
Christian , such as are <font> The Practise of Piety , The Practise of
Quietnesse , The whole duty of Man <$$font> ; and afterwards in other
delightful books of English History ; as , <font> The History of Queen
Elizabeth <$$font> ; or Poetry , as <font> Herberts Poems , Quarl's
Emblems <$$font> ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,27.103

and by this means they will gain such a habit and delight in reading ,
as to make it their chief recreation , when liberty is afforded them .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,27.104

And their acquaintance with good books will <paren> by Gods blessing
<$$paren> be a means so to sweeten their <paren> otherwise sowr
<$$paren> natures , that they may live comfortably towards themselves ,
and amiably converse with other persons . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,27.105

Yet if the Teacher of a Petty-Schoole have a pretty understanding of the
Latine Tongue , he may the better adventure to teach the Accidents , and
proceed in so doing with far more ease and profit to himself and learner
, if he observe a sure method of grounding his children in the Rudiments
of Grammar , and preparing them to speak and write familiar Latine ,
which I shall hereafter discover , having first set down somewhat how to
remedy that defect in reading English , <P_28> with which the
Grammar-Schooles are very much troubled , especially , where there is
not a good Petty-Schoole to discharge that work afore-hand .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,28.106

And before I proceed further , I will expresse my minde in the two next
chapters touching the erecting of a Petty-Schoole , and how it may
probably flourish by good Order and Discipline . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,28.107

<P_213>

<heading>

CHAP. 1 . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,213.110

OF THE FOUNDING OF A GRAMMAR-SCHOOLE . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,213.111

<$$heading>

The most of the <font> Grammar Schools <$$font> which I have yet taken
notice of in <font> England <$$font> , are <font> of two sorts <$$font>
; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,213.113

The first I may call <font> mixt Schooles <$$font> , where a structure
is made , and an allowance given of ten , twenty , or thirty pounds
per_annum onely to one man to teach children freely , that inhabit
within the precincts of one Parish , or of three or four neigbouring
Hamlets , adjoyning . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,213.114

And such Schooles as these very seldom or never improve Scholars further
, then to teach them to read and write , and learne some little <paren>
they know not what it meaneth <$$paren> in the common Grammar ; partly
because the Master is overburdened with too many petty Scholars , and
partly because many parents will not spare their children to learne , if
they <P_214> can but finde them any employment about their domestick or
rureall affairs , whereby they may save a penny .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,214.115

In some places more populous , an allowance is made to a Master of about
twen@ @pounds per_annum to attend Grammarians onely , and ten pounds to
an Usher , whose work it is to teach the Petties :
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,214.116

in such Schooles as these , I have knowne some boyes more
pregnant_witted then the rest , to have proved very good Grammarians ,
and to have profited so in the Latine and Greek Tongues , as to come to
good maturity in University studies , by a Tutors guidance .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,214.117

But the Masters of such Schooles for the most part , either weaken their
bodies by excessive toyle , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,214.118

and so shorten their dayes ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,214.119

or as <paren> soon as they can fit themselves for a more easie
profession , or obtain a more profitable place <$$paren> after a few
years quit their Schoole , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,214.120

and leave their Scholars to anothers charge , that either hath his
method to seek , or else traines them up in another , quite different
from that which they had been used to . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,214.121

And thus thorow the change of Masters the Scholars are either dispersed
, or hindered from going on with that alacrity and profit , which
otherwise they might . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,214.122

<P_215>

The second sort of <font> Schooles <$$font> are those which are <font>
purely Grammatical <$$font> , being especially conversant in teaching
the Art of Grammar . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,215.124

Now some of these have yearely salaries for a Master and one Usher ,
where the Master is employed in perfecting those Scholars , which the
Usher hath already grounded . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,215.125

And many of these Schooles , <paren> especially if they be situate in
places where accommodation is to be had for Tabling <$$paren> do happily
train up many Scholars , which about sixteen or seventeen years of age ,
are fit to be sent to the University . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,215.126

But in regard there is no preferment attending these Schooles , the most
pregnant_witted children are commonly taken thence , after they are well
grounded , and disposed on to other places , where they may gain it .
So that of all others our <font> collegiate Schooles <$$font> or those
that come nearest them , have the greatest advantage of making most
Scholars . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,215.127

For these having commonly large revenues belonging to them , do not
onely provide sufficiently for a Master and one Usher at lest , but also
for a certaine number of Scholars , which being for the most part the
choycest wits , pickt out of other Schooles , and such as depend <P_216>
upon hopes of advancement , do industriously bestirre themselves to
attain what learning they can , and submit themselves orderly to such
Discipline as is there exercised . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,216.128

But forasmuch as these greater Schooles rather intend the forwarding of
such children as are already grounded , then busie themselves about
meere Rudiments ; it causeth many parents to disperse their little ones
abroad to Tabling-Schooles , where <paren> for the most part <$$paren>
there is but one man to teach a few promiscuously hand-over-head ,
without any setled Method , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,216.129

and these changing and removing ever and anon , as cause is offered , do
seldome attain any stable proficiencie in Grammar-learning .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,216.130

Yet in some of these , where an able Schoole-Master is well seated , and
provided with all fitting accommodations , so as to entertain many
Gentlemens sonnes of good quality , and an able Usher to assist him in
Teaching , I have observed children to make double profiting , in
respect of other Schooles , because they have the advantage to spend
much of that time at their bookes , which others trifle away , in
running up and down about home ; not to say , that the constant <P_217>
eye of the Master is an especiall means to regulate them in point of
behaviour . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,217.131

Now comparing all the Schooles which we have in <font> England <$$font>
, with some that I read of in other countries , <paren> that I may speak
freely , and without offence to any man , submitting my self herein also
to the judgement of those of my Profession <$$paren> I do not know one
that is so compleated , as <paren> perhaps <$$paren> many might easily
be , with all necessary accommodations , and advantages to improve
children to what they are capable of , in their playing years ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,217.132

and wherein we evidently see , how many places of education beyond the
Seas , do quite outstrip us . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,217.133

And therefore from what I have heretofore read in <font> Mr. Mulcasters
Positions concerning the training up of children , in ch. 40 .
<$$font> <paren> which he writ when he had been twenty years
Schoole-master at <font> Merchant Tailors Schoole <$$font> , which was
erected 1561 . being afterwards head Master of <font> Pauls <$$font> ,
in 1600 . <$$paren> and what I have been informed touching Mr. <font>
Farnabies <$$font> improvement of a private Grammar Schoole in <font>
Gold-Smiths Alley <$$font> , now called <font> New street <$$font> ,
also <font> Jewen Street <$$font> ; and what I my self have <P_218>
experienced for about fourteen years together , both in that place , and
in <font> Lothbury Garden <$$font> , I am induced to think , that it is
a matter very feaseable to raise many of our Grammar-Schooles to a far
higher pitch of learning , then is ordinarily yet attained to in <font>
England <$$font> . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,218.134

For whereas in most of our Grammar-Schooles <paren> as I have noted
<$$paren> there is but one , two , or three Ushers besides a Master ,
imployed in teaching the Latine and Greek Tongues , and some smattering
of the Hebrew , together in one room , to six or seven Forms of Scholars
, who by reason of the noise of one another , <paren> not to mention the
clamour of children <$$paren> and the multiplicity of their Work , with
several boyes in each Form , do both over-tire themselves , and many
times leave things to the halves ; I conceive a course may be taken
<paren> especially <$$paren> in Cities , and Townes of greater concourse
, to teach a great multitude of Scholars <paren> as <font> Corderius
<$$font> professeth to have taught 500. and I have been informed , that
in some places beyond Seas , 2500. are taught in one Schoole <$$paren>
without any noise , in a pleasing & profiting manner , & in their
playing years ; not onely the English , Latine , and Greek Tongues ,
<paren> together with the Duties of Piety , and civil behaviour
<$$paren> but also the Easterne , <P_219> and other needful forreign
Languages , {SIC:Languaguages} besides fair writing , Arithmetick ,
Musick , and other Preparatory Arts and Sciences , which are most
obvious to the Senses ; and whereof their younger yeares are very
capable ; that thereby they may be throughly fitted for ingenuous Trades
, or to prosecute higher studies in the Universities , and so be able
<paren> when they come to mans estate <$$paren> to undertake the due
management of private or publick Affaires , either at home , or in other
countries . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,219.135

He that shall but consider the low ebbe that learning was brought to
<paren> by reason of the Danish barbarisme <$$paren> in <font> England
<$$font> , in King <font> Alfred's <$$font> dayes , who could not finde
a Master in all his dominions , to teach him the Latine Tongue , <paren>
which he began to learn at thirty_six years of age , having begun to
read English at twelve , which his elder brethren , because less
studious , could not attain to <$$paren> and the paucity of them that
understood Greek , not much above threescore yeares agoe , when a
Scholar yet living of thirteen years old from the Schoole , was owned as
a better Grecian , then most of the Fellowes of the Colledge to which he
went ; he that , I say , shall consider the former rareness of <P_220>
the Latine and Greek Tongues in <font> England <$$font> , and now see
how common they are <paren> especially since Queen <font> Elizabeths
<$$font> dayes , in whose time , more Schooles were built , then there
were before in all her Realm <$$paren> and withall , take notice what an
excellent improvement that noble-spirited Mr. <font> Busbie <$$font>
hath of late made at <font> Westminster <$$font> Schoole , where the
Easterne Languages are now become familiar to the highest sort of
Scholars , will undoubtedly think <paren> as I do <$$paren> that our
children may be brought on to far more knowledge of Language and things
, then hitherto they have been , and that also in a more easie manner .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,220.136

And forasmuch as I observe it as a great Act of Gods mercy towards his
Church , that , in this jangling age of ours , wherein too many decry
learning , he hath raised up the Spirit of some , that know better what
it is , to endeavour heartily to advance it , I shall here addresse my
words to such whosoever they are , but more especially to the Honourable
and Reverend Trustees for the maintenance of Students .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,220.137

And as before I have hinted somewhat touching the erecting of
Petty-Schooles <paren> whereof there is great need , especially
<$$paren> in <font> London <$$font> ; so I will here presume <paren> and
I hope it will prove no offence <$$paren> to publish what I <P_221> have
often seriously thought , and sometimes spoken with some mens
approbation , touching the most convenient founding of a Grammar-Schoole
; that if it shall please God to stirre up any mans spirit to perform so
pious a Work , he may do it , to the best advantage for the improvement
of Piety and learning . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,221.138

For when I see in many places of this land , what vast summes have been
expended <paren> even of late <$$paren> in erecting stately houses , and
fencing large parcels of ground for Orchards and Gardens , and the like
; and how destitute for the most part they stand , and remain without
inhabitants ; I am too too apt to think , that those persons which have
undergone so great a charge , to so little purpose , would willingly
have disbursed as much money upon a publick good , did they but rightly
know how to do it ; since thereby their name and memory will be more
preserved ; especially , if they have no children or posterity of their
own to provide for . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,221.139

But to return to the contrivance of a Schoole , which is to be in many
things <paren> as I have mentioned <$$paren> above the ordinary way of
Schooling , yet gradually distant from , and subordinate to University
Colledges , which would thence also take a <P_222> further rise towards
perfection in all kinds of Study and Action , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,222.140

For the better grounded a Scholar is in the principles of useful matters
, when he comes to the University , the greater progress he will make
there in their superstructures , which require more search and
meditation ; so that at last he will be able to discover many
particulars , which have not yet been found out by others , who <paren>
perhaps <$$paren> have not gone so rationally to work , as he may do ,
having obtained the whole <font> Ensyclopaedia <$$font> of learning , to
help him in all sorts of Books . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,222.141

Such a Schoole then as may be fit for the education of all sorts of
children <paren> for we have seen the very poorest to have come to
dignities of preferment by being learned <$$paren> should be situated in
a City or Town of great concourse and trading , whose inhabitants are
generally addicted , and sufficiently accommodated to entertain Tablers
, and are unanimously well-affected towards Piety , Learning , and
Vertue . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,222.142

The place should be healthfully and pleasantly seated in a plentifull
country , where the wayes on all sides are most commonly faire , and
convenient passage to be had from remoter parts , both by land and by
water . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,222.143

The Schoole-house should be a large <P_223> and stately building ,
placed by it selfe about the middle of the outside of a Town , as near
as may be to the Church , and not far from the fields , where it may
stand in a good aire , and be free from all annoyances .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,223.144

It should have a large piece of ground adjoyning to it , which should be
divided into a paved Court to go round about the Schoole , a faire
Orchard and Garden , with Walks and Arbors , and a spacious green close
for Scholars recreations ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,223.145

and to shelter the Scholars against rainy weather , and that they may
not injure the Schoole in times of play , it were good if some part of
the Court were sheded , or cloystered over . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,223.146

This Schoole-house should be built three stories high , whereof the
middlemost , for more freedome of the aire , should be the highest
above-head , and so spacious that it may contain <paren> at least
<$$paren> 500. Scholars together , without thronging one another .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,223.147

It should be so contrived with folding doors made betwixt every Form ,
as that upon occasion it may be all laid open into one roome , or parted
into six , for more privacie of hearing every Form without noyse , or
hinderance one of another . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,223.148

There should be seats made in the Schoole , with Deskes before them ,
<P_224> whereon every Scholar may write , and lay his book ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,224.149

and these should be so placed , that a good space may be left in the
middle of the Schoole , so as six men a_breast may walk up and down from
Form to Form . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,224.150

The Ushers Pues should be set at the head ends of every Form , so as
they may best see and hear every particular boy .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,224.151

And the Masters Chaire should be so raised at the upper end of the
Schoole , as that he may be able to have every Scholar in his eye , and
to be heard of all , when he hath occasion to give any common charge ,
or instruction . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,224.152

There may be shelves made round about the Schoole , and boxes for every
Scholar to put his books in , and pins whereon they may hang their hats
; that they be not trodden <paren> as is usual <$$paren> under feet .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,224.153

Likewise every Form should have a Repository near unto it , wherein to
lay such Subsidiary books as are most proper for its use .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,224.154

The lowest story may be divided into several rooms , proportioned
according to the uses for which they are intended , whereof one should
be for a writing-Schoole , another for such Languages as are to be
taught at spare houres ; and a third as a Petty-Schoole for such
children as can@ @not read English perfectly , and are intended for the
Grammar-Schoole . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,224.155

<P_225>

A fourth room may be reserved for laying in wood and coales , and the
rest made use on for Ushers or Scholars to lodge in , or the like
occasion , as the Master shall think best to dispose of them to the
furtherance of his Schoole . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,225.157

In the uppermost story , there should be a faire pleasant Gallery
wherein to hang Maps , and set Globes , and to lay up such rarities as
can be gotten in presses , or drawers , that the Scholars may know them
. HOOLE-1660-E3-H,225.158

There should likewise be a place provided for a School-Library ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,225.159

and the rest may be made use of as Lodging roomes , for Ushers and
Scholars . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,225.160

But the whole Fabrick should be so contrived , that there may be
sufficient lights and chimneys to every Form and roome .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,225.161

As for an house of Office , it should be made a good distance from the
Schoole , in some corner of the close , where it may be most out of
sight , and least offensive . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,225.162

The Masters dwelling-house should be nigh the Schoole ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,225.163

and should contain in it all sorts of roomes convenient for
entertainment and lodging , and necessary offices that pertain to a
great family . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,225.164

It should have a handsome Court before it , and a large yard behind it ,
with an Orchard and Garden , and some inclosure of pasture ground .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,225.165

And there should be two <P_226> or three roomes made a little remote
from the dwelling house , to which Scholars may be removed and kept
apart , in case they be sick , and have some body there to look to them
. HOOLE-1660-E3-H,226.166

Now that every Scholar may be improved to the utmost of what he is
capable , the whole Grammar Schoole should be divided into six Forms ,
and those placed orderly in one roome , which <paren> as I have
described <$$paren> may be so divided into six , that the noyse of one
form may not at all disturb or hinder another . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,226.167

There should also be six able Ushers , for every particular form one ,
whose work should be to teach the Scholars according to the method
appointed by the Master , and <paren> that every one may profit in what
he learneth <$$paren> to be sure to have respect to the weakest , and
afford them the most help . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,226.168

The Master should not be tyed <paren> as is ordinary <$$paren> to a
double work , both to teach a main part of the Schoole himselfe , and to
have the inspection and government over all ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,226.169

but his chief care should be <paren> and it wil be businesse enough for
one <$$paren> to prescribe Taskes , and to examine the Scholars in every
form , how they profit , and to see that all exercises be duely
performed , and good order constantly observed , <P_227> and that every
Usher be dexterous and diligent in his charge , and moderate in
executing such correction , as is necessary at any time to be inflicted
for vitious enormities , but seldome or never , for errours committed at
their Books . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,227.170

As for the maintenance of such a School , it should be so liberal , that
both Master and Ushers may think their places to be preferment
sufficient , & not to be enforced to look for further elsewhere , or to
direct their spare houres studies towards other Callings .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,227.171

It were to be wished therefore , that a constant Salary of <paren> at
least <$$paren> 100 +L. per_annum might be allowed to the Master , and
30 +L. 40 +L. 50 +L. 60. 70 +L. 80 +L. per_annum to his six Ushers
. The raising of which maintenance , <paren> to use Mr. <font>
Mulcasters <$$font> words <$$paren> as it will require a good minde ,
and no meane purse ; so it needs neither the conference of a countrey ,
nor yet the Revenue of a Romane Emperour . HOOLE-1660-E3-H,227.172

Besides , the Master for his encouragement , should have liberty to make
what benefit he can by tabling in strangers ; HOOLE-1660-E3-H,227.173

and every of the abler sort of inhabitants in the Town , should pay him
<paren> at least <$$paren> 10.@ @s <font> per <$$font> quarter , for a
sons teaching , HOOLE-1660-E3-H,227.174

but all the poorer children should be taught <font> gratis <$$font> , on
condition they be sent constantly to the Schoole , and that <P_228>
their Parents do engage they shall keep good order , and be cleanly and
neat in their apparel ; that they may not seem to disgrace their
fellowes , or to be disdained by them for their poverty .
HOOLE-1660-E3-H,228.175

