<BEGIN_hoxinden-1663-e3-h>

<P_272>

<heading:edcomment:CLXXVIII_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_HIS_WIFE>

My deare , I did write to thee by the Fryday post , and since by the
Tuesday post , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,272.4

and have not omitted writing to thee by the Fryday and Tuesday Post
since I came to London . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,272.5

<P_273>

My mind is with thee howsoever I am forced to be absent from Thee .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.7

I see thy care and vigilance HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.8

and thank Thee ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.9

mine is not wanting wherein I may . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.10

I have received thy Letter of Saturday last and Tuesday morning with the
half shirt , band and cuffes and handkerchiffe .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.11

If others I have to do with were as reall to mee as is Dr Hardres , Dr.
Reading , Mr Aldy and Mr. Hannington I could not do amisse .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.12

Men here ar of another temper HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.13

and a Man knows not how to beleive anie of them .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.14

I went to Lambeth with thy Noate of Cranbroke with my Brother Barrow
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.15

and desired Dr. Porie , who hath Ickham and is a kinsman and favorite
of the Archbishop , to help mee to either . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.16

Hee sayd Smarden and Cranbroke ar disposed of and the other dubious ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.17

but none know when these Men speake truth . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.18

Mr. Aylmer told my brother Richard and mee yesterday of a Divine came
to a Bishop so often as being wearie is resolved to attend no longer .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.19

And my Brother told another storie of another Divine came to a Bishop ,
viz the Bishop of London <paren> but I suppose it was some other Bishop
, for hee is reputed to be honest <$$paren> and told Him that hee came
to acquaint Him of a liveing was said lately to be fallen by the
Incumbent's decease HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.20

and desired hee might have it : HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.21

t'@ @is said hee told Him it was true , but the liveing was disposed of
the Night before ; whereupon the Gent replyed that the Incumbent was as
live as either of them , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.22

and hee sayd it to see their tricks etc HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.23

and so in an anger departed . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.24

Whether this be true or noe in this particular these courses ar much in
use . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.25

I thinke I may have some small Liveing : HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.26

great ones ar exceeding difficult to be had . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.27

I have spoken with Sir Tho: Peyton twice HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.28

and find him in such passions as I have no manner of hopes of his
assistance ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.29

hee doth mee twice as much hurt as good ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.30

some bodie hath incensed Him very much against mee ,
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.31

you may guesse who hath done it , the partie being not far from you .
Wherby you may the lesse Wonder of the Indifferent Ladie's not giveing
you a better answere , and that Charles
{COM:preceding_word_"Charles"_emended} Nichols
{COM:preceding_word_"Nichols"_emended} is so silent ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,273.32

<P_274>

for I beleive nobodie can perswade Him into a good temper towards mee .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.34

My Brother and Cozin Dalison surely ar right enough in their Wishes as
concerning somewhat so not in Kent ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.35

but all the assistance I do expect and find is from my Brother Barrow as
yet ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.36

but if I get one {COM:preceding_word_"one"_emended} step in the way I
doubt not of getting farther , notwithstanding the difficulties I have
as yet met with ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.37

and I am in some hopes that by the next Post I shall give Thee an
account of somewhat done or likely to be done .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.38

I have yet had onely to doe with Billop , Mr. Wren's Secretary ; and
with Dr. Porie who hath Ickham and is a kinsman of the Arch_bishop of
Canterbury , who tells mee that my Lord hath set down my name in Order
to somewhatt . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.39

The Bishop of Winchester is not yet come to Town , so that I can make no
tryall with him ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.40

but I beleive I must of Necessitie have my Orders up , whereby my
Ordination may appeare as to the Arch_bishop of Canterbury or the Lord
Chancellor . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.41

Trulie my Deare , I must have monie sent mee now out of hand
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.42

or I shall be in straits as well for my occasions in being here as in
way of attainment of what I aime at , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.43

for beleive mee I am as sparing as I can HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.44

and yet by reason of going by water 4 or 5 times in a day , sending of
Porters up and down etc , I am at more expence then you can imagine .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.45

My Cozin Dallison had letters by the Tuesday post of Henry Oxinden's
being very ill and that hee is grown as big as Sir George , whereby his
long life is doubted of . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.46

Be sure , however you come not by my letters , that I write constantly
by every Tuesday and Fryday post . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.47

Mr. Barling will keep in , do what anie can against Him ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.48

he will do anie thing rather then lose his liveing ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.49

however I beleive that is not intended mee . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.50

I read thy Letters over and over and over , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.51

for in them I see thee as well as I can . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.52

I am thine as much as {I_can_be} possibly . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.53

I hope our Children are well . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.54

My service to all you think fitting to speake it to .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,274.55

The rent of the red House and pasture feild to it is six pound the yeare
; Hammond's close 6@ @=l= the yeare <P_275> and the wo Maydekens 12
shillings the Acre ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.56

it is 24 acres . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.57

If 12@ @s the Acre can@ @not be had , rather then faile , eleven
shilling the Acre . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.58

It is now past 11 of the clock HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.59

and I am invited to dine with Mr. Carpenter to a peice of venison where
Mr Worstnam {COM:preceding_word_"Worstnam"_emended} and Mr. Tho:
Andrews ar allso invited and may not be absent .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.60

If Mr. John Andrews had been in Town to have spoke to my Lord
Chancellor , something considerable might have been don with Mr Billop ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.61

as the case now stands I know no way under heaven so effectually
probable as for thee to send to my brother Richard or my Cozin Dalison
to lay out the 16@ @=l= adventured with my Cozin George to my best
advantage HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.62

and in case you do not pay it them againe in good time , they to have
the benfit of it . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.63

Surely , surely , without considerable monie nothing can considerably be
done . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.64

The way is for a friend <paren> as Ned Swan sayes and others beside him
<$$paren> to put a matter of 50 or 60 peices into the secretarie's hand
and not let the party that is to have the liveing know of it .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.65

I thinke thou wert best send up the silver Tanker to my brother to that
effect : HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.66

however if thou send mee no mony I can subsist no longer here ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.67

for to borrow will spoile all . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.68

I can@ @not say all I have a mind to say because letters ar broken open
. HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.69

I am in such hast as I know not what I have wrot .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.70

Dr. Gauden , Bishop of Worcester , is dead ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.71

Dr. Bargrave is newly chosen Prebend of Canterbury in roome of an old
Prebend lately deceased HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.72

and is now uppon going to Argiers to redeem some Captives .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.73

I met him at Lambeth upon Tuesday last . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.74

The Lord blesse you HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.75

and preserve you and mee and ours . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.76

In extreme hast I rest Thine inexpressibly H .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,275.77

<P_276>

<heading:edcomment:CLXXIX_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_HIS_WIFE>

<heading:edcomment:Sep_29,_1662>

My deare , Mr. Hannington {COM:preceding_word_"Hannington"_emended}
came to mee at 9 on Saturday . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.81

I thank thee for thy care in sending to mee . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.82

Be sure that nothing shall be squandered away can be prevented .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.83

I sent a letter to thee by the Fryday post . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.84

I will assure Thee that I have had such care in sending to Thee that I
usually do not defer writing till the last houre and am as carefull to
send them in good time as may bee . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.85

If there be any fault it is in some who are inquisitive to see into them
. HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.86

Dr. Pash wrot sure enough touching Norton and Stouermouth ,
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.87

and there was nothing omitted in mee could have been done concerning
Stowermouth . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.88

Why Sir Tho. Peyton should tell anie bodie that I refused a liveing of
a_100@ @=li= by the yeare I knowe not ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.89

for I have not refused anie : HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.90

and none that I know of hath been offered mee .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.91

You know that you may beleive mee , how little truth soever there be in
other men . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.92

I have 4 times waited upon Sir Tho . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.93

The first time hee tooke little notice of mee though I ernestly
solliceted him : HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.94

hee expressed his dislike of things too long to relate .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.95

However I pressed him in my behalfe HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,276.96

and spake to him to speak <P_277> to the Lord Chancellor ect.
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.97

What his answeres were and what were my replies will be to long to
relate . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.98

The second time my brother Barrow in like manner pressed him in my
presence , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.99

but hee was then much at one as before . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.100

Then I wrot a letter to his lodgeing to him , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.101

so hee sent for mee , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.102

and wee had some discourse in a more friendly manner .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.103

The 4 time I was with Him hee spake to mee to dine with him
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.104

and then hee at dinner before some strangers began my Lord Chancellor's
health to mee HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.105

and said that might signify somewhat . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.106

This is all the account I can give thee as concerning Him .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.107

T'@ @is said hee and his family comes up to London upon Wedensday next ,
in order to go into Kent . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.108

His daughter , viz his 2=d= daughter is upon recovery so as to come :
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.109

and it is thought that his third daughter hath a sutor .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.110

I intend to try Sir Tho. once more if I see Him .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.111

I think verily hee is better contented that I shall be neerer home then
those you and I have said are not contented , whose
{COM:preceding_word_"whose"_emended} design is to have mee placed as far
as may be . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.112

You have advised mee well in being my own secretarie ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.113

howsoever I think Sir Robt Hales , Mr. Hannington and Ch. N. are some
of our truest friends . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.114

Mr. Hannington and I were a Sunday last HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.115

and heard a sermon at White Hall before the King .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.116

Dr. Bolton preached HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.117

and that you may know that Mr. Hannington is of no ordinary esteeme , I
will assure thee hee had such a presence with him as though a stranger
to every one in the Church , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.118

hee was ushered in from his standing amongst severall gentlemen and
seated next to the Bishop of London himselfe ,
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.119

and I {COM:preceding_word_"I"_emended} finde him much in esteem amongst
all them that have any acquaintance with Him .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.120

Smarden and Cranbrook are disposed of , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.121

Smarden is the best . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.122

Hedcorne is not as yet disposed of . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.123

I can@ @not as yet say farther then {I_will_say} I , God willing , will
not come home without doing somewhat , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.124

but of what consideration it will be I may get , I can@ @not tell .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.125

My Lord Bishop of Winchester came not to Town untill Saturday night last
; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.126

his Secretary came upon Fryday last , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.127

and I have spake with him , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,277.128

and just as I met <P_278> him - I ment to have said a little before I
met him - I was a speaking to Dr. Gibbs who is brother to the Lady
Deering ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.129

hee is now become {COM:preceding_word_"become"_emended} Prebend of
Westminster , who told mee the Lord Bishop of Winchester that ordeyned
mee enquired of him concerning mee . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.130

I find by him that hee spake well of me to the Bishop :
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.131

that which enduces mee to beleive as much is because hee gave mee his
hand to my certificate . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.132

The Secretary aske mee if I were acquainted with him .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.133

I told him yes . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.134

The Secretary answered that if hee did but speake to the Bishop in my
behalfe I could not faile . After which I spake to Dr. Gibbs to speak
to the Bishop in my behalf : HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.135

hee hath promised mee to speake : so that Mr. Swan being to go to him
as yesterday , I provided a Maze ring of a noble price
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.136

and sent it to him in a letter by Capt. Swan , in token of thanks for
his love to mee . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.137

What the effect of this Negociation will be time will demonstrate .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.138

I foresee that I can@ @not possibly do what I would to the purpose I
feare this fourth night at least <paren> as you say now or never I must
endeavour <$$paren> HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.139

The rent of the heder Horselease and farther horselease are , one with
the other , 10@ @=s= or 11@ @=s= the Acre , as you can get , remembring
that they that hire them pay for what is plowed and the carriing up of
the dung ; or else condition to plow so much and carry out so much dung
; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.140

the upper Regdens and the long slip of Summerland , about that rate ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.141

the Heder and farther Cowleases about that rate , and the little field
adioining to Cowlease , formerly called Giles pees -
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.142

I refer things to thy discretion , knowing Thee to be careful and
knowing how to advise with old Robt Jull or some others thou thinkest
most fitt . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.143

As you find occasion do with the house at Barham and land , remembring
that you do not give way to have the pasture feild next the house broke
up HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.144

This day as I came from Westminster I saw the King and the Queen at
dinner . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.145

I have received my Orders and what Thou didst send
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.146

and give thee thanks for thy love . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.147

I have now bought mee a change . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,278.148

I hope that Thou and <P_279> our Children are in good health .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,279.149

I pray God blesse thee and them . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,279.150

My Love to our friends . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,279.151

I am Thine sincerely H. O. HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,279.152

<heading:edcomment:CLXXX_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_HIS_WIFE>

I received noe letter from thee by the Fryday post .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,279.154

My deare , Saturday last thy Taffety came to my lodgeing in my absence .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,279.155

I sent a letter by the Tuesday and Fryday post whereby you may perceive
that I could not come home without leaving my busines undon , which to
tell thee the Truth was in no such forwardnes {SIC:for_such_forwardnes}
as Mr. Hannington thought . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,279.156

Uppon Fryday my Brother Barrow and I were with <em> Dr. Porie <$$em> at
Lambeth , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,279.157

and then hee told my Brother Barrow so much as hee and I gave it over ,
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,279.158

and so I went to my Brother Richard HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,279.159

and told him that I had no hopes , <P_280> and what {SIC:that} Dr.
Porie's reason was , and all the reason hee could give ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.160

hee thought I was of a weakly and sickly constitution and preaching was
a laborious work and would quickly bring mee to my end ; or else I must
be necessitated to keepe a Curate . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.161

But my Brother understood the matter aright HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.162

and found that could not be his reall reason ,
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.163

and my Cosin Dalison {COM:preceding_word_"Dalison"_emended} told mee
plainely nothing was to be done without mony ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.164

and therefore my Brother Richard should negociate the busines with my
Brother barrow without mee , and try what might be done that way , so
that I find my Brother Richard and my Cozin Dalison now to bee my most
reall friends HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.165

A Fryday Night I went againe to Dr. Porie's house in Warwicke Court
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.166

and asked him what hee could obiect agt mee , or whether anie body had
said anything agt mee . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.167

Hee said nobody had said anything agt mee . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.168

I asked him if hee could object agt mee for learning :
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.169

hee said hee was satifyed in that ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.170

I asked him if he could object agt my life and conversation ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.171

hee said , no ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.172

only he spake as before HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.173

I met Sir Tho: Peyton {COM:preceding_word_"Peyton"_emended} today in
Fleete street ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.174

hee asked mee if I were still in Town HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.175

and called me Doctor , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.176

and so spake to a gentleman close by , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.177

so hee and I had no more words . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.178

Hee went at 3 of the clock to Twickenham . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.179

I would faine have spoken with Him before he went
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.180

but could not ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.181

but sure enough hee will do mee no good . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.182

Thus far Saturday night . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.183

It is said that Dunkirk is sold to the French for four_hundred_thousand
pound . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.184

Sir Tho. Peyton's daughter is not thorowly recovered .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.185

It is hoped shee will recover . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.186

It is now about 12 of the clock , Mooneday noone
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.187

and my Cozin Dalison is going to take water for Gravesend .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.188

Shee will bee at Deane Tuesday night . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.189

I have wrot a letter by her to thee ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.190

there is nothing in it but what is in this , only something of my
acknowledgement of My brother Richard@ @'s Love to mee and her Reality
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.191

Mr. Hannington had fifty shillings of you and mee ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,280.192

suppose <P_281> the dying of your silk come to 5@ @=s= , the horse 10@
@=s= , his meate 3@ @=s= 6@ @=d= ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.193

that is 18@ @s 6@ @d . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.194

I know not how it could stand him in 31 shillings 6@ @d more ; unless
hee spent more then hee needed . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.195

It may be hee was out of purse last time hee came to London with mee ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.196

yet I paid for him and mee that as I thinke mattered
{COM:preceding_word_"mattered"_emended} in everything except where hee
would fling away his monie . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.197

I can@ @not tell with whom hee left my daughter Hobart@ @'s ring .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.198

My Cozin Dalison intends to stay about 10 dayes as shee sayes .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.199

T'@ @is shee that must do mee what kindnes is to be done when all comes
to all ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.200

and therefore may observe her what you can , as indeed wee ought .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.201

My Horse is at Mr. Marlo's at the dark house in Gravesend :
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.202

I wish I had sent for him home within 3 or 4 dayes after I left him
there : HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.203

he will have been 5 weekes there next Wedensday or Thursday noone .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.204

I know not what to ad but {to_add} that I am Thine truly .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.205

<font> Mooneday noone Octob. 13 . <$$font> HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,281.206

<P_291>

<heading:edcomment:CLXXXV_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_KATHERINE_OXINDEN>

<P_292>

My dere beyond all expression , this is to desire Thee not to be
troubled in the least Measure at that which joyes mee , which is our
removal to thy red house ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.210

before wee were sure of Nothing , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.211

now we are of somewhat ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.212

for I have all_ready setled it so uppon Thee as it lyes not in my power
to unsettle it . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.213

This paper will not hold all the inconveniencies I lay under before I
came up to London , which now are in a great Measure abated .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.214

It is probable that time will worke to our advantage .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.215

I pray let this suffice for the present . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.216

Now my mind is wholy set upon comeing to see Thee , in order to which
pray let my Horse <paren> if I have one <$$paren> be sent to the Dark
House at Gravesend by Thursday Night , if not Wedensday Night .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.217

If Thou canst not send him thether , yet I pray send him to Ospring to
our Brother Cater@ @'s ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.218

but I had rather Thou would send him to the Dark House .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.219

I heare that Mr. Hales went home last Fryday .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.220

I now , thanks be to God , ow not Mr. Carpenter or Ms Andrews or any of
them one penny . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.221

Mr. White of Dover and Mr. Roberts will be paid in the County .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.222

My Cozin Val Pettit is paid his debt . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.223

Mr. Trusser's bond and Mr. Dickenson's bond I intend , God willing ,
to pay tomorrow being Mooneday ; HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.224

if I see Mr. Twiman I intend to pay him what is due to Him ;
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.225

and if Mr. Crux his bond be sent up , I intend to pay that , so that I
shall not be troubled with their summons any further .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.226

I am offerd an Advowsen of what is sayd to be worth seavenskore pound by
the yeare for 40@ @=l= to be paid in hand : HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.227

the incumbent is said to be 80 yeare old etc ,
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.228

but shall not make any agreement till I speake with thee .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.229

It lyes in surry about 20 miles from London .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.230

I suppose that Mr. Ady and his Family set out from Greenwich upon
Wedensday morning in two Coaches . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,292.231

I spake <P_293> to Him to be kind to Thee . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.232

Hee sayes he will : HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.233

and expresses his sorrow for Mr. Barling's leaving Denton
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.234

I have not been very wel these two dayes , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.235

however I am glad that I have setled my busines so well as I have , so
that what ever come of mee , things will be better for Thee and Thine
then they would have been in case I had not made any agreement .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.236

It is late this Sunday Night HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.237

and so I shall commit Thee and Thine to his Protection who alone is able
to preserve us , whose Name be praysed for ever .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.238

Now I proceed in my letter , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.239

it is Moonday , past 6 , HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.240

and I am somewhat better then I was and so much as I intend to make what
hast I can home , in order to which pray observe my directions in this
letter at the other side of the paper . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.241

This hath been a very wet day here at London .
HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.242

I shall now say no more then {I_will_say} that no man can have a more
real heart toward any then hath to Thee and Thine Thine inalterably Hen:
Oxinden HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.243

<font> May 25 . <$$font> 65 . HOXINDEN-1663-E3-H,293.244

