<BEGIN_jbarring-1629-e2-h>

<P_76>

<heading:edcomment:46_JOHN_BARRINGTON,_18_JULY_1629,_TO_HIS_MOTHER>

Deare mother I am exceading sorrowfull that I have been forced by reason
of my longe sicknes to be so often importunate to request your favour in
the releafe of my greate necessities , wherby I know I have beene very
chargeable unto yow , without which love of yours so highlie shewed to
mee I could not have imagined what I should have done for my releafe all
this time . JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.4

I beseach yow not to esteame your love ill bestowed upon mee hearin ;
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.5

I trust in God I shall never give yow cause so to doe , but yow shall
<paren> God willing <$$paren> ever finde mee willing to strive to
desearve your love to my uttermost power and indeavour .
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.6

I must indeade confess I was more then ordinarie chargeable unto yow
latelie <paren> being constrained therunto which I could not avoide
<$$paren> , in which respect I do understand yow are displeased with mee
<paren> which hath much troubled mee <$$paren> JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.7

but I do intreate yow if yow have conceaved any distast against mee
hearin that yow would be pleased to remitt it , assuring yow I will
carefully avoyde any thinge which I can thinke to be displeasing to yow
. JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.8

I do understand it is your pleasure to know of mee what course I do
purpose to take when God shal@ @be pleased to inable mee with strength
to goe abroode . JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.9

I beseach you not to harbour any other conceite then that I am resolved
to take such a lawfull course as shall be both pleasing to God and
liking to your sealfe ; JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.10

this my desire , JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.11

for I delight not in sullenes . JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.12

But as yet I must with patience waight God his pleasure for my former
strength , JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.13

for as yet I have not JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.14

nore dare beare any waight upon my hurte legg because the bone is not
all come of that is to scale of . JBARRING-1629-E2-H,76.15

I only as yet goe with cruches now and then about my <P_77> chamber .
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,77.16

With the remembrance of my humble dutie I commend yow to God his
protection remayning Your obedient sonn John Barrington
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,77.17

London , JBARRING-1629-E2-H,77.18

18 July , 1629 : JBARRING-1629-E2-H,77.19

To my honourable mother the lady Johanna Barrington
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,77.20

<P_79>

<heading:edcomment:50_JOHN_BARRINGTON,_13_AUGUST_1629,_TO_HIS_MOTHER>

Deare mother May it please yow , since my last letter which I desired
Sir Francis Harris to deliver unto yow my bone which was to scale is
<paren> I thanck God <$$paren> quite of and the wound allmost dried upp
, soe that I hope I shall now be quickly able to goe abroade .
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.23

I do hope <paren> God willing <$$paren> to gow for Swede and to have a
company for that service , JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.24

but as yet wee have noe absolute answeare of {COM:sic} those condicions
are sent to the king , which are carried thither by a Dutchman who is to
be our collonell <paren> if wee are agreed upon our condicions <$$paren>
. JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.25

I was demanded by a speciall frind if I would be one of the regiment ,
to which I have willingly agreed . JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.26

As yet wee have no certaintie before wee heare from thence , which wee
earnestlie expect . JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.27

The chiefe points wee stand upon are for monie to be paid us heare to
rayse our men ; JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.28

and for the time how long they will entertaine us , wee desire to make
in our condicions that the king shal@ @be bound to keepe us in pay three
yeares at least . JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.29

They would pay us <paren> as to some before <$$paren> halfe our monie
heare and the rest a month after our arrivall theare , for raysing our
men , JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.30

but wee hope to have all our monie heare to rayse and transport our men
, which is 300@ @=li= to each captain . JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.31

A captain's meanes is good theare which is twentie_five pounds a month ,
ten to a lieutenant , as much to an ensigne . JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.32

I shall be wondrous willing to imbrace this imployment if wee can agree
to have all our monie heare to rayse and transport our men ,
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.33

else wee can@ @not rayse them for want of monie .
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.34

I beseach yow excuse my tediousness , JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.35

with my humble duty remembred I commend yow to the protection of the
allmightie who I beseach to prosper all your affaires ,
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.36

and will ever rest Your obedient sonn John Barrington
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,79.37

<P_96>

<heading:edcomment:71_JOHN_BARRINGTON,_10_OCTOBER_1629,_TO_HIS_MOTHER>

Deare mother May it please yow , since I last wroghte yow <paren> I
thancke God <$$paren> my legg is much stronger JBARRING-1629-E2-H,96.40

and doth daylie increase in strength , insomuch that I am able to walke
a staff reasonable <P_97> well , JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.41

only my knee is not yet recovred , JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.42

but I hope as strength doth come that will mende .
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.43

As yet wee have receaved no newes of our bussines in Swede
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.44

but wee do dayly expect the comming of Collonel Knephusen from theance
or else his sending hither ; JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.45

I hope wee shall have such contentment that wee may goe over to searve
that kinge next springe , which I doe desire , JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.46

and shall willingly imbrace any reasonable condicions for my parte .
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.47

I doe not heare of any newes worth the wrighting at this time .
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.48

Thus with my humble dutie remembred , I commend yow to the tuition of
the allmightie , resting Your obedient son John Barrington
JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.49

Westminster , JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.50

13th October , 1629 : JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.51

To my very good freind Mr Issac Ewer , servant to the ladie Barrington ,
at Sir Gilbert Gerrard's in Harrow Hill JBARRING-1629-E2-H,97.52

