<BEGIN_jetaylor-1673-e3-h>

<P_8>

Single life makes men in one instance to be like Angels ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.3

but Marriage in very many things makes the chast pair to be like to
Christ . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.4

<font> This is a great mystery <$$font> , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.5

but it is the symbolical and sacramental representment of the greatest
mysteries of our Religion . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.6

Christ descended from his Father's bosom , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.7

and contracted his Divinity with flesh and bloud ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.8

and married our Nature , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.9

and we became a Church , the spouse of the Bridegroom , which he
cleansed with his Bloud , and gave her his holy Spirit for a dowry , and
Heaven for a joynture ; begetting children unto God by the Gospel .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.10

This Spouse he hath joyn'd to himself by an excellent Charity ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.11

he feeds her at his own Table , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.12

and lodges her nigh his own Heart , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.13

provides for all her Necessities , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.14

relieves her Sorrows , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.15

determines her Doubts , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.16

guides her Wandrings , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.17

he is become her Head , and she as a Signet upon his right hand ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.18

he first indeed was betrothed to the Synagogue JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.19

and had many children by her , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.20

but she forsook her love , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.21

and then he married the Church of the Gentiles , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.22

and by her as by a second venter had a more numerous Issue ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.23

atque una domus est omnium filiorum ejus , all the Children dwell in the
same house , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.24

and are Heirs of the same promises , intituled to the same Inheritance .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.25

Here is the eternal Conjunction , the indissoluble knot , the exceeding
love of Christ , the obedience of the Spouse , the communicating of
Goods , the uniting of Interests , the fruit of Marriage , a celestial
Generation , a new Creature ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,8.26

Sacramentum hoc magnum est ; this is the Sacramental mystery ,
represented by the holy Rite of Marriage ; so that Marriage is divine in
its <P_9> Institution , sacred in its Union , holy in the Mystery ,
sacramental in its Signification , honourable in its Appellative ,
religious in its Imployments : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.27

It is Advantage to the societies of men , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.28

and it is <font> Holiness to the Lord <$$font> .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.29

Dico autem in Christo & Ecclesia , It must be in Christ and the Church .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.30

If this be not observed , Marriage loses its mysteriousness :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.31

but because it is to effect much of that which it signifies , it
concerns all that enter into those golden fetters to see that Christ and
his Church be in at every of its periods , and that it be intirely
conducted and over-rul'd by Religion ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.32

for so the Apostle passes from the sacramental rite to the real duty ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.33

<font> Nevertheless <$$font> , that is , although the former Discourse
were wholly to explicate the Conjunction of Christ and his Church by
this similitude , yet it hath in it this real Duty , <font> that the man
love his wife , and the wife reverence her husband <$$font> :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.34

and this is the use we shall now make of it , the particulars of which
precept I shall thus dispose : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.35

1 . I shall propound the Duty as it generally relates to Man and Wife
in conjunction . 2. The duty and power of the Man . 3. The rights
and priviledges , and the duty of the Wife . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.36

1 . In Christo & Ecclesia that begins all , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.37

and there is great need it should be so : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.38

for they that enter into the state of marriage , cast a dye of the
greatest contingency , and yet of the greatest interest in the world ,
next to the last throw for Eternity . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.39

{COM:greek_omitted} Life or death , felicity or a lasting sorrow are in
the power of marriage . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.40

A woman indeed ventures most JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.41

for she hath no Sanctuary to retire to from an evil Husband ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,9.42

she must dwell upon her Sorrow , and hatch the Eggs which her own Folly
or <P_10> Infelicity hath produced ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.43

and she is more under it , because her tormentor hath a warrant of
prerogative , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.44

and the Woman may complain to God as Subjects do of tyrant Princes ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.45

but otherwise she hath no appeal in the causes of unkindness .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.46

And though the man can run from many hours of his sadness , yet he must
return to it again , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.47

and when he sits among his neighbours , he remembers the objection that
lies in his bosom , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.48

and he sighs deeply . Ah tum te miserum , malique fati Quem attractis
pedibus patente porta Percurrent mugilesque raphanique .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.49

The boys , and the pedlers , and the fruiterers shall tell of this man ,
when he is carried to his grave , that he lived and died a poor wretched
person . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.50

The Stags in the Greek Epigram , whose Knees were clog'd with frozen
Snow upon the mountains , came down to the Brooks of the valleys ,
{COM:greek_omitted} hoping to thaw their joynts with the waters of the
stream ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.51

but there the Frost overtook them , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.52

and bound them fast in Ice , till the young Heards-men took them in
their stranger snare . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.53

It is the unhappy chance of many men , finding many inconveniences upon
the mountains of single life , they descend into the valleys of marriage
to refresh their troubles , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.54

and there they enter into fetters , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.55

and are bound to sorrow by the cords of a mans or womans peevishness :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.56

and the worst of the evil is , they are to thank their own follies ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.57

for they fell into the snare by entering an improper way :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.58

Christ and the Church were no ingredients in their choice :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,10.59

but as the <font> Indian <$$font> Women enter into folly for the price
of an Elephant , and think their Crime warrantable ; so do men and women
change their liberty for <P_11> a rich fortune <paren> like <font>
Eriphyle <$$font> the <font> Argive <$$font> , {COM:greek_omitted} she
preferr'd gold before a good man <$$paren> and shew themselves to be
less than money by overvaluing that to all the content and wise felicity
of their lives : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.60

and when they have counted the Money and their Sorrows together , how
willingly would they buy with the Loss of all that money , Modesty , or
sweet Nature to their relative ! JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.61

the odd thousand pound would gladly be allowed in good nature and fair
manners . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.62

As very a Fool is he that chuses for Beauty principally ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.63

cui sunt eruditi oculi , & stulta mens <paren> as one said , <$$paren>
whose Eyes are witty , and their Soul sensual ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.64

It is an ill band of affections to tie two hearts together by a little
thread of red and white . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.65

{COM:greek_omitted} And they can love no longer but until the next Ague
comes , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.66

and they are fond of each other but at the chance of fancy , or the
small Pox , or Child-bearing , or Care , or Time , or any thing that can
destroy a pretty Flower . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.67

But it is the basest of all when lust is the Paranymph and solicites the
suit , and makes the contract , and joyns the hands ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.68

for this is commonly the effect of the former , according to the Greek
proverb , {COM:greek_omitted} JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.69

At first for his fair cheeks and comely Beard , the beast is taken for a
Lion , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.70

but at last he is turn'd to a Dragon , or a Leopard , or a Swine .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.71

That which is at first Beauty on the face may prove Lust in the manners
. JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,11.72

{COM:greek_omitted} <P_12> So <font> Eubulus <$$font> wittily
reprehended such impure contracts ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.73

they offer in their marital Sacrifices nothing but the Thigh , and that
which the Priests cut from the Goats when they were laid to bleed upon
the Altars . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.74

{COM:greek_omitted} Said S. <font> Clement <$$font> .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.75

" He or she that looks too curiously upon " the beauty of the body ,
looks too low , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.76

and hath flesh and corruption in his Heart , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.77

and is judg'd sensual and earthly in his Affections and Desires .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.78

" Begin therefore with God ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.79

Christ is the President of marriage , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.80

and the holy Ghost is the Fountain of purities and chast loves ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.81

and he joyns the hearts ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.82

and therefore let our first Suit be in the court of Heaven , and with
designs of Piety , or Safety , or Charity ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.83

let no impure spirit defile the virgin purities and <font>
castifications of the soul <$$font> , <paren> as S. <font> Peters
<$$font> phrase is ; <$$paren> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.84

let all such Contracts begin with religious affections .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.85

Conjugium petimus , partumque uxoris ; at illis Notum , qui pueri
qualisve futura sit uxor . We sometimes beg of God , for a Wife or a
Child , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.86

and he alone knows what the wife shall prove , and by what dispositions
and manners , and into what fortune that child shall enter :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.87

but we shall not need to fear concerning the Event of it , if Religion ,
and fair Intentions , and Prudence manage , and conduct it all the way .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.88

The preservation of a Family , the production of Children , the avoiding
Fornication , the refreshment of our Sorrows by the comforts of Society
, all these are fair Ends of Marriage JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.89

and hallow the entrance ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.90

but , in these there is a special order ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.91

society was the first designed , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.92

<font> It is not good for man to be alone <$$font> ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.93

Children was the next , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.94

<font> Increase and multiply <$$font> ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,12.95

but the avoiding fornication came in by the <P_13> superfoetation of the
evil accidents of the world . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.96

The first makes marriage Delectable , the second necessary to the
Publick , the third necessary to the Particular ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.97

This is for safety , for life , and Heaven it self ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.98

Nam simulac venas inflavit dira cupido , Huc juvenes aequum est
descendere ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.99

- The other have in them joy and a portion of Immortality :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.100

the first makes the mans Heart glad ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.101

the second is the friend of Kingdoms , and Cities , and Families ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.102

and the third is the Enemy to Hell , and an Antidote of the chiefest
inlet to damnation : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.103

but of all these the noblest End is the multiplying children ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.104

Mundus cum patet , Deorum tristium atque inferum quasi patet janua ;
propterea uxorem liberorum quaerendorum causa ducere religiosum est ,
said <font> Varro <$$font> , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.105

It is religion to marry for children ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.106

and <font> Quintilian <$$font> put it into the definition of a wife ,
est enim uxor quam jungit , quam diducit utilitas ; cujus haec
reverentia est , quod videtur inventa in causa liberorum ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.107

and therefore S. <font> Ignatius <$$font> when he had spoken of <font>
Elias <$$font> , and <font> Titus <$$font> , and <font> Clement <$$font>
, with an honourable mention of their virgin-state , lest he might seem
to have lessened the married Apostles , at whose feet in Christs Kingdom
he thought himself unworthy to sit , he gives this testimony ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.108

they were {COM:greek_omitted} that they might not be disparaged in their
great names of holiness and severity , they were secured by not marrying
to satisfie their lower appetites , but out of desire of children .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.109

Other considerations if they be incident and by way of appendage , are
also considerable in the accounts of prudence ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.110

but when they become principles , they defile the mystery
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.111

and make the blessing doubtful : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.112

Amabit sapiens , cupient caeteri , said <font> Afranius <$$font> ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,13.113

<P_14>

Love is a fair Inducement , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.115

but Desire and Appetite are rude , and the Characterisms of a sensual
person : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.116

Amare justi & boni est , cupere impotentis ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.117

to love , belongs to a just and a good man ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.118

but to lust , or furiously and passionately to desire , is the sign of
impotency and an unruly mind . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.119

2 . Man and Wife are equally concerned to avoid all Offences of each
other in the beginning of their conversation : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.120

every little thing can blast an infant Blossom ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.121

and the breath of the South can shake the little rings of the Vine ,
when first they begin to curle like the locks of a new weaned boy ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.122

but when by Age and consolidation they stiffen into the hardness of a
stem , and have by the warm embraces of the Sun and the kisses of Heaven
brought forth their clusters , they can endure the storms of the North ,
and the loud noises of a Tempest , and yet never be broken :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.123

So are the early unions of an unfixed Marriage ; watchful and observant
, jealous and busie , inquisitive and careful , and apt to take alarum
at every unkind word . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.124

For Infirmities do not manifest themselves in the first Scenes , but in
the succession of a long Society ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.125

and it is not chance or weakness when it appears at first ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.126

but it is want of love or prudence , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.127

or it will be so expounded ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.128

and that which appears ill at first usually affrights the unexperienced
man or woman , who makes unequal conjectures , and fancies mighty
sorrows by the proportions of the new and early unkindness .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.129

It is a very great Passion , or a huge Folly , or a certain want of Love
, that can@ @not preserve the colours and beauties of Kindness , so long
as publick Honesty requires a man to wear their Sorrows for the death of
a Friend . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.130

<font> Plutarch <$$font> compares a new Marriage to a Vessel before the
hoops are on , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.131

{COM:greek_omitted} every thing dissolves their tender compaginations ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,14.132

but {COM:greek_omitted} <P_15> when the joynts are stiffened and are
tied by a firm compliance and proportion'd bending , scarcely can it be
dissolved without Fire or the violence of Iron .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,15.133

After the Hearts of the man and the wife are endeared and hardened by a
mutual Confidence , and Experience longer than artifice and pretence can
last , there are a great many remembrances , and some things present
that dash all little unkindnesses in pieces . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,15.134

The little Boy in the Greek Epigram , that was creeping down a Precipice
was invited to his Safety by the sight of his Mother's pap , when
nothing else could intice him to return : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,15.135

and the bond of common Children , and the sight of her that nurses what
is most dear to him , and the endearments of each other in the course of
a long society , and the same relation is an excellent security to
redintegrate and to call that love back which folly and trifling
accidents would disturb . - JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,15.136

Tormentum ingens nubentibus haeret Quae nequeunt parere , & partu
retinere maritos . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,15.137

When it is come thus far , it is hard untwisting the Knot ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,15.138

but be careful in its first coalition , that there be no rudeness done ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,15.139

for if there be , it will for ever after be apt to start and to be
diseased . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,15.140

3 . Let man and wife be careful to stifle little things , that as fast
as they spring , they be cut down and trod upon ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,15.141

for if they be suffered to grow by numbers , they make the spirit
peevish , and the Society troublesome , and the Affections loose and
easie by an habitual Aversation . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,15.142

Some men are more vexed with a Flie than with a Wound ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,15.143

and when the Gnats disturb our sleep , and the Reason is disquieted but
not perfectly awakened ; it is often seen that he is fuller of trouble
than if in the day-light of his reason he were to contest with <P_16> a
potent enemy . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.144

In the frequent little accidents of a Family , a mans reason can@ @not
always be awake ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.145

and when his Discourses are imperfect , and a trifling Trouble makes him
yet more restless , he is soon betrayed to the violence of Passion .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.146

It is certain that the man or woman are in a state of weakness and folly
then , when they can be troubled with a trifling accident ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.147

and therefore it is not good to tempt their affections , when they are
in that state of danger . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.148

In this case the Caution is , to substract Fuel from the sudden Flame ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.149

for stubble though it be quickly kindled , yet it is as soon
extinguished , if it be not blown by a pertinacious breath , or fed with
new materials . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.150

Add no new provocations to the accident , and do not inflame this , and
peace will soon return , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.151

and the discontent will pass away soon , as the sparks from the
collision of a flint ; ever remembring , that Discontents proceeding
from daily little things , do breed a secret undiscernable Disease ,
which is more dangerous than a Fever proceeding from a discerned
notorious Surfeit . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.152

4 . Let them be sure to abstain from all those things , which by
experience and observation they find to be contrary to each other .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.153

They that govern Elephants never appear before them in White ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.154

and the Masters of Bulls keep from them all garments of Bloud and
Scarlet , as knowing that they will be impatient of civil usages and
discipline , when their Natures are provoked by their proper Antipathies
. JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.155

The ancients in their martial Hieroglyphicks us'd to depict <font>
Mercury <$$font> standing by <font> Venus <$$font> , to signifie , that
by fair language and sweet intreaties , the minds of each other should
be united ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.156

and hard by them , Suadam & Gratias descripserunt , they would have all
deliciousness of manners , compliance and mutual observance to abide .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,16.157

5 . Let the Husband and Wife infinitely avoid a curious <P_17>
distinction of <font> mine <$$font> and <font> thine <$$font> ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.158

for this hath caused all the Laws , and all the Suits , and all the Wars
in the World ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.159

let them who have but one Person , have also but one Interest .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.160

The Husband and Wife are heirs to each other <paren> as <font> Dionysius
Halicarnasseus <$$font> relates from <font> Romulus <$$font> <$$paren>
if they die without Children ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.161

but if there be Children , the Wife is {COM:greek_omitted} a partner in
the Inheritance . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.162

But during their life , the use and imployment is common to both their
necessities , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.163

and in this there is no other Difference of right , but that the Man
hath the Dispensation of all , and may keep it from his Wife just as the
Governour of a Town may keep it from the right Owner ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.164

he hath the <font> power <$$font> , but <font> no right <$$font> to do
so . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.165

And when either of them begins to impropriate , it is like a tumour in
the flesh , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.166

it draws more than its share ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.167

but what it feeds on , turns to a bile : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.168

and therefore the <font> Romans <$$font> forbad any Donations to be made
between Man and Wife , because neither of them could transfer a new
Right of those things , which already they had in common ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.169

but this is to be understood only concerning the uses of necessity and
personal conveniences ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.170

for so all may be the Woman's , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.171

and all may be the Man's in several regards . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.172

<font> Corvinus <$$font> dwells in a Farm JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.173

and receives all its profits , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.174

and reaps and sows as he please , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.175

and eats of the Corn JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.176

and drinks of the Wine ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.177

it is his own : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.178

but all that also is his Lords , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.179

and for it <font> Corvinus <$$font> pays Acknowledgement ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.180

and his Patron hath such powers and uses of it as are proper to the
Lords ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.181

and yet for all this , it may be the Kings too , to all the purposes
that he can need , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.182

and is all to be accounted in the <font> census <$$font> and for certain
services and times of danger : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.183

So are the Riches of a Family , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.184

they are a Womans as well as a Mans : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.185

they are hers for Need , and hers for Ornament , and hers for modest
Delight , and for the uses of Religion and prudent Charity ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,17.186

but the disposing <P_18> them into portions of inheritance , the
assignation of charges and governments , stipends and rewards ,
annuities and greater donatives are the reserves of the superior right ,
and not to be invaded by the under-possessors .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.187

But in those things , where they ought to be common , if the spleen or
the belly swells and draws into its capacity much of that which should
be spent upon those parts , which have an equal right to be maintain'd ,
it is a dropsie or a consumption of the whole , something that is evil
because it is unnatural and monstrous . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.188

<font> Macarius <$$font> in his 32 Homily speaks fully in this
particular , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.189

a Woman betrothed to a Man bears all her Portion ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.190

and with a mighty Love pours it into the hands of her Husband ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.191

and says , {COM:greek_omitted} , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.192

I have nothing of my own ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.193

my Goods , my Portion , my Body and my Mind is yours .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.194

{COM:greek_omitted} all that a Woman hath is reckoned to the right of
her Husband ; not her wealth and her person only , but her reputation
and her praise ; so <font> Lucian <$$font> . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.195

But as the Earth , the Mother of all Creatures here below , sends up all
its Vapours and proper emissions at the command of the Sun , and yet
requires them again to refresh her own Needs , and they are deposited
between them both in the bosome of a Cloud as a common receptacle , that
they may cool his Flames , and yet descend to make her Fruitful : So are
the proprieties of a Wife to be dispos'd of by her Lord ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.196

and yet all are for her provisions , it being a part of his need to
refresh and supply hers , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.197

and it serves the interest of both while it serves the necessities of
either . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.198

These are the Duties of them both , which have common regards and equal
necessities , and obligations ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.199

and indeed there is scarce any matter of duty , but it concerns them
both alike , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.200

and is only distinguished by names , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,18.201

and hath its variety <P_19> by circumstances and little accidents :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.202

and what in one is call'd <font> love <$$font> , in the other is called
<font> reverence <$$font> ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.203

and what in the wife is <font> obedience <$$font> , the same in the man
is <font> duty <$$font> . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.204

He provides , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.205

and she dispenses ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.206

he gives commandments , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.207

and she rules by them ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.208

he rules her by Authority , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.209

and she rules him by Love ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.210

she ought by all means to please him , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.211

and he must by no means displease her . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.212

For as the Heart is set in the midst of the Body , and though it strikes
to one side by the prerogative of Nature , yet those throbs and constant
motions are felt on the other side also , and the influence is equal to
both : So it is in conjugal Duties ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.213

some motions are to the one side more than {they_are} to the other ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.214

but the interest is on both , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.215

and the Duty is equal in the several instances .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.216

If it be otherwise , the Man enjoys a Wife as <font> Periander <$$font>
did his dead <font> Melissa <$$font> , by an unnatural Union , neither
pleasing , nor holy , useless to all the purposes of Society , and dead
to Content . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,19.217

<P_20>

<heading>

PART II . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.220

<$$heading>

The next Inquiry is more particular , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.222

and considers the Power and Duty of the Man ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.223

<font> Let every one of you so love his Wife even as himself <$$font> ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.224

she is as himself , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.225

the man hath power over her as over himself , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.226

and must love her equally . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.227

A Husbands power over his wife is paternal and friendly , not
magisterial and despotick . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.228

The wife is in perpetua tutela , under conduct and counsel ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.229

for , the power a man hath is founded in the understanding , not in the
will or force ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.230

it is not a power of coercion , but a power of advice , and that
government that wise men have over those who are fit to be conducted by
them : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.231

Et vos in manu et in tutela non in servitio debetis habere eas , et
malle patres vos , et viros , quam dominos dici , said <font> Valerius
<$$font> in <font> Livie <$$font> ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.232

Husbands should rather be <font> Fathers <$$font> than <font> Lords
<$$font> . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.233

<font> Homer <$$font> adds more soft appellatives to the character of a
Husbands duty , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.234

{COM:greek_omitted} Thou art to be a Father and a Mother to her , and a
Brother : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.235

and great reason , unless the state of Marriage should be no better than
the condition of an Orphan . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.236

For she that is bound to leave Father and Mother , and Brother for thee
, either is miserable like a poor fatherless child ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,20.237

or else ought <P_21> to find all these , and more in thee .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.238

<font> Medea <$$font> in <font> Euripides <$$font> had cause to complain
when she found it otherwise . {COM:greek_omitted} Which Saint <font>
Ambrose <$$font> well translates : It is sad , when Virgins are with
their own Money sold to Slavery ; and that Services are in better state
than Marriages ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.239

for they receive Wages , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.240

but these buy their Fetters JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.241

and pay dear for their loss of Liberty ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.242

and therefore the <font> Romans <$$font> expressed the mans power over
his wife but by a gentle word , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.243

Nec vero mulieribus praefectus praeponatur , qui apud Graecos creari
solet , sed sit censor qui viros doceat moderari uxoribus ; said <font>
Cicero <$$font> , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.244

let there be no Governour of the Woman appointed , but a Censor of
Manners , one to teach the men <font> to moderate their Wives <$$font> ,
that is , fairly to induce them to the measures of their own proportions
. JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.245

It was rarely observed of <font> Philo <$$font> , {COM:greek_omitted}
when <font> Adam <$$font> made that fond Excuse for his Folly in eating
the forbidden fruit , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.246

he said <font> The woman thou gavest to be with me she gave me <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.247

He says not <font> The woman which thou gavest to me <$$font> no such
thing ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.248

she is none of his Goods , none of his Possessions , not to be reckoned
amongst his Servants ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.249

God did not give her to him so ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.250

but <font> The woman thou gavest to be with me <$$font> that is , to be
my partner , the Companion of my joys and sorrows , thou gavest her for
Use , not for Dominion . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.251

The Dominion of a man over his Wife is no other than as the Soul rules
the Body ; for which it takes a mighty care , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.252

and uses it with a delicate tenderness , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,21.253

and cares for it in all <P_22> contingencies , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.254

and watches to keep it from all evils , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.255

and studies to make for it fair provisions , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.256

and very often is led by its inclinations and desires ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.257

and does never contradict its appetites , but when they are evil , and
then also not without some trouble and sorrow ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.258

and its Government comes only to this , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.259

it furnishes the body with light and understanding ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.260

and the body furnishes the soul with hands and feet ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.261

the Soul governs , because the body can@ @not else be happy ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.262

but the <font> government <$$font> is no other than <font> provision
<$$font> ; as a Nurse governs a Child , when she causes him to eat , and
to be warm , and dry , and quiet : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.263

and yet even the very government itself is divided ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.264

for Man and Wife in the family , are as the Sun and Moon in the
firmament of Heaven ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.265

He rules by Day , and she by Night , that is , in the lesser and more
proper Circles of her affairs , in the conduct of domestick provisions
and necessary offices , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.266

and shines only by his light , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.267

and rules by his authority ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.268

and as the Moon in opposition to the Sun shines brightest , that is ,
then , when she is in her own circles and separate regions ; so is the
authority of the Wife then most conspicuous , when she is separate and
in her proper Sphere ; in <font> Gynaeceo <$$font> , in the nursery and
offices of domestick employment : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.269

but when she is in conjunction with the Sun her Brother , that is , in
that place and employment in which his care and proper offices are
employed , her light is not seen , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.270

her authority hath no proper business ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.271

but else there is no difference : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.272

for they were barbarous people , among whom wives were instead of
servants , said <font> Spartianus <$$font> in <font> Caracalla <$$font>
; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.273

and it is a sign of impotency and weakness , to force the Camels to
kneel for their Load , because thou hast not spirit and strength enough
to climb : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.274

To make the affections and evenness of a wife bend by the flexures of a
servant , is a sign the man is not wise enough to govern , when another
stands by . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,22.275

So <P_23> many differences as can be in the appellatives of Dominus and
Domina , Governour and Governess , Lord and Lady , Master and Mistress ,
the same difference there is in the authority of man and woman , and no
more ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.276

Si tu Caius , ego Caia , was publickly proclaimed upon the threshold of
the young mans house , when the bride enter'd into his hands and power ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.277

and the title of Domina in the sense of the Civil Law , was among the
<font> Romans <$$font> given to Wives . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.278

Hi Dominam Ditis thalamo deducere adorti , said <font> Virgil <$$font> :
where , though <font> Servius <$$font> says it was spoken after the
manner of the <font> Greeks <$$font> , who call'd the Wife
{COM:greek_omitted} , Lady or Mistress , yet it was so amongst both the
Nations . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.279

Ac domum Dominam voca , says <font> Catullus <$$font> ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.280

Haerebit Dominae vir comes ipse suae , so <font> Martial <$$font> ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.281

And therefore although there is just measure of Subjection and Obedience
due from the Wife to the Husband <paren> as I shall after explain
<$$paren> yet nothing of this expressed is in the mans Character , or in
his Duty ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.282

he is not commanded to rule , nor instructed how , nor bidden to exact
obedience , or to defend his priviledge ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.283

all his Duty is signified by <font> Love <$$font> , by <font> nourishing
and cherishing <$$font> , by being joyned with her in all the unions of
charity , by <font> not being bitter to her <$$font> , by <font>
dwelling with her according to knowledge , giving honour to her <$$font>
: so that it seems to be with Husbands , as it is with Bishops and
Priests , to whom much honour is due , but yet so that if they stand
upon it , and challenge it , they become less honourable :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.284

And as amongst men and women humility is the way to be preferr'd ; so it
is in Husbands , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.285

they shall prevail by cession , by sweetness and counsel , and charity
and compliance . So that we can@ @not discourse of the mans right ,
without describing the measures of his duty ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.286

that therefore follows next . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,23.287

<P_24>

<font> Let him love his wife even as himself <$$font> :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.289

That@ @'s his Duty , and the measure of it too : which is so plain ,
that if he understands how he treats himself , there needs nothing be
added concerning his demeanour towards her , save only that we add the
particulars , in which holy Scripture instances this general Commandment
. JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.290

{COM:greek_omitted} That@ @'s the first . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.291

<font> Be not bitter against her <$$font> ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.292

and this is the least Index and signification of Love ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.293

a Civil man is never bitter against a Friend or a Stranger , much less
to him that enters under his Roof , and is secured by the Laws of
Hospitality . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.294

But a Wife does all that , and more ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.295

she quits all her interest for his love , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.296

she gives him all that she can give , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.297

she is as much the same person as another can be the same , who is
conjoyned by love , and mystery , and religion , and all that is sacred
and profane . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.298

Non equidem hoc dubites amborum foedere certo Consentire dies , & ab uno
sidere duci ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.299

They have the same Fortune , the same Family , the same Children , the
same Religion , the same Interest , the same Flesh
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.300

erunt duo in carnem unam JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.301

and therefore this the Apostle urges for his {COM:greek_omitted}
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.302

<font> no man hateth his own flesh , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.303

but nourisheth and cherisheth it <$$font> ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.304

and he certainly is strangely Sacrilegious and a Violater of the rights
of Hospitality and Sanctuary , who uses her rudely , who is fled for
Protection , not only to his House , but also to his Heart and Bosome .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.305

A wise man will not wrangle with any one , much less with his dearest
relative ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.306

and if it be accounted undecent to Embrace in publick , it is extremely
shameful to Brawle in publick : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.307

for the other is in itself lawful ; but this never , though it were
assisted with the best circumstances of which it is capable .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,24.308

<font> Marcus Aurelius <$$font> said , that a wise man ought <P_25>
<font> often <$$font> to <font> admonish <$$font> his wife , to <font>
reprove her seldom <$$font> , but <font> never to lay his hands <$$font>
upon her : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.309

neque verberibus neque maledictis exasperandam uxorem , said the Doctors
of the <font> Jews <$$font> , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.310

and <font> Homer <$$font> brings in <font> Jupiter <$$font> sometimes
speaking sharply to <font> Juno <$$font> <paren> according to the Greek
liberty and Empire <$$paren> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.311

but made a pause at striking her , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.312

{COM:greek_omitted} And the Ancients used to sacrifice to <font> Juno
<$$font> {COM:greek_omitted} or the President of Marriage , without gall
; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.313

and St. <font> Basil <$$font> observes and urges it , by way of
upbraiding quarrelling husbands ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.314

Etiam vipera virus ob nuptiarum venerationem evomit ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.315

the Viper casts all his poison when he marries his female ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.316

Tu duritiam animi , tu feritatem , tu crudelitatem ob unionis
reverentiam non deponis ? JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.317

He is worse than a Viper , who for the reverence of this sacred union
will not abstain from such a poisonous bitterness ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.318

and how shall he embrace that person whom he hath smitten reproachfully
; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.319

for those kindnesses are undecent which the fighting-man pays unto his
wife . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.320

S. <font> Chrysostome <$$font> preaching earnestly against this
barbarous Inhumanity of striking the Wife , or reviling her with evil
Language , says , it is as if a King should beat his Viceroy and use him
like a Dog ; from whom most of that Reverence and Majesty must needs
depart , which he first put upon him , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.321

and the subjects shall pay him less duty , how much his Prince hath
treated him with less civility ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.322

but the loss redounds to himself ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.323

and the government of the whole family shall be disordered , if blows be
laid upon that shoulder which together with the other ought to bear
nothing but the cares and the issues of a prudent government .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,25.324

And it is observable , <P_26> that no man ever did this rudeness for a
vertuous end ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.325

it is an incompetent instrument , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.326

and may proceed from wrath and folly , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.327

but can never end in vertue and the unions of a prudent and fair society
. JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.328

Quod si verberaveris , exasperabis morbum : <paren> saith S. <font>
Chrysostome <$$font> ; <$$paren> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.329

asperitas enim mansuetudine , non alia asperitate , dissolvitur ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.330

if you strike , you exasperate the Wound , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.331

and <paren> like <font> Cato <$$font> at <font> Utica <$$font> in his
despair <$$paren> tear the Wounds in pieces ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.332

and yet he that did so ill to himself whom he lov'd well , he lov'd not
women tenderly , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.333

and yet would never strike ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.334

And if the man can@ @not endure her talking , how can she endure his
striking ? JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.335

But this Caution contains a Duty in it which none prevaricates , but the
meanest of the people , Fools and Bedlams , whose kindness is a Curse ,
whose government is by chance and Violence , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.336

and their families are Herds of talking Cattel ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.337

Sic alternos reficit cursus Alternus Amor , sic astrigeris Bellum
discors exulat oris . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.338

Haec concordia temperat aequis Elementa modis , ut pugnantia Vicibus
cedant humida siccis , Jungantque fidem frigora flammis .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.339

The Marital Love is infinitely removed from all possibility of such
rudenesses : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.340

it is a thing pure as Light , sacred as a Temple , lasting as the World
; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.341

Amicitia , quae desinere potuit , nunquam vera fuit , said one ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.342

that love , that can cease , was never true : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.343

it is {COM:greek_omitted} JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.344

so <font> Moses <$$font> call'd it ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.345

it is {COM:greek_omitted} JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.346

so S. <font> Paul <$$font> ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.347

it is {COM:greek_omitted} JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.348

so <font> Homer <$$font> ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.349

it is {COM:greek_omitted} JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.350

so <font> Plutarch <$$font> ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.351

that is , it contains in it all sweetness , and all society , and
felicity , and all prudence , and all wisdom .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.352

For there is nothing can please a man without Love ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,26.353

and if a man be <P_27> weary of the wise discourses of the Apostles ,
and of the innocency of an even and a private Fortune , or hates peace
or a fruitful Year , he hath reaped Thorns and Thistles from the
choicest Flowers of Paradise ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.354

<font> For nothing can sweeten felicity itself , but Love <$$font> ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.355

but when a man dwells in love , then the Breasts of his Wife are
pleasant as the droppings upon the hill of <font> Hermon <$$font> ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.356

her Eyes are fair as the light of Heaven , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.357

she is a Fountain sealed , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.358

and he can quench his thirst , and ease his cares , and lay his sorrow
down upon her lap , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.359

and can retire home as to his sanctuary and refectory , and his gardens
of sweetness and chast refreshments . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.360

No man can tell but he that loves his children , how many delicious
accents make a mans heart dance in the pretty conversation of those dear
pledges ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.361

their childishness , their stammering , their little angers , their
innocence , their imperfections , their necessities are so many little
emanations of joy and comfort to him that delights in their persons and
society ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.362

but he that loves not his Wife and Children , feeds a Lioness at home ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.363

and broods a nest of Sorrows ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.364

and Blessing itself can@ @not make him Happy ; so that all the
Commandments of God injoyning a man to <font> love his wife <$$font> ,
are nothing but so many Necessities and Capacities of joy .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.365

<font> She that is lov'd is safe <$$font> , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.366

and <font> he that loves is joyful <$$font> . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.367

Love is a union of all things excellent ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.368

it contains in it , Proportion and Satisfaction , and Rest and
Confidence ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.369

and I wish that this were so much proceeded in , that the Heathen
themselves could not go beyond us in this Vertue , and its proper , and
its appendant happiness . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.370

<font> Tiberius Gracchus <$$font> chose to die for the safety of his
Wife ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.371

and yet me@ @thinks to a Christian to do so , should be no hard thing ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.372

for many Servants will die for their Masters , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.373

and many Gentlemen will die for their Friend ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.374

but the Examples are not so many of those that are ready to do it for
their dearest Relatives , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,27.375

and yet <P_28> some there have been . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.376

<font> Baptista Fregosa <$$font> tells of a <font> Neapolitan <$$font> ,
that gave himself a slave to the Moors , that he might follow his Wife ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.377

and <font> Dominicus Catalusius <$$font> , the Prince of <font> Lesbos
<$$font> , kept company with his Lady when she was a Leper ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.378

and these are greater things than to die . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.379

But the Cases in which this can be required are so rare and contingent ,
that holy Scripture instances not the duty in this particular ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.380

but it contains in it that the Husband should nourish and cherish her ,
that he should refresh her sorrows and intice her fears into confidence
and pretty arts of rest ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.381

For even the Fig-trees that grew in Paradise had sharp_pointed Leaves ,
and Harshnesses fit to mortifie the too forward lusting after the
Sweetness of the Fruit . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.382

But it will concern the Prudence of the Husbands love to make the Cares
and Evils as simple and easie as he can , by doubling the Joys and Acts
of a careful friendship , by tolerating her Infirmities , <paren>
because by so doing , he either cures her , or makes himself better
<$$paren> by fairly expounding all the little traverses of society and
communication , by taking every thing by the right handle , <paren> as
<font> Plutarch's <$$font> expression is <$$paren>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.383

for there is nothing but may be mis-interpreted ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.384

and yet if it be capable of a fair construction , it is the Office of
Love to make it . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.385

{COM:greek_omitted} Love will account that to be well said , which it
may be was not so intended ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.386

and then it may cause it to be so , another time .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-H,28.387

