<BEGIN_jopinney-1688-e3-h>

<P_58>

<heading:edcomment:32_TO_HESTER_DUBLIN_AUG._16_1688>

Daughter Hester Yours I received JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.4

and have such a Narrative of the Scot from your Mother that I would have
neither of you to have to doe with her at all . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.5

She said , she is come in among a parcell of beggars :
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.6

and if so , t@ @is but a thiefe and a beggar come unhappily among
beggars JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.7

<paren> for her mother was maintained here by public almes <$$paren> .
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.8

Her imperious pride and falsnes make her incapable of your commerce with
her . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.9

I hear she did borrow money of Mr. Busbie being lately in London ,
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.10

if she thinkes I shall pay it , she is deceived .
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.11

Let her get her owne bread by the Sweat of her browes as I have and pay
her own debts . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.12

Her ill character and carriage hath disobliged me to her for Ever .
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.13

And if service be to mean for her now , <paren> by which she alwayes
lived here <$$paren> let her hunger for me , JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.14

I have enough of her already . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.15

You write of returning your money to Nath. JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.16

I would have you to have security of him : JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,58.17

<P_59>

for though your mother have trusted much in his handes yet she hath
something left If that should miscarry . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.19

For Rachel I can@ @not so well advise her nor know in what Capacity she
can enter againe upon the Exchange . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.20

To doe it contemptibly I would not advise her , JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.21

but if with Credit I shall not be against it . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.22

But not to medle with the Scot : JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.23

I will rather maintaine her <paren> though she hath grieved me <$$paren>
. JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.24

I shall not be able to get off here as yet , though I desire to doe it :
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.25

if any of you will come to me you shall be Welcome .
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.26

The rescuing of us from the housbreaker is a great providence of God .
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.27

His end was to have ruined us JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.28

and he had don it ; if I had not strictly written to your mother from
hence that she should send out of the house all my writings Especially
such as concerned the Rogue . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.29

Had he gotten them <paren> which was his aime <$$paren> he had don his
purpose : JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.30

God hath saved us JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.31

and I hope to no great loss unless the Wast they made on your sister
Hoare . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.32

Remember me to Rachel . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.33

God almighty bless and keep you which is the dayly prayer of Your Aged
father Jo. Pinney JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.34

Cut this off JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.35

and send it to the Scott sealed up . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-H,59.36

