<BEGIN_jotaylor-1630-e2-h>

<P_1,128.C1>

To the purpose then : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C1.3

my first nights lodging in <font> Scotland <$$font> was at a place
called <font> Mophot <$$font> , which they say , is thirty miles from
<font> Carlile <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C1.4

but I suppose them to be longer then forty of such miles as are betwixt
<font> London <$$font> and Saint <font> Albanes <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C1.5

but indeed the Scots doe allow almost as large measure of their miles ,
as they doe of their drinke , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C1.6

for an English Gallon either of Ale or Wine , is but their quart ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C1.7

and <P_1,128.C2> one Scottish mile <paren> now and then , may well stand
for a mile and a halfe or two English <$$paren>
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.8

but howsoeuer short or long , I found that dayes iourney the weariest
that euer I footed , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.9

and at night being come to the Towne , I found good ordinary Countrey
entertainment ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.10

my fare and my lodging was sweet and good ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.11

and might haue serued a farre better man then my selfe , although my
selfe haue had many times better : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.12

but this is to be noted , that though it rained not all the day , yet it
was my fortune to be well wet twise , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.13

for <font> I <$$font> waded ouer a great riuer called <font> Eske
<$$font> in the morning , somewhat more then foure miles distance from
<font> Carlile <$$font> in <font> England <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.14

and at night within two miles of my lodging , I was faine to wade ouer
the Riuer of <font> Annan <$$font> in <font> Scotland <$$font> , from
which Riuer the County of <font> Annandale <$$font> , hath it's name .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.15

And whilst I waded on foot , my man was mounted on horse-backe , like
the <font> George <$$font> without the Dragon .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.16

But the next morning , I arose JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.17

and left <font> Mophot <$$font> behind me ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.18

and that day I traueled twenty_one miles to a sory Village called <font>
Blithe <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.19

but I was blithe my selfe to come to any place of harbour or succour ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.20

for since I was borne , I neuer was so weary , or so neere being dead
with extreme trauell ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.21

I was founderd and refounderd of all foure ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.22

and for my better comfort , I came so late , that I must lodge without
doores all night , or else in a poore house where the good-wife lay in
Child-bed , her husband being from home , her owne seruant mayde being
her nurse . A Creature naturally compacted , and artificially adorned
with an incomparable homelines ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.23

but as things were I must either take or leaue ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.24

and necessity made mee enter , where we gat Egges and Ale by measure and
by tale . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.25

At last to bed I went , my man lying on the floore by mee , where in the
night there were Pidgeons did very bountifully mute in his face :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.26

the day being no sooner come , and hauing but fifteene miles to <font>
Edenborough <$$font> , mounted vpon my ten toes ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.27

and began first to hobble , and after to amble ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.28

and so being warme , I fell to pace by degrees ; all the way passing
thorow a fertill Countrey for Corne and Cattle :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,128.C2.29

and about two of the clocke in the afternoone <P_1,129.C1> that
Wednesday , being the thirteenth of August , and the day of <font> Clare
<$$font> the Virgin <paren> the signe being in <font> Virgo <$$font>
<$$paren> the Moone foure dayes old , the wind at West , I came to take
rest , at the wished , long expected , ancient famous City of <font>
Edenborough <$$font> , which I entred like Pierce pennilesse ,
altogether monyles , but I thanke God , not friendlesse ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.30

for being there , for the time of my stay , I might borrow , <paren> if
any man would lend <$$paren> spend if I could get , begge if I had the
impudence , and steale , if I durst aduenture the price of a hanging ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.31

but my purpose was to house my horse , and to suffer him and my apparell
to lye in durance , or Lauender in stead of Litter , till such time as I
could meete with some valiant friend , that would desperately disburse .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.32

Walking thus downe the street , <paren> my body being tyred with trauell
, and my minde attyred with moody , muddy , Moore ditch melancholly
<$$paren> my Contemplation did deuoutly pray , that I might meete one or
other to prey vpon , being willing to take any slender acquaintance of
any map whatsoeuer , viewing , and circumviewing euery mans face I met ,
as if I meant to drawe his picture , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.33

but all my acquaintance was Non est Inuentus ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.34

<paren> pardon me Reader , that Latine is none of mine owne , I sweare
by <font> Priscians Paricranion <$$font> , an oath which I haue
ignorantly broken many times . <$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.35

At last I resolu'd , that the next Gentleman that I met withall , should
be acquaintance whether hee would or no : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.36

and presently fixing mine eyes vpon a Gentleman-like obiect , I looked
on him , as if I would suruay something through him , and make him my
perspectiue : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.37

and hee much musing at my gazing , and I much gazing at his musing , at
last he crost the way JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.38

and made toward me , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.39

and then I made downe the street from him , leauing to encounter with my
man , who came after me leading my horse , whom he thus accosted .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.40

My friend <paren> quoth he <$$paren> doth yonder Gentleman , <paren>
meaning me <$$paren> know me , that he lookes so wistly on me ?
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.41

Truely Sir , said my man , I thinke not , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.42

but my Master is a stranger come from <font> London <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C1.43

and would gladly meete some acquaintance to direct him where he may haue
lodging and <P_1,129.C2> horse-meate . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.44

Presently the Gentleman , <paren> being of a generous disposition
<$$paren> ouer-tooke me with vnexpected and vndeserued courtesie ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.45

brought me to a lodging , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.46

and caused my horse to bee put into his owne stable , whilest we
discoursing ouer a pinte of Spanish , I related as much English to him ,
as made him lend me tenne shillings , <paren> his name was Master <font>
Iohn Maxwell <$$font> <$$paren> which money I am sure was the first that
I handled after I came from out the walls of <font> London <$$font> :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.47

but hauing rested two houres and refreshed my selfe , the Gentleman and
I walked to see the City and the Castle , which as my poore vnable and
vnworthy pen can , I will truly describe .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.48

The Castle on a loftie Rocke is so strongly grounded , bounded , and
founded , that by force of man it can neuer be confounded ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.49

the Foundation and Walls are vnpenetrable , the Rampiers impregnable ,
the Bulwarkes inuincible , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.50

no way but one to it is or can be possible to be made passable .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.51

In a word , I haue seene many Straights and Fortresses , in <font>
Germany <$$font> , the <font> Netherlands <$$font> , <font> Spaine
<$$font> , and <font> England <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.52

but they must all giue place to this vnconquered Castle , both for
strength and scituation . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.53

Amongst the many memorable things which I was shewed there , I noted
especially a great peece of Ordnance of Iron ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.54

it is not for batterie , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.55

but it will serue to defend a breach , or to tosse balles of wilde-fire
against any that should assaile or assault the Castle ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.56

it lyes now dismonted . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.57

And it is so great within , that it was told me that a Childe was once
gotten there : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.58

but I , to make tryall crept into it , lying on my backe ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.59

and I am sure there was roome enough and spare for a greater then my
selfe . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.60

So leauing the Castle , as it is both defensiue against any opposition ,
and magnificke for lodging and receite , I descended lower to the City ,
wherein I obserued the fairest and goodliest streete that euer mine eyes
beheld , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.61

for I did neuer see or heare of a street of that length , <paren> which
is halfe an English mile from the Castle to a faire Port which they call
the <font> Neather-bow <$$font> <$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,129.C2.62

and from that Port , the streete which they call the <font> Kenny-hate
<$$font> is one quarter of a mile more , downe to the Kings Palace ,
called <P_1,130.C1> <font> Holy-rood-House <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.63

the buildings on each side of the way being all of squared stone , fiue
, six , and seuen stories high , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.64

and many by-Lanes and Closes on each side of the way , wherein are
Gentlemens houses , much fairer then the buildings in the high-street ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.65

for in the high-street the Marchants and Tradesmen do dwell ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.66

but the Gentlemens mansions and goodliest houses are obscurely founded
in the aforesaid Lanes : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.67

the Walles are eight or tenne foote thicke , exceeding strong , not
built for a day , a weeke , or a moneth , or a yeere ; but from
Antiquitie to Posteritie , for many Ages ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.68

There I found entertainement beyond my expectation or merit ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.69

and there is fish , flesh , bread and fruit , in such variety , that I
thinke I may offencelesse call it superfluity , or faciety .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.70

The worst was , that Wine and Ale was so scarce , and the people there
such Mizers of it , that euery night before I went to bed , if any man
had asked me a ciuill question , all the wit in my head could not haue
made him a sober answer . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.71

I was at his Maiestis Palace , a stately and Princely seate , wherein I
saw a sumptuous Chappell , most richly adorned with all appurtenances
belonging to so sacred a place , or so Royall an owner .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.72

In the inner Court , I saw the Kings Armes cunningly carued in stone ,
and fixed ouer a doore aloft on the wall , the red Lyon being the Crest
, ouer which was written this inscription in Latine , Nobis haec inuicta
miserunt , 106. proaui . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.73

I enquired what the English of it was ? JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.74

it was told me as followeth , which I thought worthy to be recorded .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.75

<font> 106. Fore-fathers haue left this to vs vnconquered
{SIC:vnchnquered} . <$$font> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.76

This is a worthy and memorable Motto , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C1.77

and I thinke few Kingdomes or none in the world can truly write the like
, that notwithstanding so many inroades , incursions , attemps ,
assaults , Ciuill warres , and forraigne hostilities , bloody battels ,
and mighty foughten fields , that maugre the strength and policy of
enemies , that Royall Crowne and Scepter hath from one_hundred_and_seuen
descents , kept still vnconquered , and by the power of the King of
Kings <paren> through the grace of the <P_1,130.C2> Prince of peace
<$$paren> is now left peacefully to our peacefull King , whom long in
blessed peace , the God of peace defend and gouerne .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.78

But once more , a word or two of <font> Edenborough <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.79

although I haue scarcely giuent it that due which belongs vnto it , for
their lofty and stately buildings , and for their faire and spacious
streete , yet my minde perswades me that they in former ages that first
founded that Citie did not so well in that they built it in so
discommodious a place ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.80

for the Sea , and all nauigable riuers being the chiefe meanes for the
enriching of Townes and Cities , by the reason of Traffique with
forraine Nations , with exportation , transportation , and receite of
variety of Marchandizing ; so this Citie had it beene built but one mile
lower on the Sea side , I doubt not but it had long before this beene
comparable to many a one of our greatest Townes and Cities in <font>
Europe <$$font> , both for spaciousnesse of bounds , Port , state , and
riches . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.81

It is said , that King <font> Iames <$$font> the fifth <paren> of famous
memory <$$paren> did graciously offer to purchase for them , and to
bestow vpon them freely , certaine low and pleasant grounds a mile from
them on the Sea shore , with these conditions , that they should pull
downe their Citie , and build it in that more commodious place ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.82

but the Citizens refused it : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.83

and so now it is like <paren> for me <$$paren> to stand where it doth ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.84

for I doubt such another profer of remouall will not bee presented to
them , till two dayes after the Faire . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.85

Now haue with you for <font> Leeth <$$font> , whereto I no sooner came ,
but I was well entertained by Master <font> Barnard Lindsay <$$font> ,
one of the Groomes of his Maiesties Bed-chamber ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.86

hee knew my estate was not guilty , because I brought guilt with me
<paren> more then my sins , and they would not passe for current there
<$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.87

hee therefore did replenish the vaustity of my empty purse ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.88

& discharged a piece at mee with two bullets of gold , each being in
value worth eleuen shillings white money :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.89

and I was credibly informed , that within the compasse of one yeere ,
there was shipped away from that onely Port of <font> Leeth <$$font> ,
foure_score_thousand Boles of Wheat , {SIC:wheat.} Oates , and Barley
into <font> Spaine <$$font> , <font> France <$$font> , and other
forraine parts , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,130.C2.90

and euery Bole containes <P_1,131.C1> the measure of foure English
bushels , so that from <font> Leeth <$$font> onely hath beene
transported three_hundred_and_twenty_thousand bushels of Corne ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C1.91

besides some hath beene shipped away from Saint <font> Andrewes <$$font>
, from <font> Dundee , Aberdeene , Disert , Kirkady , Kinghorne ,
Burnt-Iland , Dunbar <$$font> , and other portable Townes , which makes
me to wonder that a Kingdome so populous as it is , should neuerthelesse
sell so much bread-corne beyond the Seas , and yet to haue more then
sufficient for themselues . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C1.92

So I hauing viewed the Hauen and Towne of <font> Leeth <$$font> , tooke
a passage Boate to see the new wondrous Well , to which many a one that
is not well , comes from {TEXT:missing_"from"} farre and neere in hope
to be made well : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C1.93

indeed I did heare that it had done much good , and that it hath a rare
operation to expell or kill diuers maladies ; as to prouoke appetite ,
to helpe much for the auoyding of the grauell in the bladder , to cure
sore eyes , and old vlcers , with many other vertues which it hath ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C1.94

but I through the mercy of God , hauing no need of it , did make no
great inquisition what it had done , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C1.95

but for nouelty I dranke of it , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C1.96

and I found the taste to be more pleasant then any other water , sweet
almost as milke , yet as cleare as cristall ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C1.97

and I did obserue , that though a man did drinke a quart , a pottle , or
as much as his belly could containe , yet it neuer offended or lay heauy
vpon the stomacke , no more then {it_would_have_offended} if one had
dranke but a pint or a small quantity . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C1.98

I went two miles from it to a Towne called <font> Burnt-Iland <$$font> ,
where I found many of my especiall good friends , as Master <font>
Robert Hay <$$font> , one of the Groomes of his Maiesties Bed-chamber ,
Master <font> Dauid Drummond <$$font> , one of his Gentlemen Pentioners
, Master <font> Iames Acmooty <$$font> , one of the Groomes of the
Priuie Chamber , Captaine <font> Murray <$$font> , Sir <font> Henry
Witherington <$$font> Knight , Captaine <font> Tyrie <$$font> , and
diuers others : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C1.99

and there Master <font> Hay <$$font> , Master <font> Drummond <$$font> ,
and the good olde Captaine <font> Murray <$$font> did very bountifully
furnish mee with gold for my expences , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C1.100

but I being at dinner with those aforesaid Gentlemen , as we were
discoursing , there befell a strange accident , which I thinke worth the
relating . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C1.101

<P_1,131.C2>

I know not vpon what occasion they began to talke of being at Sea in
former times , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.103

and I <paren> amongst the rest <$$paren> said , I was at the taking of
<font> Cales <$$font> ; whereto an English Gentleman replyed , that hee
was the next good voyage after at the Ilands :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.104

I answered him that I was there also . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.105

He demanded in what ship I was ? JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.106

I tolde him in the Rainebowe of the Queenes :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.107

why <paren> quoth he <$$paren> doe you not know me ?
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.108

I was in the same ship , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.109

and my name is <font> Witherington <$$font> .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.110

Sir , said I , I do remember the name well ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.111

but by reason that it is neere two_and_twenty yeers since I saw you , I
may well forget the knowledge of you . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.112

Well said he , if you were in that ship , I pray you tell me some
remarkable token that happened in the voyage , whereupon I told him two
or three tokens ; which he did know to be true .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.113

Nay then , said I , I will tell you another which <paren> perhaps
<$$paren> you haue not forgotten ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.114

as our ship and the rest of the fleet did ride at Anchor at the Ile of
<font> Flores <$$font> <paren> one of the Iles of the <font> Azores
<$$font> <$$paren> there were some foureteene men and boyes of our ship
, that for nouelty would goe ashore , and see what fruit the Iland did
beare , and what entertainment it would yeeld vs :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.115

so being landed , we went vp and downe JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.116

and could finde nothing but stones , heath and mosse ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.117

and wee expected Oranges , Limonds , Figges , Muske-millions , and
Potatoes : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.118

in the meane space the wind did blow so stiffe , and the Sea was so
extreme rough , that our Ship-boate could not come to the land to fetch
vs , for feare she should bee beaten in pieces against the rockes :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.119

this continued fiue dayes , so that we were almost famished for want of
food : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.120

but at last <paren> I squandring vp and downe <$$paren> by the
prouidence of God I hapned into a Caue or poore habitation , where I
found fifteene loaues of bread , each of the quantity of a penny loafe
in <font> England <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.121

I hauing a valiant stomacke of the age of almost of a_hundred_and_twenty
houres breeding , fell to , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.122

and ate two loaues JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.123

and neuer said grace : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.124

and as I was about to make a Horse-loafe of the third loafe , I did put
twelue of them into my breeches , and my sleeues ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,131.C2.125

and so went mumbling out of the Caue , leaning my backe against a Tree ,
when vpon the sudden a Gentleman <P_1,132.C1> came to me , and said ,
Friend , what are you eating ? JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.126

Bread , <paren> quoth I . <$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.127

For Gods sake said he , giue me some . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.128

With that , I put my hand into my breech , <paren> being my best pantrey
<$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.129

and I gaue him a Loafe , which hee receiued with many thankes ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.130

and said , that if euer hee could requite it , he would .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.131

I had no sooner told this tale , but Sir <font> Henry Witherington
<$$font> did acknowledge himselfe to bee the man that I had giuen the
Loafe vnto two_and_twenty yeeres before , where I found the Prouerbe
true , that men haue more priuiledge then mountaines in meeting .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.132

In what great measure hee did requite so small a courtesie , I will
relate in this following discourse in my Returne through <font>
Northumberland <$$font> : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.133

So leauing my man at the Town of <font> Burnt Iland <$$font> , I tolde
him , I would but goe to <font> Sterling <$$font> , and see the Castle
there , and withall to see my honourable friends the Earle of <font>
Marr <$$font> , and Sir <font> William Murray <$$font> Knight , Lord of
<font> Abercarny <$$font> , and that I would returne within two dayes at
the most : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.134

But it fell out quite contrary ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.135

for it was fiue_and_thirtie dayes before I could get backe againe out of
these Noble mens company . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.136

The whole progres of my trauell with them , and the cause of my stay , I
can@ @not with gratefulnesse omit ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.137

and thus it was . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.138

A worthy Gentleman named Master <font> Iohn Fenton <$$font> , did bring
me on my way sixe miles to <font> Dumfermling <$$font> , where I was
well entertained , and lodged at Master <font> Iohn Gibb <$$font> his
house , one of the Groomes of his Maiesties Bed-chamber , and I thinke
the oldest Seruant the King hath : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.139

withall , I was well entertained there by Master <font> Crighton
<$$font> at his owne house , who went with me , and shewed me the
Queenes Palace ; <paren> a delicate & Princely Mansion <$$paren>
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.140

withall I saw the ruines of an ancient & stately built Abey , with faire
gardens , orchards , medowes belonging to the Palace : all which with
faire & goodly reuenues by the suppression of the Abbey , were annexed
to the Crowne . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.141

There also I saw a very faire Church , which though it bee now very
large and spacious , yet it hath in former times beene much larger .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C1.142

But I taking my leaue of <font> Dumfermling <$$font> , would needs goe
and see the truely Noble Knight Sir <font> George Bruce <$$font> , at a
<P_1,132.C2> Towne called the <font> Cooras <$$font> :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.143

there he made mee right welcome , both with varietie of fare ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.144

and after all , hee commanded three of his men to direct mee to see his
most admirable Colemines ; which <paren> if man can or could worke
wonders <$$paren> is a wonder : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.145

for my selfe neither in any trauels that I haue beene in , nor any
History that I haue read , or any Discourse that I haue heard , did
neuer see , read , or heare of any worke of man that might parallell or
bee equiualent with this vnfellowed and vnmatchable work :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.146

& though all I can say of it , can@ @not describe it according to the
worthines of his vigilant industry , that was both the occasion ,
Inuentor , & Maintainer of it : yet rather then the memory of so rare an
Enterprise , and so accomplisht a profit to the Common-wealth shall bee
raked and smothered in the dust of obliuion , I will giue a little touch
at the description of it , although I amongst Writers , am like he that
worst may hold the candle . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.147

The Mine hath two wayes into it , the one by sea and the other by land ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.148

but a man may goe into it by land , and returne the same way if he
please , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.149

and so he may enter into it by sea , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.150

and by sea he may come forth of it : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.151

but I for varieties sake went in by sea , and out by land .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.152

Now men may obiect , how can a man goe into a Mine , the entrance of it
being into the sea , but that the Sea will follow him , and so drown the
Mine ? To which obiection thus I answer , That at low water , the sea
being ebd away , and a great part of the sand bare ; vpon this same sand
<paren> being mixed with rockes and cragges <$$paren> did the Master of
this great worke build a round circular frame of stone , very thicke ,
strong , and ioyned together with glutinous or bitumous matter , so high
withall that the Sea at the highest flood , or the greatest rage of
storme or tempest , can neither dissolue the stones so well compacted in
the building or yet ouerflowe the height of it .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.153

Within this round frame , <paren> at all aduentures <$$paren> hee did
set workemen to digge with Mattockes , Pick-axes , and other instruments
fit for such purposes . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.154

They did dig forty foot downe right , into and through a rocke .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.155

At last they found that which they expected , which was Sea-cole ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,132.C2.156

<P_1,133.C1>

they following the veine of the Mine , did dig forward still : So that
in the space of eight_and_twenty , or nine_and_twenty yeeres , they haue
digged more then an English mile vnder the Sea , that when men are at
worke belowe , an_hundred of the greatest shippes in <font> Britaine
<$$font> may saile ouer their heads . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,133.C1.158

Besides , the Mine is most artificially cut like an Arch or a Vault ,
all that great length , with many nookes and by-wayes :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,133.C1.159

and it is so made , that a man may walke vpright in the most places ,
both in and out . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,133.C1.160

Many poore people are there set on work , which otherwise through the
want of imployment would perish . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,133.C1.161

But when I had seene the Mine , and was come forth of it againe ; after
my thankes giuen to Sir <font> George Bruce <$$font> , I told him , that
if the plotters of the Powder Treason in England had seene this Mine ,
that they <paren> perhaps <$$paren> would haue attempted to haue left
the Parliament House , and haue vndermined the Thames , and so to haue
blowne vp the Barges and Wherries , wherein the King , and all the
Estates of our Kingdome were . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,133.C1.162

Moreouer , I said , that I could affoord to turne Tapster at <font>
London <$$font> , so that I had but one quarter of a mile of his Mine to
make mee a Celler , to keepe Beere and Bottle-ale in .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,133.C1.163

But leauing these Iests in Prose , I will relate a few Verses that I
made merrily of this Mine . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,133.C1.164

<P_1,133.C2>

The Sea at certaines places doth leake , or soake into the Mine , which
by the industry of Sir <font> George Bruce <$$font> , is all conueyd to
one Well neere the land ; where he hath a deuice like a horse-mill ,
that with three horses and a great chaine of Iron , going downeward many
fadomes , with thirty_sixe buckets fastened to the chaine , of the which
eighteene goe downe still to be filled , and eighteene ascend vp to be
emptied , which doe emptie themselues <paren> without any mans labour
<$$paren> into a trough that conueyes the water into the Sea againe ; by
which meanes he saues his Mine , which otherwise would be destroyed with
the Sea , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,133.C2.166

besides he doth make euery weeke ninety or a_hundred Tunnes of salt ,
which doth serue most part of <font> Scotland <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,133.C2.167

some he sends into <font> England <$$font> , and very much into <font>
Germany <$$font> : all which shewes the painfull industry with Gods
blessings to such worthy endeauours : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,133.C2.168

I must with many thankes remember his courtesie to me , and lastly how
he sent his man to guide mee tenne miles on the way to <font> Sterling
<$$font> , where by the way I saw the outside of a faire and stately
house called <font> Allaway <$$font> , belonging to the Earle of <font>
Marr <$$font> , which <P_1,134.C1> by reason that his Honor was not
there , I past by and went to <font> Sterling <$$font> , where I was
entertained and lodged at one Master <font> Iohn Archibalds <$$font> ,
where all my want was that I wanted roome to containe halfe the good
cheere that I might haue had there ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.169

hee had me into the Castle , which in few words I doe compare to <font>
Windsor <$$font> for situation , much more then <font> Windsor <$$font>
in strength , and somewhat lesse in greatnesse ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.170

yet I dare affirme , that his Maiesty hath not such another hall to any
house that he hath neither in <font> England <$$font> or <font> Scotland
<$$font> , except Westminster Hall which is now no dwelling Hall for a
Prince , being long since metamorphosed into a house for the Law and the
profits . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.171

This goodly Hall was built by King <font> Iames <$$font> the fourth ,
that marryed King <font> Henry <$$font> the eight@ @s sister , and after
was slaine at <font> Flodden field <$$font> ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.172

but it surpasses all the Halls for dwelling houses that euer I saw , for
length , breadth , height and strength of building ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.173

the Castle is built vpon a rocke very lofty , and much beyond <font>
Edenborough <$$font> Castle in state and magnificence , and not much
inferiour to it in strength , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.174

the roomes of it are lofty , with carued workes on the seelings , the
doores of each roome being so high , that a man may ride vpright on
horse-backe into any chamber or lodging .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.175

There is also a goodly faire Chappell , with Cellers , Stables , and all
other necessary Offices , all very stately & befitting the Maiesty of a
King . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.176

From <font> Sterling <$$font> I rode to Saint <font> Iohnston <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.177

a fine Towne it is , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.178

but it is much decayed , by reason of the want of his Maiesties yeerely
comming to lodge there . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.179

There I lodged one night at an Inne , the goodman of the house his name
being <font> Petricke Pettcarne <$$font> , where my entertainement was
with good cheere , good lodging , all too good to a bad weary guest .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.180

Mine Host told me that the Earle of <font> Marr <$$font> , and Sir
<font> William Murray <$$font> of <font> Abercarny <$$font> were gone to
the great hunting to the <font> Brea <$$font> of <font> Marr <$$font> ;
but if I made haste I might perhaps finde them at a Towne called <font>
Breekin <$$font> , or <font> Breechin <$$font> , two_and_thirty miles
from Saint <font> Iohn stone <$$font> whereupon I tooke a guide to
<font> Breekin <$$font> the next day , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.181

but before I came , my Lord was gone from thence foure dayes .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C1.182

<P_1,134.C2>

Then I tooke another guide , which brought me such strange wayes ouer
mountaines and rockes , that I thinke my horse neuer went the like ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.184

and I am sure I neuer saw any wayes that might fellow them .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.185

I did go through a Countrey called <font> Glaneske <$$font> , where
passing by the side of a hill , so steepe as the ridge of a house ,
where the way was rocky , and not aboue a yard broad in some places , so
fearfull and horrid it was to looke down into the bottome ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.186

for if either horse or man had slipt , he had fallen <paren> without
recouery <$$paren> a good mile downeright ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.187

but I thanke God , at night I came to a lodging in the Lard of <font>
Eggel@ @s <$$font> Land , where I lay at an Irish house , the folkes not
being able to speake scarce any English ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.188

but I sup'd JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.189

and went to bed , where I had not laine long ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.190

but I was enforced to rise , I was so stung with Irish Musketaes , a
creature that hath sixe legs , and liues like a monster altogether vpon
mans flesh , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.191

they doe inhabite and breed most in sluttish houses ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.192

and this house was none of the cleanest ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.193

the beast is much like a louse in <font> England <$$font> , both in
shape and nature ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.194

in a word , they were to me the <font> A. <$$font> and the <font> Z.
<$$font> the Prologue and the Epilogue , the first and the last that I
had in all my trauels from <font> Endenborough <$$font> ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.195

and had not this High-land Irish house helped me at a pinch , I should
haue sworne that all <font> Scotland <$$font> had not beene so kind as
to haue bestowed a Louse vpon me : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.196

but with a shift that I had , I shifted off my Canibals ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.197

and was neuer_more troubled with them . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.198

The next day I trauelled ouer an exceeding high mountaine , called mount
<font> Skeene <$$font> , where I found the valley very warme before I
went vp it ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.199

but when I came to the top of it , my teeth beganne to dance in my head
with cold , like Virginals iacks ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.200

and withall , a most familiar mist embraced me round , that I could not
see thrice my length any way : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.201

withall , it yeelded so friendly a deaw , that it did moysten thorow all
my clothes : Where the old Prouerbe of a Scottish Miste was verified ,
in wetting me to the skinne . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,134.C2.202

Vp and downe , I thinke this hill is sixe miles , the way so vneuen ,
stony , and full of bogges , quagmires , and long health , that a dogge
with three legs will out-runne <P_1,135.C1> horse with foure :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C1.203

for doe what we could , wee were foure houres before we could passe it .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C1.204

Thus with extreme trauell , ascending and descending , mounting and
alighting , I came at night to the place where I would be , in the Brea
of <font> Marr <$$font> , which is a large County , all composed of such
mountaines , that Shooters hill , Gads hill , Highgate hill , Hampsted
hill , Birdlip hill , or Maluernes hill , are but Molehills in
comparison , or like a Liuer , or a Gizard vnder a Capons wing , in
respect of the altitude of their tops , or perpendicularitie of their
bottomes . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C1.205

There I saw Mount <font> Benawne <$$font> , with a furrd'd mist vpon his
snowie head in stead of a nightcap : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C1.206

<paren> for you must vnderstand , that the oldest man aliue neuer saw
but the snow was on the top of diuers of those hills , both in Summer ,
as well as in Winter <$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C1.207

There did I finde the truely Noble and Right Honourable Lords <font>
Iohn Erskin <$$font> Earle of Marr , <font> Iames Stuart <$$font> Earle
of Murray , <font> George Gordon <$$font> Earle of Engye , sonne and
heire to the Marquesse of Huntley , <font> Iames Erskin <$$font> Earle
of Bughan , and <font> Iohn <$$font> Lord <font> Erskin <$$font> , sonne
and heire to the Earle of Marr , and their Countesses , with my much
honoured , and my best assured and approued friend , Sir <font> William
Murray <$$font> Knight , of <font> Abercarny <$$font> , and hundred of
others Knights , Esquires , and their followers ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C1.208

all and euery man in generall in one habit , as if <font> Licurgus
<$$font> had beene there , and made Lawes of Equality :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C1.209

For once in the yeere , which is the whole moneth of August , and
sometimes part of September , many of the Nobility and Gentry of the
Kingdome <paren> for their pleasure <$$paren> doe come into these
high-land Countries to hunt , where they doe conforme themselues to the
habite of the High-land-men , who for the most part speake nothing but
Irish ; and in former time were those people which were called the
<font> Red-shankes <$$font> . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C1.210

Their habite is shooes with but one sole apiece ; stockings <paren>
which they call short hose <$$paren> made of a warme stuffe of diuers
colours , which they call Tartane : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C1.211

as for breeches , many of them , nor their forefathers neuer wore any ,
but a ierkin of the same stuffe that their hose is of , their garters
being bands or wreathes of hay or straw , with a plead <P_1,135.C2>
about their shoulders , which is a mantle of diuers colours , much finer
and lighter stuffe then their hose , with blue flat caps on their heads
, a handkerchiefe knit with two knots about their necke :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.212

and thus are they attyred . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.213

Now their weapons are long bowes and forked arrowes , Swords and Targers
, Harquebusses , Muskets , Durks , and Loquhabor-Axes .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.214

With these Armes I found many of them armed for the hunting .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.215

As for their attire , any man of what degree soeuer that comes amongst
them , must not disdaine to weare it : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.216

for if they doe , then they will disdaine to hunt , or willingly to
bring in their Dogges : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.217

but if men be kind vnto them , and be in their habit ; then are they
conquered with kindnesse , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.218

and the sport will be plentifull . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.219

This was the reason that I found so many Noblemen and Gentlemen in those
shapes . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.220

But to proceed to the hunting . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.221

My good Lord of <font> Marr <$$font> hauing put me into that shape , I
rode with him from his house , where I saw the ruines of an old Castle ,
called the Castle of <font> Kindroghit <$$font> .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.222

It was built by King <font> Malcolm Canmore <$$font> <paren> for a
hunting house <$$paren> who raigned in <font> Scotland <$$font> when
<font> Edward <$$font> the Confessor , <font> Harold <$$font> , and
Norman <font> William <$$font> raigned in <font> England <$$font> :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.223

I speake of it , because it was the last house that I saw in those parts
; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.224

for I was the space of twelue dayes after , before I saw either House ,
Corne-field , or habitation for any creature , but Deere , wilde Horses
, Wolues , and such like creatures , which made mee doubt that I should
neuer haue seene a house againe . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.225

Thus the first day wee traueld eight miles , where there were small
cottages built on purpose to lodge in , which they call Lonquhards ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,135.C2.226

I thanke my good Lord <font> Erskin <$$font> , hee commanded that I
should alwayes bee lodged in his lodging , the Kitchin being alwayes on
the side of a banke , many Kettles and Pots boyling , and many spits
turning and winding , with great variety of cheere : as Venison bak't ,
sodden , rost , and stu'de Beefe , Mutton , Goates , Kid , Hares , fresh
Salmon , Pidgeons , Hens , Capons , Chickins , Partridge , Moorecoots ,
Heathcocks , Caperkellies , and Termagants ; <P_1,136.C1> good Ale ,
Sacke , White , and Claret , Tent , <paren> or Allegant <$$paren> with
most potent <font> Aquavitae <$$font> . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.227

All these , and more then these we had continually , in superfluous
aboundance , caught by Faulconers , Fowlers , Fishers , and brought by
my Lords Tenants and Purueyers to victuall our Campe , which consisteth
of fourteen or fifteene_hundred men and horses ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.228

the manner of the hunting is this : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.229

Fiue or sixe_hundred men doe rise early in the morning ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.230

and they doe disperse themselues diuers wayes ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.231

and seuen , eight or tenne miles compasse , they doe bring or chase in
the Deere in many heards , <paren> two , three or foure_hundred in a
heard <$$paren> to such or such a place , as the Noblemen shall appoint
them ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.232

then when day is come , the Lords and Gentlemen of their Companies , doe
ride or goe to the said places , sometimes wading vp to the middles
through bournes and riuers : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.233

and then they being come to the place , doe lye downe on the ground ,
till those foresaid Scouts which are called the Tinckhell , doe bring
downe the Deere : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.234

But as the Prouerbe sayes of a bad Cooke , so these Tinckhell men doe
like their owne fingers ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.235

for besides their bowes and arrowes which they carry with them , wee can
heare now and then a Harquebusse or a Musket goe off , which they doe
seldome discharge in vaine : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.236

Then after we had stayed there three houres or thereabouts , we might
perceiue the Deere appeare on the hills round about vs , <paren> their
heads making a shew like a wood <$$paren> which being followed close by
the Tinkhall , are chased downe into the valley where we lay ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.237

then all the valley on each side being way-laid with a_hundred couple of
strong Irish Grey-hounds , they are let loose as occasion serues vpon
the heard of Deere , that with Dogges , Gunnes , Arrowes , Durkes , and
Daggers , in the space of two houres , fourescore fat Deere were slaine
, which after are disposed of some one way , and some another , twenty
and thirty miles , and more then enough left for vs to make merry
withall at our Rendez-vous . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.238

I liked the sport so well , that I made these two Sonnets following .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C1.239

<P_1,136.C2>

Being come to our lodgings , there was such Baking , Boyling , Roasting
, and Stewing , as if Cooke Russian had beene there to haue scalded the
Deuill in his feathers : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C2.241

and after supper a fire of Firre-wood as high as an indifferent May-pole
: JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C2.242

for I assure you , that the Earle of <font> Marr <$$font> will giue any
man that is his friend , for thankes , as many Firre trees <paren> that
are as good as any shippes masts in England <$$paren> as are worth
<paren> if they were in any place neere the Thames , or any other
portable riuer <$$paren> the best Earledome in England or Scotland
either : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C2.243

For I dare affirme , hee hath as many growing there , as would serue for
masts <paren> from this time to the end of the world <$$paren> for all
the shippes , Carackes , Hoyes , Galleyes , Boates , Drumlers , Barkes ,
and Water-crafts , that are now , or can be in the world these fourty
yeeres . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C2.244

This sounds like a lye to an vnbeleeuer ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,136.C2.245

but I and many thousands doe knowe that I speake <P_1,137.C1> within the
compasse of truth : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C1.246

for indeede <paren> the more is the pitty <$$paren> they doe grow so
farre from any passage of water , and {SIC:aad} withall in such rockie
Mountaines , that no way to conuey them is possible to bee passable ,
either with Boate , Horse , or Cart . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C1.247

Thus hauing spent certaine dayes in hunting in the Brea of <font> Marr
<$$font> , wee went to the next County called <font> Bagenoch <$$font> ,
belonging to the Earle of <font> Engie <$$font> , where hauing such
sport and entertainement as we formerly had ; after foure or fiue dayes
pastime , we tooke leaue of hunting for that yeere ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C1.248

and tooke our iourney toward a strong house of the Earles , called
<font> Ruthen <$$font> in <font> Bagenoch <$$font> , where my Lord of
<font> Engie <$$font> and his Noble Countesse <paren> being daughter to
the Earle of <font> Argile <$$font> <$$paren> did giue vs most noble
welcome three dayes . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C1.249

From thence we went to a place called <font> Ballo Castle <$$font> , a
faire and stately house , a worthie Gentleman being the Owner of it ,
called the Lard of <font> Graunt <$$font> ; his wife being a Gentlewoman
honourably descended being sister to the right {SIC:theright} Honourable
Earle of <font> Atholl <$$font> , and to Sir <font> Patricke Murray
<$$font> Knight ; she being both inwardly and outwardly plentifully
adorned with the gifts of Grace and Nature : so that our cheere was more
then sufficient ; and yet much lesse then they could affoord vs .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C1.250

There stayed there foure dayes , foure Earles , one Lord , diuers
Knights and Gentlemen , and their seruants , footmen and horses ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C1.251

and euery meale foure long Tables furnished with all varieties : Our
first & second course being threescore dishes at one boord ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C1.252

and after that alwayes a Banquet : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C1.253

and there if I had not forsworne wine till I came to <font> Edenborough
<$$font> , I thinke I had there dranke my last .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C1.254

The fifth day with much adoe we gate from thence to <font> Tarnaway
<$$font> , a goodly house of the Earle of <font> Murraye@ @s <$$font> ,
where that right Honourable Lord and his Lady did welcome vs foure dayes
more . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C1.255

There was good cheere in all variety , with somewhat more then plenty
for aduantage : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C1.256

for indeed the Countie of <font> Murray <$$font> is the most pleasantest
, and plentifull Countrey in all <font> Scotland <$$font> ; being plaine
land , that a Coach may be driuen more then foure_and_thirtie
<P_1,137.C2> miles one way in it , alongst by the Sea-coast .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.257

From thence I went to <font> Elgen <$$font> in <font> Murray <$$font> ,
an ancient Citie , where there stood a faire and beautifull Church with
three steeples , the walls of it and the steeples all yet standing ; but
the Roofes , Windowes , and many Marble Monuments and Toombes of
honourable and worthie personages all broken and defaced :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.258

this was done in the time when ruine bare rule , and Knox knock'd downe
Churches . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.259

From <font> Elgen <$$font> we went to the Bishop of <font> Murray
<$$font> his house which is called <font> Spinye <$$font> , or <font>
Spinaye <$$font> : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.260

a Reuerend Gentleman he is , of the Noble name of <font> Dowglasse
<$$font> , where wee were very well wel-comed , as befitted the honour
of himselfe and his guests . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.261

From thence we departed to the Lord Marquesse of <font> Huntley@ @s
<$$font> , to a sumptuous house of his , named the <font> Bogg of Geethe
<$$font> , where our entertainement was like himselfe , free ,
bountifull and honourable . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.262

There <paren> after two dayes stay <$$paren> with much entreatie and
earnest suite , I gate leaue of the Lords to depart towards <font>
Edenborough <$$font> : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.263

the Noble Marquesse , the Earle of <font> Marr , Murray , Engie , Bughan
<$$font> , and the Lord <font> Erskin <$$font> ; all these , I thanke
them , gaue me gold to defray my charges in my iourney .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.264

So after fiue_and_thirty dayes hunting and trauell , I returning , past
by another stately mansion of the Lord Marquesses , called <font>
Stroboggi <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.265

and so ouer <font> Carny <$$font> mount to <font> Breekin <$$font> ,
where a wench that was borne deafe and dumb came into my chamber at
midnight <paren> I being asleepe <$$paren>
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.266

and shee opening the bed , would faine haue lodged with mee :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.267

but had I beene a <font> Sardanapalus <$$font> , or a <font>
Heliogabalus <$$font> , I thinke that either the great trauell ouer the
Mountaines had tamed me ; or if not , her beautie could neuer haue moued
me . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.268

The best parts of her were , that her breath was as sweet as
sugar-carrion , being very well shouldered beneath the waste ; and as my
Hostesse told me the next morning , that she had changed her Maiden-head
for the price of a Bastard not long before .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.269

But howsoeuer , shee made such a hideous noyse , that I started out of
my sleepe , and thought that the Deuill had beene there :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.270

but I no sooner knew who it was , but I arose ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,137.C2.271

and thrust my dumb <P_1,138.C1> beast out of my chamber ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.272

and for want of a locke or a latch , I staked vp my doore with a great
chaire . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.273

Thus hauing escaped one of the seuen deadly sinnes as at <font> Breekin
<$$font> , I departed from thence to a Towne called <font> Forfard
<$$font> ; and from thence to <font> Dundee <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.274

and so to <font> Kinghorne <$$font> , <font> Burnt Iland <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.275

and so to <font> Edenborough <$$font> , where I stayed eight dayes , to
recouer my selfe of falls and bruises which I receiued in my trauell in
the High-land mountainous hunting , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.276

Great welcome I had shewed me all my stay at <font> Edenborough <$$font>
, by many worthy Gentlemen , namely , old Master <font> George Todrigg
<$$font> , Master <font> Henry Leuingston <$$font> , Master <font> Iames
Henderson <$$font> , Master <font> Iohn Maxwell <$$font> , and a number
of others , who suffered mee to want no wine or good cheere , as may be
imagined . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.277

Now the day before I came from <font> Edenborough <$$font> , I went to
<font> Leeth <$$font> , where I found my long approued and assured good
friend Master <font> Beniamin Iohnston <$$font> , at one Master <font>
Iohn Stuarts <$$font> house : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.278

I thanke him for his great kindnesse towards me :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.279

for at my taking leaue of him , he gaue me a piece of gold of
two_and_twenty shillings to drink his health in <font> England <$$font>
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.280

And withall , willed me to remember his kind commendations to all his
friends : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.281

So with a friendly farewell , I left him as well , as I hope neuer to
see in a worse estate : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.282

for he is amongst Noblemen and Gentlemen ; that knowe his true worth ,
and their owne honours , where , with much respectiue loue he is
worthily entertained . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.283

So leauing <font> Leeth <$$font> , I return'd to <font> Edenborough
<$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.284

and within the port or gate , called the <font> Netherbowe <$$font> , I
discharged my pockets of all the money I had :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.285

and as I came pennilesse within the walls of that Citie at my first
comming thither ; so now at my departing from thence , I came moneylesse
out of it againe ; hauing in company to conuey me out , certaine
Gentlemen , amongst the which was Master <font> Iames Acherson <$$font>
, Laird of <font> Gasford <$$font> , a Gentleman that brought mee to his
house , where with great entertainement he and his good wife did welcome
me . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C1.286

On the morrow he sent one of his men to bring me to a place called
<font> Adam <$$font> , to Master <font> Iohn Acmootye <$$font> his house
, one of the Groomes <P_1,138.C2> of his Maiesties Bed-chamber ; where
with him and his two brethren , Master <font> Alexander <$$font> , and
Master <font> Iames Acmootye <$$font> , I found both cheere and Welcome
, not inferiour to any that I had had in any former place .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.287

Amongst our viands that wee had there , I must not forget the Soleand
Goose , a most delicate Fowle , which breeds in great aboundance in a
little Rocke called the <font> Basse <$$font> , which stands two miles
into the Sea . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.288

It is very good flesh , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.289

but it is eaten in the forme as wee eate Oysters , standing at a
side-boord , a little before dinner , vnsanctified without Grace ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.290

and after it is eaten , it must be well liquored with two or three good
rowses of Sherrie or Canarie sacke . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.291

The Lord or Owner of the <font> Basse <$$font> doth profit at the least
two_hundred pound yeerely by those Geese ; the <font> Basse <$$font> it
selfe being of a great height , and neere three quarters of a mile in
compasse , all fully replenished with Wildfowle , hauing but one small
entrance into it , with a house , a garden , and a Chappell in it ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.292

& on the toppe of it a Well of pure fresh water .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.293

From <font> Adam <$$font> , Master <font> Iohn <$$font> and Master
<font> Iames Acmootye <$$font> went to the Towne of <font> Dunbarr
<$$font> with me , where ten Scottish pints of wine were consumed , and
brought to nothing for a farewell : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.294

there at Master <font> Iames Baylies <$$font> house I tooke leaue ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.295

and Master <font> Iames Acmootye <$$font> comming for <font> England
<$$font> , said , that if I would ride with him , that neither I nor my
horse should want betwixt that place and <font> London <$$font> .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.296

Now I hauing no money or meanes for trauell , began at once to examine
my manners and my want : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.297

at last my want perswaded my manners to accept of this worthy Gentlemans
vndeserued courtesie . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.298

So that night he brought me to a place called <font> Cober-spath
<$$font> , where we lodged at an Inne , the like of which I dare say ,
is not in any of his Maiesties Dominions .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.299

And for to shewe my thankfulnesse to Master <font> William Arnet
<$$font> and his wife , the Owners thereof , I must explaine their
bountifull entertainement of guests , which is this :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.300

Suppose ten , fifteene , or twenty men and horses come to lodge at their
house , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,138.C2.301

the men shall haue flesh , tame and wild-fowle , fish with <P_1,139.C1>
all varietie of good cheere , good lodging , and welcome ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.302

and the horses shall want neither hay or prouender :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.303

and at the morning at their departure the reckoning is iust nothing .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.304

This is this worthy Gentlemans vse , his chiefe delight being onely to
giue strangers entertainment <font> gratis <$$font> :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.305

And I am sure , that in <font> Scotland <$$font> beyond <font>
Edenborough <$$font> , I haue beene at houses like Castles for building
; the master of the house his Beauer being his blue Bonnet , one that
will weare no other shirts , but of the Flaxe that growes on his owne
ground , and of his wiues , daughters , or seruants spinning ; that hath
his Stockings , Hose , and Ierkin of the Wooll of his owne Sheepes
backes ; that neuer <paren> by his pride of apparell <$$paren> caused
Mercer , Draper , Silke-man , Embroyderer , or Haberdasher to breake and
turne bankerupt : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.306

and yet this plaine home-spunne fellow keepes and maintaines thirty ,
forty , fifty seruants , or perhaps more , euery day releeuing three or
foure_score poore people at his gate ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.307

and besides all this , can giue noble entertainment for foure or fiue
dayes together to fiue or sixe Earles and Lords , besides Knights ,
Gentlemen and their followers , if they bee three or foure_hundred men ,
and horse of them , where they shall not onely feede but feast , and not
feast but banket , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.308

this is a man that desires to know nothing so much , as his duty to God
and his King whose greatest cares are to practise the workes of Piety ,
Charity , and Hospitality : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.309

he neuer studies the consuming Art of fashionlesse fashions ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.310

hee neuer tries his strength to beare foure or fiue_hundred Acres on his
backe at once , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.311

his legges are alwayes at liberty , not being fettred with golden
garters , and manacled with artificial Roses , whose weight <paren>
sometime <$$paren> is the Reliques of some decayed Lordship :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.312

Many of these worthy house-keepers there are in <font> Scotland <$$font>
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.313

amongst some of them I was entertained ; from whence I did truely gather
these aforesaid obseruations . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.314

So leauing <font> Coberspath <$$font> , we rode to <font> Barwicke
<$$font> , where the worthy old Soldier and ancient Knight , Sir <font>
William Bowyer <$$font> , made me welcome ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.315

but contrary to his will , we lodged at an Inne , where Master <font>
Iames Acmooty <$$font> paid all charges :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C1.316

<P_1,139.C2>

but at <font> Barwhicke <$$font> there was a grieuous chance hapned ,
which I thinke not fit the relation to be omitted .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C2.318

In the Riuer of <font> Tweed <$$font> , which runnes by <font> Barwicke
<$$font> , are taken by Fishermen that dwell there , infinite numbers of
fresh Salmons , so that many housholds and families are relieued by the
profit of that fishing ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C2.319

but <paren> how long since I know not <$$paren> there was an order that
no man or boy whatsoeuer should fish vpon a Sunday :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C2.320

This order continued long amongst them , till some eight or nine weekes
before Michaelmas last , on a Sunday , the Salmons plaid in such great
aboundance in the Riuer , that some of the Fishermen <paren> contrary to
Gods law and their owne order <$$paren> tooke Boates and nettes and
fished , and caught three_hundred Salmons ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C2.321

but from that time vntill Michaelmas day that I was there , which was
nine weekes , and heard the report of it , and saw the poore -peoples
lamentations , they had not seene one Salmon in the Riuer ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C2.322

and some of them were in despaire that they should neuer see any more
there ; affirming it to be Gods Iudgement vpon them for the prophanation
of the Sabbath . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C2.323

The thirtieth of September we rode from <font> Barwicke <$$font> to
<font> Belford <$$font> , from <font> Belford <$$font> to <font> Anwicke
<$$font> , the next day from <font> Anwick <$$font> to <font> Newcastle
<$$font> , where I found the noble Knight , Sir <font> Henry
Witherington <$$font> ; who , because I would haue no gold nor siluer ,
gaue me a bay Mare , in requitall of a loafe of bread that I had giuen
him two_and_twenty yeeres before , at the Iland of <font> Flores
<$$font> , of the which I haue spoken before .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C2.324

I ouertooke at <font> Newcastle <$$font> a great many of my worthy
friends , which were all comming for <font> London <$$font> , namely ,
Master <font> Robert Hay <$$font> , and Master <font> Dauid Drummond
<$$font> , where I was welcom'd at Master <font> Nicholas Tempests
<$$font> house . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,139.C2.325

From <font> Newcastle <$$font> I rode with those Gentlemen to <font>
Durham <$$font> , to <font> Darington <$$font> , to <font> Northalerton
<$$font> , and to <font> Topcliffe <$$font> in <font> Yorkeshire
<$$font> , where I tooke my leaue of them , and would needs try my
pennilesse fortunes by my selfe , and see the City of <font> Yorke
<$$font> , where I was lodged at my right Worshipfull good friend ,
Master Doctor <font> Hudson <$$font> one of his Maiesties Chaplaines ,
who went with me , and shewed <P_1,140.C1> me the goodly Minster Church
there , and the most admirable , rare-wrought , vnfellowed Chapter house
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C1.326

From <font> Yorke <$$font> I rode to <font> Doncaster <$$font> , where
my horses were well fed at the Beare , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C1.327

but my selfe found out the honourable Knight , Sir <font> Robert
Anstruther <$$font> at his father_in_lawes , the truely noble Sir <font>
Robert Swifts {COM:preceding_word_"Swifts"_emended} house , he being
then high Sheriffe of <font> Yorkeshire <$$font> , where with their good
Ladies , and the right Honourable the Lord <font> Sanquhar <$$font> , I
was stayed two nights and one day , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C1.328

Sir <font> Robert Anstruther <$$font> <paren> I thanke him <$$paren> not
only paying for my two horses meat , but at my departure , he gaue me a
letter to <font> Newarke <$$font> vpon <font> Trent <$$font> ,
twenty_eight miles in my way , where Master <font> George Atkinson
<$$font> mine Host made me as welcome , as if I had beene a French Lord
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C1.329

and what was to be paid , as I call'd for nothing , I paid as much ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C1.330

and left the reckoning with many thankes to Sir <font> Robert Anstruther
<$$font> . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C1.331

So leauing <font> Newarke <$$font> , with another Gentleman that
ouertooke me , we came at night to <font> Stamford <$$font> , to the
signe of the Virginitie <paren> or the Maydenhead <$$paren> where I
deliuered a Letter from the Lord <font> Sanquhar <$$font> ; which caused
Master <font> Bates <$$font> and his wife , being the Master and
Mistresse of the house , to make me and the Gentleman that was with me
great cheere for nothing . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C1.332

From <font> Stamford <$$font> the next day we rode to <font> Huntington
<$$font> , where we lodged at the Post-masters house , at the signe of
the Crowne ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C1.333

his name is <font> Riggs <$$font> . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C1.334

He was informed who I was , and wherefore I vndertooke this my
pennilesse Progresse : wherefore he came vp to our chamber , and sup'd
with vs , and very bountifully <P_1,140.C2> called for three quarts of
Wine and Sugar , and foure Iugges of Beere .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.335

He did drinke and beginne healths like a Horse-leech ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.336

and swallowed downe his cuppes without feeling , as if he had had the
dropsie , or nine pound of Spunge in his maw .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.337

In a word , as he is a Poste , he dranke poste , striuing and calling by
all meanes to make the reckoning great , or to make vs men of great
reckoning . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.338

But in his payment he was tyred like a Iade , leauing the Gentleman that
was with me to discharge the terrible Shott ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.339

or else one of my horses must haue laine in pawne for is superfluous
calling , and vnmannerly intrusion . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.340

But leauing him , I left <font> Huntington <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.341

and rode on the Sunday to <font> Puckeridge <$$font> , where Master
<font> Holland <$$font> at the Faulkon , <paren> mine old acquaintance
<$$paren> and my louing and ancient Hoste gaue mee , my friend , my man
, and our horses excellent cheere , and welcome ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.342

and I paid him with , Not a penny of money .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.343

The next day I came to <font> London <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.344

and obscurely coming within More-gate , I went to a house
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.345

and borrowed money : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.346

And so I stole backe againe to <font> Islington <$$font> , to the signe
of the Maydenhead , staying till Wednesday , that my friends came to
meete me , who knew no other , but that Wednesday was my first comming :
where with all loue I was entertained with much good cheere :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.347

and after Supper we had a play of the life and death of <font> Guy of
Warwicke <$$font> , played by the Right Honourable the Earle of <font>
Darbie <$$font> his men . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.348

And so on the Thursday morning being the fifteenth of October , I came
home to my house in <font> London <$$font> .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-H,1,140.C2.349

