<BEGIN_knyvett-1624-e2-h>

<P_55>

<heading:edcomment:1>

Sweet Harte I haue sent by this bearer fourteen woodcockes and a brace
of feasants which came to me by chance very fortunately .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.4

If you will , you may send them to my Lady Knyvett , which if you doe ,
I pray lett this bearer cary them and remember my humble servis to my
Lor: and Lady . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.5

I came home on friday nighte betimes sumwhat wery ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.6

but nowe am very well KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.7

and doe hope to see the this weeke if it be possible .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.8

I pray remember my servis to S=r= Tho: Holland and my Lady .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.9

So my deerest affection to thyselfe ; KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.10

I commit the to the protection of the Almighty god
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.11

and rest Thy deerest Loving Husband Thomas Knyvett
{COM:preceding_word_"Knyvett"_emended} . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.12

Ashwell Thorpe KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.13

Ma: 18: 1620 . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.14

Eares remembreth his servis to {TEXT:missing_"to"} you and all the rest
. KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.15

To his deerest loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Lady Pewe give these .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.16

Westminster . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.17

<heading:edcomment:2>

My deere Harte the cause of my not writing to thee the last week was
becaus I thought to haue been at home with the before my letter ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.19

and therfore I can@ @not chose but condemne y=r= to rashe censure of my
forgettfullnes ; which although it proceeds from y=r= infinite love ,
yet the assuered testimonies of my affection to you haue bene such as
showld rather have layd the fault vpon something else ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.20

for I protest to god I love nothing but onely thee ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.21

and so rest assuered . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.22

For my busines , if I had not come vp when I did I thinke I had lost my
mony , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.23

for certainely my Lo: mayor meanes to breake as@ @soone as his yeare
comes out , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.24

but I thanke god , I have got good securitie for my mony ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,55.25

and as@ @soon as ever all things be finished betwixt <P_56> vs I wil@
@be with the , god willing , the next day , which wil@ @be , I hope the
next weeke . Till when and ever I rest Thy loving husband who loves the
more then his owne life Tho: Knyvett . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.26

Houborn , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.27

Oct. 9. 1621 . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.28

For newes the Kings Chappell at Whithall is curiously painted and all
the images newe made and a silver crusifix a@ @making to hange therin ,
against the spannish Ladys coming , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.29

and my Lady Digby is providing to go to fetch her .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.30

My Lo: Chamberlaine thay say shal@ @be sent in to Irland to call a
parlament , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.31

and in his absens my Lo: Digby shal@ @be put in his place .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.32

This newes you must not be to bould to report , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.33

but it is certainely reported to be true . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.34

Remember my servis to my Aunt Bell KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.35

and pray god Bless littel Pudd and vs all KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.36

Amen . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.37

To his deerest loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Ashwell Thorpe give these .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.38

Norffolke . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.39

<heading:edcomment:3>

Sweet harte I am forst yet to send the shaddowe of my selfe , the true
affection of a substance that loves you aboue all the world .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.41

My busines I hope wil@ @be effectually dispatcht presently
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.42

and god willing I will be with the before you are aware .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.43

I haue been to look for stufe for y=r= bedde KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.44

and haue sent downe paternes for you to choose which you like best .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.45

Thay are the neerest to the patourne that wee can finde .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.46

If you lack anything accept my company you are to blame not to lett me
knowe of it , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.47

for my selfe being only yours the rest doe followe .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,56.48

Thus in hast Intreating the to be merry and the more merry to think thou
hast <P_57> him in thy armes that had rather be with you then in any
place vnder heaven ; KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.49

and so I rest Thy dear loving husband for ever Tho: Knyvett .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.50

Houborn KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.51

26 Nove: 1621 . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.52

To his deerest loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Ashwell Thorp give these .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.53

Leave this at Windham to be sent as aforesaide .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.54

<heading:edcomment:4>

Sweet harte my entire love remembred vnto the . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.56

It is no litle joy to me to heere of thy wellfare , and our children .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.57

I pray god continue it . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.58

I doe purpose god willing to be with the on saturday nighte .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.59

My busines with Jones falls out still vntowardly , ther being a compacte
of knavery amongst them to defraud the creditors KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.60

but I hope to prevaile for my mony notwithstanding in a short time .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.61

I haue made inquiry of the land of Starbourg , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.62

and haue spoken with Beareblock , which M=r=. Seriant Richardson did
take very ill , fearing least I had made an agreement with him for his
statute , which I would to god I had . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.63

I can@ @not tell yett how we shall agree KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.64

but as neere as I can I will deale to our best advantage .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.65

My Lo: Knyvett lyes very weake still KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.66

but thay that are about him saith he is much better since sunday then he
was , which god increas and , if it be his will , restore him to his
former health againe to our comforts . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.67

Y=r= gowne and things are a making , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.68

but will not be done against whittsunday , which fault I must confess I
deserue to be chidden for , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.69

but I hope it wil@ @be but gentill when I come home .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.70

All y=e= weare at court is plaine white aprons , among the great Ladys .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.71

Thus deer harte commending vs both and all ours to the protection of
Almighty god I rest Thy assuered loving husband till death Tho: Knyvett
. KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.72

June 4 . 1622 . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.73

Commend me to my playfellowe KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.74

and tell her that wascoats are quite out of fashion .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.75

To his most loving and deer wife m=is= Knyvett at Ashwell Thorpe , give
these . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.76

Leave this at Windham to be sent as before . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,57.77

<P_58>

<heading:edcomment:5>

My deerest harte , I received thy kinde letter , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.80

and returne the as true love and affection as can lodge in the hart of
mortallitye . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.81

I thanke god I got safe to London on saturday the fornoone ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.82

and am very kindely intertaind of my cousin Knyvett and his wife with
good cheer and good Lodging . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.83

I might have stayd my Journy a while longer if I had knowne it ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.84

for my cousin and my selfe going to the steward of Lambeth , we found
that by Judds and my vncles vnderhand dealing , the Jury haue given in
ther verdict and found my vncle heier to the moitye ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.85

but as yet he is not admitted , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.86

and the steward hath promised vs that he shall not be admitted till a
certaine time be past which we desirde . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.87

It is like to prove a very troublesome busines , if we doe not agree
quickly , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.88

but my cosin is absolute of the opinion that my cousin Abrahall shall
not recover against me . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.89

I am going this afternoone to m=is=. Hamden . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.90

I doe purpose to see y=r= mother also . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.91

My Journy into Spaine is stayd , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.92

for the neewes heer is that the Prince is comeing home with all speed ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.93

and this is certaine that 2 shipps with horsses and Tilting provision
are sent after and stayd . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.94

Some say the Prince is alredye married , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.95

other say noe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.96

It is sayd that the Queen of Bohemia is in a pitifull case , almost
distracted sinc the Princes going over . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.97

I pray god comfort her . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.98

Thus praying god to Bless the and thy houshould , commending my servis
to my Aunt Bell , I rest Thy most true loving husband till death Tho:
Knyvett . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.99

Chancery Lane KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.100

April 23. 1623 . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.101

I have sent you my key of my closett which I forgott ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.102

and I pray looke for 2 letters which my cousin Abrahall writ , one to my
selfe and the other to my cousin Knyvett , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.103

and send them to me . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.104

To his most assuered loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Hapton give these .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.105

Leave this at Robert Dyes of Wimonham to be sent according to the
direction . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.106

Norfolke . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,58.107

<P_59>

<heading:edcomment:6>

Sweet harte in great hast I commend my best love to the .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.110

I haue stayd till I feare the post showld be gone for things to send you
, KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.111

but I can@ @not gett them to send this weeke , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.112

but the next week you shal@ @be suer of them . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.113

I am going presently to y=r= mother , whoe is going to_morrowe morning
to the Bathe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.114

I heear say Anthony Knyvett is with you . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.115

I pray send him vp with all speed , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.116

for ther is one busines which he must doe before I can come downe ;
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.117

it is about y=r= wardshipp which if it be not lookt after may turne vs
to a great deale of trouble and charge . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.118

I have had 2 meetings with my vncle KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.119

but what shal@ @be done yet I knowe not because my cosin Abrahall is not
in towne . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.120

I pray tell Gorge Keeper I would have him sell the wood in middle woode
to the best advantage , according as he writt me worde .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.121

I am glade to heer of the kinde Answeare of my mother .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.122

For Clarkes kine I pray if thay be good , take them ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.123

and he and I will reckone for them at my retourne .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.124

I pray send mony for the horss to Horsnell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.125

I have sent you with this letter 12 ounz. of counterfeite ose ;
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.126

if thay be not of the right sise I can have them changd .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.127

Send me word which of the twist you will have of .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.128

Thus in hast commend my respect to my Aunte Bell ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.129

I rest Y=r= most true loving husband Tho: Knyvett .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.130

To his True loving wife m=is= Knyvett att Hapton , give these .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.131

Leave this letter at Robert Dyes of Windham to be sent .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.132

<heading:edcomment:7>

My deere harte , I can@ @not forgett the obligation that I am bound in
to the , that is to write to thee , which is the beste expression of my
true affection that I can afoorde thee in my absence .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.134

I have seen my mother , who I thanke her have yeelded me more respecte
then she haue vsed to doe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.135

I hope in god time will wear out all vnkindnes .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.136

I was also to see y=r= mother whoe it pleasd not to give me a sighte of
her , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.137

but it was happines inoughe for me to convers with y=r= sister Drury ,
who talkt at a strange rate , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,59.138

but <P_60> I had temper to heer her KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.139

and so parted vpon fayer termes , onely wishing them a happy retourne ,
hopeing the Bath water would coole ther bloods .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.140

The onely happy newes that I can send you of y=r= kindred is that y=r=
cousine Bourh is lately come over with great honor .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.141

He was the last sunday at Greenweech with the Kinge , who conferd the
honor of Knightwood vpon him , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.142

but what eles he haue done I doe not heer . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.143

I hope to make an end of all my busines this weeke , and to be with thee
the next . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.144

I haue sent divers things heer in a bundle , some for you and some for
my Aunte Bell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.145

I hope I have pleasd you that I may have more of y=r= costome .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.146

The rest of y=r= bill is makeing redy and also my sweetharts wascote .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.147

In the meane time pray her to accepte of that peece of burdseye to make
a rufe of , falling round with a litle sett , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.148

not to deepe is all the fashion . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.149

I have no skill in buing of lace , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.150

therfore I hope she will pardon me . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.151

I can@ @not match my Aunts purles in all the towne ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.152

but I will have some for her if thay be to be got .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.153

I did y=r= messuage to m=r= Towesend , who is grown so brisk , as no
grownd can hould him . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.154

Y=r= Nurss Keeper will be redy to wayte on you at the time appointed .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.155

S=r= Francis Lee and S=r= Phillippe Cary are harde at it for that wich
was truly meante to thee and me , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.156

but <paren> gods will be done <$$paren> I hope he hath in store for vs
sufficient . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.157

I have no more to say , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.158

but my everlasting love rest with thee , and that love that makes me but
halfe my selfe till I be with the , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.159

and thus praying for a blessing for thine and mine I rest Thy most
faythfull loving husband Tho: Knyvett . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.160

I praye remember my servis to my Aunte Bell KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.161

and tell her for Neewes that shee must provide clouts ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.162

for ther is hopefull Issue towards at the Tower .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.163

I have a man preferrd to me by my cosin Knyvett who is very servisable
fellowe , and a very good Taylor both for men and weomen .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.164

If you will , I will take him , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.165

but then I would haue you put away Browne alias Griffin my man .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.166

I pray send me word what you thinke of it . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.167

To his deerly beeloved wife M=is= Kynvett at Hapton give these ,
Norfolke . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.168

Leave this letter at Windham , at Robert Dyes to be sent accordingly
{COM:preceding_word_"accordingly"_emended} . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,60.169

<P_61>

<heading:edcomment:8>

Sweet Harte <paren> thankes be god <$$paren> we are come safe to London
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.172

And I am very sory I came no sooner to have heard the cause between S=r=
Phillipp Carye and S=r= Fra: Lee , which began on thursday last and held
till saturday , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.173

and it is ordred very well for S=r= Phillipp , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.174

for the land is to be devided between the chilldren , whether it be a
match or no . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.175

S=r= Fran: is not so much deiected as cast downe ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.176

and swears he will never goe to Lawe againe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.177

James Pepper and olde Doll have browght m=is= Hambden into a faier case
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.178

for shee is like to loose Stanwell presently . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.179

She hath caried her selfe very partially in this busines , for which she
will goe neere to smart , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.180

for she hath lost S=r= Phillipp Cary , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.181

and he doth propose to prosequte her lease presently .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.182

Little Cromwell hath lost his parte cleane . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.183

My Lady Knyvett@ @s will was cald in open court Paddyes will ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.184

and was almost proved so . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.185

I could tell thee howe S=r= Francis , the night before the heering ,
made a great feast for his councell , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.186

and ther the busines was debated , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.187

and ther it went cleerly of S=r= Fr: his side , S=r= Randoll Crewe being
Judge , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.188

but the next day the case was altered . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.189

Thus we see what wrangling ther is for the things of this world , which
, if god had seen good for vs , might have been ours ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.190

but his will be done . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,61.191

Oh god sweet harte heer fell out on sunday last the lamentablest
accident that ever was heard of , at the French Embassadors house in
Blacke Friers , a great <P_62> number of Papist being at masse and to
heer a sermon preched by an english Jesuite whose name was Wrighte .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.192

In the midst of his sermon the house fell downe KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.193

and slewe aboue a_100 persons in the place , besides a great manye that
weare mained {TEXT:mained_in_ms.} , and some dead since .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.194

The Preest that preached was beaten all in peeces .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.195

Ther wear divers of good worth in the house , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.196

but we can@ @not heer certainely what thay weare , onely 2 Ladyes , one
the Lady Webbe and the Lady Hutton . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.197

Doctor Moore , a Phisition , a great Papist was slaine ther .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.198

It was a most fearefull Judgment of god . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.199

God of his mercy give vs grace to make good vse of it .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.200

Yet for all this the papists gives out that it was a plotte of the
puritanes , so insible {TEXT:sic} are thay of the heinous offence
committed against our good god , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.201

but suer I am it will be a great blowe to the Catholicke cause ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.202

for many that wear that way affected are stricken with a great amazement
. KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.203

Ther wear divers that went onely to heare and see the manner of it , of
which some escaped , that wear perswaded to goe heer the sermon ,
because it was in english . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.204

His text was out of St. Math: Thou shalt not come out thenc till thou
hast payde the vttermost farthing . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.205

So much for this fearfull accident . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.206

For other newes I can tell you y=r= Nephewe Brooke is married to a fine
gentlewoman , my Lo: Dacres his sister , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.207

but what portion I can@ @not tell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.208

Y=r= sister Drury hath recovered 100@ @=l= per_ann: and 400@ @=l= in
mony out of her husbands estate . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.209

Y=r= 2 Neeces m=is= Carr and lusty Bess hath recovered one 3000@ @=l= ,
and the other 2000@ @=l= , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.210

but from whome I can@ @not tell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.211

These are strange things , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.212

and I would have you wonder at them the more because thay be very true .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.213

Thus wishing all happines to thee and thine I rest Thy faithfull loving
Husband Tho: Knyvett . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.214

Commend my servis to my much honored widdowe KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.215

and tell her I make as much hast as possibly I can home .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.216

My tenants of Staines and I haue triall this day with S=r= Henry Spiller
. KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.217

God send vs good Luck . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.218

M=is= Hamden and my cosin Tho: Knyvett are mightyty falne out by James
Peppers meanes and Doll by whom she is to much ruled as all her freinds
say . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.219

I pray make Kate looke in all the littel pocketts of my breeches for my
silver seale KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.220

and send it me for a token . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.221

To his most deer & loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Hapton give these .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.222

Leaue this at Wyndhame to be conveyed as aboue .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,62.223

<P_63>

<heading:edcomment:9>

Sweet harte I am very gladde to heare of all y=r= good healths .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.226

I thanke god my busines goes on resonably well .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.227

My cosin Knyvett is so delatorye otherwise I showld soone have beene at
home againe , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.228

but I hope to be with the about Saturday come senight at the furthest .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.229

Heer is no neewes worth the sending . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.230

I tould my cosin Hunne of my Auntes desire KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.231

and he says he saith he hath not spoken with Pettus yet .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.232

I pray send me word whether Bishoppe hath payde the monye or no .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.233

I would not have that mony payde which Kinge writ for vntill I knowe
whether it be due or no {SIC:on} . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.234

I am in great hast , KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.235

therfore I can not write so much as I would . Wherfore praying to our
good god to blesse vs and all our actions , I rest , Thy true loving
husband Tho: Knyvett . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.236

I pray remember my due respecte to my widdowe and as duty bindes me my
servis to my brace of virgins . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.237

To his most assuered loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Hapton give these .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.238

Leave this letter at Windham to be sent . KNYVETT-1624-E2-H,63.239

