<BEGIN_kpaston-1625-e2-h>

<P_65>

<heading:edcomment:33_LADY_KATHERINE_PASTON_TO_WILLIAM_PASTON>

To my beloued William paston these be deliuered at Cambridge
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.4

My good Child the Lord {COM:preceding_word_"Lord"_emended} blese the
ever more in all thy goinges ovtt and thy Cominges in . euen in all thy
ways words and words , for his mercy sake : KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.5

I was very glad to heer by your first letter that you wer so saffly
arriued at your wished portt . but more glade to reade thy Louinge
promises to parforme my desiers : which I hope in god shall allways
redownd to thy cheefest good bothe for this , and the Liffe to come .
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.6

and remember that now is the cheefest time to gayne the truest good
bothe for sowll and body : KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.7

your Cunditt of Comfort tells you : that : " the seeds which now in
youth you sowe : " " springe vp and sprout increase and grow : "
wherfore Labor to sowe : | KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.8

for your grownd is as the tilled earthe , KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.9

if you sowe good seed , you shall reape a plentifull and comfortable
Crope : KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.10

but if it shold lie still with_out good seed , it doth naturally bringe
forthe noysom weeds : | KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.11

I coold wish that you wold settell your self to certin howers tasks
euery day you rise : KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.12

and those howld your self too with_out any wearines :
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.13

the vse of it wold make it bothe easy and pleasent to you : |
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.14

but it may be at the first it will seem Laborious to you :
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.15

but you must remember . that the sonns of Adam wear borne to digge and
delue : euen in the sweat of our browes : | KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.16

Likewis wisdom is not fownd KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.17

but is as hidden treasuer . which must be digged for affter much scerch
to finde it out : | KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.18

this I thought good to put the in minde of . veryily
{COM:preceding_word_"veryily"_emended} beleuinge thou wilt doe this for
my sake but more cheefly for thyn owne : that I may receive
{COM:preceding_word_"receive"_emended} the from that plase adorned bothe
with devine and humayne Learninge to my sowls comfort
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.19

for nothinge in this Liffe can be so cordiall to me as . shall@ @be thy
vertuous and Ciuill behavior {COM:preceding_word_"behavior"_emended}

and now I thanke the for thy kinde token sent me in your first letter :
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.21

and allso I haue received two other letters this last by Iohnsons . by
whom I did not wright , becawse this mesenger will be with you sooner
than he : | in all which of thy most louinge letters I haue thy
faythefull promises redubled . wherfor I haue no doupt of the
parformanc of them seinge thay be allwas in thy minde : |
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.22

Your father comende him to the KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.23

and doe acsepet kindly of the token you sent him ,
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.24

he sends you this 10 s for a remembranc of his Love :
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,65.25

and ascept <P_66> of this other from me till a better com :
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,66.26

your brother is very well , KPASTON-1625-E2-H,66.27

and have sent you a letter of his own indittinge as you may se .
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,66.28

but mr brend was his clarke : KPASTON-1625-E2-H,66.29

he tells you all the newes is sturinge : KPASTON-1625-E2-H,66.30

I will conclude as I begane with my harty prayers to the allmighty for
all true hapines to be mulltiplied to the bothe now and ever
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,66.31

farwell my sweet will : for this time : | by thy louinge mother
Katherine Paston KPASTON-1625-E2-H,66.32

remember my good respect to your worthy master : |
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,66.33

Linnicars' watter worke and his glasinge worke dothe very well : as may
be : KPASTON-1625-E2-H,66.34

<P_77>

<heading:edcomment:49_LADY_KATHERINE_PASTON_TO_WILLIAM_PASTON>

To my most beloued sonne William Paston these I pray ye at Corpus Christ
Colledge Cambridg KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.37

My good chilld the lord blese the ever : | KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.38

I was glad to heer by Phillup of thy good healthe and allso by mr
Roberts letter to vnderstand of thy wellfare every way : the hope of the
continuanc of which , dothe still cheer me every way : |
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.39

thy father haue bine very ill with his owld truble in his Legge so that
he haue kepte his bede with it this 5: or 6: days ,
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.40

but now god be thanked it is on the mendinge hand
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.41

but yett he can not indure to sitt vp : | KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.42

your brother and all good frindes heer are well ,
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.43

I hope thow doest keep good fiers . this cowld wether .
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.44

for it is bothe comfortable and howlsum : KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.45

heer haue bine much lose heerabout with these great windes and ill
wether ; KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.46

diuers botts with wheat which was to be deliuered for the kinges
provision at Yarmouth are sunke in the riuer , which is the owners lose
and not the kings : | KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.47

I was sory to heere of tom harstons beinge ill , KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.48

but hope well of his recouery : KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.49

I did wright to the the last satterday when I had very littel time to
say any thinge for hast : KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.50

Commend me very kindly to good mr Roberts KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.51

I doe not know whether he shall need a new supply :
KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.52

yett before our Lady : I will sende so soon as the wether breake vp to
know how the squars goe KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.53

in the mean time I pray god blese the KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.54

farwell sweet harte to thy owne selfe : | KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.55

thy most louinge Mother Katherine Pason KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.56

My Neec Knyvett hathe a yonge soone KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.57

and is very well : | KPASTON-1625-E2-H,77.58

