<BEGIN_langf-1696-e3-h>

<P_29>

<heading>

CHAP. IV . LANGF-1696-E3-H,29.4

OF INOCULATING . LANGF-1696-E3-H,29.5

<$$heading>

<font> Sect. <$$font> 1 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,29.7

About a fortnight before or after <font> Midsummer <$$font> <paren>
which is the best time , though it may be done from the beginning of
<font> May <$$font> till <font> August <$$font> <$$paren> when you have
pitch'd upon such <font> stocks <$$font> as are fit to be <font>
inoculated <$$font> , choose out a strong and <font> well liking branch
<$$font> , or <font> shoot <$$font> of that <font> years growth <$$font>
upon a Tree that bears such kind of <font> fruit <$$font> as you would
by this operation produce , LANGF-1696-E3-H,29.8

and about the middle , or lower end of it , <paren> for the top will be
too tender <$$paren> fix upon a <font> leaf <$$font> , that hath a fresh
and fair <font> bud <$$font> growing out betwixt it and the bark ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,29.9

and about half an inch below , and above the <font> bud <$$font> , cut
off the <font> branch <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-H,29.10

and so you will have a piece of it about an inch long remaining , with a
<font> bud <$$font> and a <font> leaf <$$font> on ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,29.11

this you must <font> cleave <$$font> just through the midst , so as the
<font> bud <$$font> may be directly in the middle of the one half ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,29.12

and then snip off a part of the <font> leaf <$$font> , or the whole
leaving the stalk : LANGF-1696-E3-H,29.13

and holding it by the remainder , clap it to a smooth place on the stock
; LANGF-1696-E3-H,29.14

and with a <P_30> Pen-knife score out , on each side of it , so much of
the stock as it covers , or rather a little broader <paren> because when
the <font> bark <$$font> on which the <font> bud <$$font> is , is taken
off from its own <font> wood <$$font> and applyed to the stock , it will
cover a wider space of the stock than it did before ; <$$paren>
LANGF-1696-E3-H,30.15

after you have thus marked your stock , with-draw the Scion again ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,30.16

& cut the <font> bark <$$font> through where you had marked it ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,30.17

then cut the <font> bark cross <$$font> and <font> straight <$$font> ,
from the uppermost end of one <font> score <$$font> to the upper end of
the <font> other <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-H,30.18

and cut the <font> bark <$$font> again <font> cross <$$font> and <font>
straight <$$font> , from one <font> score <$$font> to the <font> other
<$$font> , but not so low as the lower ends of the <font> scores
<$$font> by a quarter of an inch , LANGF-1696-E3-H,30.19

then take the oblong square piece of <font> bark <$$font> , that is cut
on every side quite off the Stock , LANGF-1696-E3-H,30.20

and raise up that part of the bark that remains betwixt the side <font>
scores <$$font> , at the bottom of the work , from the <font> wood
<$$font> , till you come to the lower ends of the side <font> scores
<$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-H,30.21

Take then a Goose-quill , cut in the fashion of an <font> Apple Scoop
<$$font> , or <font> Scraper <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-H,30.22

and having with your Nail a little loosened the upper part of the <font>
bark <$$font> that is on the Scion , thrust the <font> quill <$$font>
betwixt the <font> bark <$$font> and the <font> wood <$$font> , holding
it close to the <font> wood <$$font> , that it may separate them ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,30.23

and take off with the <font> bark <$$font> a little <font> wood <$$font>
or <P_31> <font> root <$$font> of the <font> bud <$$font> over against
it : LANGF-1696-E3-H,31.24

If you see a <font> hole <$$font> on the inside over against the <font>
bud <$$font> , when you have taken the bark off , <paren> which is
seldom <$$paren> cast it away , that little labour is lost ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,31.25

and try another till you find it otherwise . LANGF-1696-E3-H,31.26

Then put in the lower end of that <font> Bark <$$font> or <font> Scion
<$$font> betwixt the <font> bark <$$font> that was raised on the Stock
and the Wood , LANGF-1696-E3-H,31.27

and so bind it on the Stock gently with <font> Woollen-yarn <$$font> ,
or <font> narrow shreds <$$font> of <font> Linen-cloth <$$font> , or
<font> gentle Stuff <$$font> , or with <font> Basses <$$font> , or
<font> Bast <$$font> , of which the <font> Russia Mats <$$font> are made
, but so that the <font> Scion <$$font> may lie close to the <font> wood
<$$font> of the <font> stock <$$font> that was made bare ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,31.28

and have a special care that you hurt not the <font> bud <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,31.29

<font> Sect. <$$font> 2 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,31.30

There are some other ways of <font> inoculating <$$font> used ,
differing only in the manner of the cut both in the <font> bark <$$font>
of the Stock , and of the <font> Scion <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-H,31.31

And first , some proceeding in all other things as is before directed ,
cut the Bark out of the whole length of the side <font> scores <$$font>
, LANGF-1696-E3-H,31.32

and apply the <font> Scion <$$font> to the disbarked place .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,31.33

Secondly , Others cut one slit only , down the bark of the <font> Stock
<$$font> , and another <font> cross <$$font> the top of it , like a
great T : LANGF-1696-E3-H,31.34

when this is done , they prepare the <P_32> <font> Scion <$$font> or
<font> bark <$$font> as before directed , <paren> only cutting it
sharp_pointed at the lower end before they take the <font> bud <$$font>
off its <font> wood <$$font> <$$paren> LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.35

then raise the <font> bark <$$font> of the <font> Stock <$$font> up on
each side the <font> slit <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.36

and put in the Scion , beginning at the top and sliding it downward
gently , LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.37

and so bind the bark gently upon it . LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.38

<font> This is the common way used among Gardiners . <$$font>
LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.39

<font> Thirdly <$$font> , You may make the <font> cross cut <$$font> in
the middle of the downright <font> score <$$font> on the Stock ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.40

and lifting up the four corners of the <font> bark <$$font> , and making
the Scion sharp at both ends , put it under the bark of the Stock at
both ends , LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.41

and then bind it . LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.42

But in doing this there is danger of hurting the Scion .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.43

<font> Fourthly <$$font> , Mr. <font> Rea <$$font> commends the making
the <font> cross cut <$$font> at the lower end of the <font> down_right
cut <$$font> , and having opened the sides , put in the Scion upward ,
being made sharp at the upper end only . LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.44

Thus much to satisfie the curiosity of such as have a mind to make tryal
of every way ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.45

but the first that I have described at large , I take to be the best .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,32.46

<P_33>

<heading>

CHAP. V . LANGF-1696-E3-H,33.49

OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING INOCULATING . LANGF-1696-E3-H,33.50

<$$heading>

<font> Sect. <$$font> 1 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,33.52

Lest one <font> bud <$$font> fail , or any mischance break it , put
<font> two <$$font> in every <font> Stock <$$font> , but not directly
<font> under <$$font> one another , on the same side of the <font> stock
<$$font> : LANGF-1696-E3-H,33.53

The <font> branch <$$font> or <font> shoot <$$font> , you cut one <font>
Scion <$$font> off , may yield you several . LANGF-1696-E3-H,33.54

About a <font> month <$$font> after the <font> inoculating <$$font> , or
sooner , if you perceive the <font> bark <$$font> swell where the
binding is , cut off the binding . If it grow it will fix to the <font>
Stock <$$font> , keep its colour , LANGF-1696-E3-H,33.55

and that part of the <font> leaf <$$font> and <font> stalk <$$font> that
was left will drop off , and the <font> bud <$$font> appear fair ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,33.56

then sometime before the next spring cut off the <font> top <$$font> of
the <font> stock <$$font> a hands breadth above the place it was <font>
inoculated <$$font> at , and all the <font> side-branches <$$font> ,
that grow any where upon the <font> Stock <$$font> ; and at Spring the
<font> bud <$$font> will put forth , LANGF-1696-E3-H,33.57

and if any other <font> sprouts <$$font> of <font> buds <$$font> appear
on the <font> stock <$$font> , cut them off . LANGF-1696-E3-H,33.58

If the first <font> inoculation <$$font> fail , or the <font> buds
<$$font> die , the <font> stocks <$$font> may be <font> inoculated
<$$font> again next Summer ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,33.59

and of such as are <font> inoculated <$$font> <P_34> timely in the year
, it may be sometimes seen whether they grow or not , time enough to
<font> inoculate <$$font> them again the same year .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,34.60

<font> Apricocks <$$font> will have <font> buds <$$font> sooner ready
than other fruit ; so that you may begin with them , and follow with
other kinds . LANGF-1696-E3-H,34.61

<font> Sect. <$$font> 2 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,34.62

<font> Stocks <$$font> raised of <font> Peach-stones <$$font> are
commonly big enough to be <font> inoculated <$$font> the <font> second
<$$font> Summer , sometimes the <font> first <$$font> after they are set
; LANGF-1696-E3-H,34.63

when they , or any other <font> Stocks <$$font> are an <font> inch
<$$font> and half in compass , or thereabouts , they are big enough to
be <font> inoculated <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-H,34.64

Those you intend for <font> Wall <$$font> , or <font> Dwarf-trees
<$$font> , are to be <font> inoculated <$$font> within a <font> handful
<$$font> of the ground , and not Pruned at all till you remove them ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,34.65

and then you will better see what@ @'s necessary to be cut off :
LANGF-1696-E3-H,34.66

And these you may remove after <font> one <$$font> years growth , or
<font> two <$$font> with more safety . LANGF-1696-E3-H,34.67

If you <font> inoculate <$$font> any <font> Plums <$$font> , <font>
Cherries <$$font> , <font> Pears <$$font> or other <font> Fruit <$$font>
, that you intend for an Orchard , or other place , for tall standards ,
you may do it higher on the <font> stocks <$$font> , and Prune these up
in the <font> Nursery <$$font> , and let them grow there three or four
years <paren> according as they grow in height <$$paren> before they be
removed . LANGF-1696-E3-H,34.68

<P_35>

After <font> Stocks <$$font> that are <font> inoculated <$$font> have
made <font> one <$$font> or <font> two <$$font> years growth , you must
cut off the head of the <font> stock <$$font> , that remain'd above the
<font> bud <$$font> at your first cutting it : LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.70

Cut it close to the new branch , that it may grow over the cut ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.71

let it be cut a little slope , and <font> clay'd <$$font> over , if you
desire the <font> branch <$$font> should quickly cover it ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.72

and the sooner it doth the better . LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.73

<font> Sect. <$$font> 3 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.74

Care must be had in choosing <font> branches <$$font> , or <font> shoots
<$$font> , from which you are to have your <font> buds <$$font> , that
are of strong growth , the Bark firm , and not spungy ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.75

suffer them to fade as little as may be , before you use them ; and if
the fruit you design to raise , be at such a distance that you can@ @not
have <font> buds <$$font> to <font> inoculate <$$font> the same day they
are cut , put them in wet <font> Moss <$$font> , or <font> Grass
<$$font> in a Box , and so they will keep a day and a night very well .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.76

<font> Nectarines , Peaches <$$font> , and <font> Apricocks <$$font> ,
are seldom raised otherwise than by <font> inoculation <$$font> ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.77

I knew an <font> Apricock graffed <$$font> in the <font> cleft <$$font>
, as likely as might be to grow , LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.78

but failed ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.79

I have heard of one <font> graffed <$$font> in the <font> bark <$$font>
that grew . LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.80

<font> Cherries <$$font> and <font> Pears <$$font> take very sure ,
being on young fresh stocks whose bark is not thick .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,35.81

<P_36>

The <font> bark <$$font> of <font> Scions <$$font> taken from some
<font> Plums <$$font> , is so tender and spungy , they will often
miscarry when <font> inoculated <$$font> ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.83

from such one would choose rather to raise by Graffing ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.84

but most <font> Plums <$$font> will hit very well being inoculated .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.85

<font> Scions <$$font> of <font> Apples <$$font> fails for the most part
, their Bark being tender , and <font> buds weak <$$font> ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.86

but to preserve kind of a dying <font> Apple-tree <$$font> , that I
could not well cut a <font> Scion <$$font> to Graff off , I have taken a
hungry <font> bud <$$font> of the year foregoing , LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.87

and it hath taken , and grown very well . LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.88

<font> Pears <$$font> and <font> Apples <$$font> succeed very well
<paren> and the latter best <$$paren> by taking a <font> bud <$$font>
from a shoot of the year foregoing to inoculate with .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.89

The skill in finding <font> buds <$$font> that are fit for it , which
must be short and not likely to make <font> buds <$$font> for <font>
blossoms <$$font> is the only difficulty . LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.90

There is a considerable advantage in it , LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.91

<font> viz. <$$font> Being done in <font> May <$$font> or the beginning
of <font> June <$$font> , and part of the head of the <font> stock
<$$font> cut off , the <font> Bud <$$font> of the {COM:sic} shoots the
same year , LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.92

and becomes so strong , that it makes a far better growth the succeeding
year , than otherwise it would have done ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.93

neither is such <font> shoot <$$font> liable to so many hurtful
casualties , as a <font> bud <$$font> is before the ensuing spring .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,36.94

And lastly , if it should miscarry <P_37> <paren> as it seldom doth
<$$paren> it will be perceived by <font> Midsummer <$$font> ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.95

and the <font> stock <$$font> may be <font> enoculated <$$font> again
the same year . LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.96

<font> Sect. <$$font> 4 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.97

Where <font> inoculating <$$font> succeeds well , it is to be prefer'd
before Graffing . LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.98

1 . Because the <font> stock <$$font> will be big enough to <font>
inoculate <$$font> sooner by two or three <font> years <$$font> , than
to graff , LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.99

and your <font> Plant <$$font> groweth much faster , after the Nature is
so altered , than it did before , LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.100

and will be sooner ready to <font> Transplant <$$font> , than {SIC:and}
if it be suffered to grow <font> two <$$font> or <font> three <$$font>
years longer , as it must be before it will be fit to be <font> graffed
<$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.101

2 . It makes a <font> sounder Tree <$$font> than one that is <font>
graffed <$$font> , especially in the cleft ; because it covereth the
<font> Stock <$$font> speedily and well . LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.102

3 . It <font> hurts <$$font> not the <font> Stock <$$font> so much as
<font> graffing <$$font> ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.103

and if it chance to fail , it may be <font> inoculated <$$font> next
<font> year <$$font> again , and sometimes the same <font> year <$$font>
. LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.104

4 . It@ @'s more <font> speedy <$$font> , <font> easie <$$font> , and
<font> delightful <$$font> than <font> Graffing <$$font> ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.105

and may be practis'd by <font> Gentlemen <$$font> , who in <font> June
<$$font> may lie on the ground and do it ; whereas they can@ @not bear
the cold without danger of taking {SIC:taing} hurt , in <font> February
<$$font> , or <font> March <$$font> , which is the chief <font> Graffing
<$$font> season . LANGF-1696-E3-H,37.106

<P_38>

<font> Sect. <$$font> 5 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,38.108

It is debated among <font> Planters <$$font> what <font> time <$$font>
of the <font> day <$$font> is best for <font> Inoculating <$$font> :
LANGF-1696-E3-H,38.109

I have heard an Ingenious person argue for the morning ; because there
passeth up much more <font> sap <$$font> , or <font> juice <$$font> , in
the <font> day <$$font> time , than in the <font> night <$$font> ; as
was observed by him in piercing the <font> Birch tree <$$font> , and
other <font> Trees <$$font> , to get the <font> liquor <$$font> , that
distills out of them , for Physical uses ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,38.110

and consequently the <font> bud inoculated <$$font> in the morning ,
must be more likely to grow , having the whole days plenty of <font> sap
<$$font> to invite it to unite with the <font> Stock <$$font> , than if
it be <font> inoculated <$$font> late in the day , and so must be
discouraged in its new habitation , by the niggardly provision of the
nights Sap . LANGF-1696-E3-H,38.111

If you follow this advice , you had best wrap some broad <font> leaves
<$$font> , or <font> Fearn <$$font> , about the <font> stock <$$font> ,
so as to shade the Scion from the scorching heat of the day following ,
to prevent its drying before the <font> Stock <$$font> hath undertaken
the charge of preserving it . LANGF-1696-E3-H,38.112

But this work may be done in the middle of the day , if the heat be not
<font> violent <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-H,38.113

and then you must <paren> as at all times you ought <$$paren> be very
quick in the doing of it . LANGF-1696-E3-H,38.114

<P_39>

And for all that hath been said before , the afternoon may be as good a
time as any ; because if the <font> bud <$$font> have less <font> liquor
<$$font> afforded it in the night , then the coolness of that time makes
it less thirsty ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,39.116

and as its thirst encreaseth by the heath of the next day , a more
plentiful stream will be very seasonable to satisfie it .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,39.117

<heading>

CHAP. VI . LANGF-1696-E3-H,39.119

<$$heading>

OF THE SEVERAL WAYS OF GRAFFING . LANGF-1696-E3-H,39.121

<$$heading>

<font> Sect. <$$font> 1 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,39.123

As there are several ways <paren> as you have seen <$$paren> of <font>
inoculating <$$font> , so are there of Graffing , as now I come to let
you see ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,39.124

and the first I shall speak of is that which is called <font> Slicing
<$$font> , or <font> Packing <$$font> , which I shall describe here at
large , LANGF-1696-E3-H,39.125

and so it will serve in part , as a general direction for all .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,39.126

Cut off the <font> top <$$font> of your <font> Stock <$$font> in some
smooth straight place ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,39.127

if you do it with a <font> Hand-saw <$$font> , cut it smooth afterward
with your <font> Knife <$$font> , leaving the top flat and even .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,39.128

<P_40>

Then prepare your <font> Scion <$$font> or <font> Graff <$$font> , by
cutting it on one side , from the <font> joint <$$font> , or <font> seam
<$$font> , <paren> that is , at every years growth <$$paren> down
slope-wise in the <font> old wood <$$font> , till it@ @'s cut quite off
, that the slope may be about an inch long , or something more ,
observing its bent , that when the <font> Scion <$$font> is fixed to the
<font> Stock <$$font> it may stand almost upright ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,40.130

give a cut then cross through the <font> bark <$$font> at the top of the
slope , LANGF-1696-E3-H,40.131

and then cut a thin <font> chip <$$font> of the <font> slope <$$font>
upward to the <font> cross-cut <$$font> , that there may be a <font>
shoulder <$$font> to rest on the top of the <font> Stock <$$font> ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,40.132

but cut not this <font> shoulder <$$font> too deep ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,40.133

little more than through the <font> bark <$$font> will be enough ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,40.134

and this will cause a little rising in the sloped part , which you must
cut down , that the whole <font> slope <$$font> may be plain and smooth
, without dints or risings , and lie even to the side of the <font>
Stock <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-H,40.135

Cut then the top of the Scion off , close about a <font> bud <$$font> ,
about four inches above the <font> shoulder <$$font> if it be for a
<font> standard <$$font> Tree , two <font> buds <$$font> above the clay
being full enough ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,40.136

but for <font> Dwarf <$$font> , or <font> Wall-trees <$$font> , you may
let the <font> Scion <$$font> be six inches long with several <font>
buds <$$font> that they may shoot forth many branches , and spread from
the very Stock . LANGF-1696-E3-H,40.137

<P_41>

The <font> Scion <$$font> or <font> Graff <$$font> thus prepared ; lay
the cut part of the <font> Scion <$$font> on the <font> West <$$font> ,
or <font> South-west <$$font> side of the Stock , LANGF-1696-E3-H,41.139

and so measure and mark the breadth and length of it ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,41.140

then cut away so much of the bark of the stock , as the cut part of the
Scion may fit , drawing your Knife upward ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,41.141

but as the <font> stock <$$font> , is bigger , and the bark thicker than
that on the Scion , so the <font> chip <$$font> must be longer , and
broader , LANGF-1696-E3-H,41.142

or else the passage for the <font> sap <$$font> in the <font> stock
<$$font> and Scion , <paren> which is chiefly betwixt the <font> bark
<$$font> and the <font> wood <$$font> <$$paren> will not meet together
<paren> as in the work you will easily see <$$paren> which should be
aimed at . LANGF-1696-E3-H,41.143

Then lay the cut part of the Scion on the cut part of the Stock ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,41.144

and bind it on with course <font> Woollen-yarn <$$font> , <font> Basses
<$$font> , or the inward peeling of the <font> Witch-tree <$$font> ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,41.145

if you bind with such a material as will not be loose , or rotten by
Midsummer , about that time give it a cut cross-wise with a Knife to set
the Prisoners at liberty . LANGF-1696-E3-H,41.146

Have in readiness good <font> Clay <$$font> , free from Stones , mixt
with long Hay , LANGF-1696-E3-H,41.147

and daub it about the Stock and Scion , a full inch above and below the
head of the Stock , LANGF-1696-E3-H,41.148

work it up round the Scion till it be sharp at the top , that the rain
water may run <P_42> down it ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,42.149

and with a Knife or little <font> trowel <$$font> dipt in water smooth
over the clay ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,42.150

in doing this be sure not to displace the Scion .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,42.151

Thus you may Graff <font> Pears <$$font> , <font> Plums <$$font> ,
<font> Cherries <$$font> , and <font> Apples <$$font> , if it be before
the <font> bark <$$font> of the Stock will part from the wood of them ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,42.152

for when it will , the next way following is better .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,42.153

<P_114>

<heading>

CHAP. XII . LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.156

OF THE ANNOYANCES ABOUT FRUIT-TREES , AND OF SOME MISTAKES IN PLANTING
AND ORDERING THEM . LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.157

<$$heading>

<font> Sect. <$$font> 1 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.159

The nature of the soil is the chief cause of <font> Moss <$$font> and
<font> Canker <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.160

and therefore without altering the <font> one <$$font> you can scarce
prevent the other ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.161

However you may scrape or with a <font> hair-cloth <$$font> rub the
<font> moss <$$font> off , after rain , or <paren> as some say <$$paren>
burn it with a bottle of straw under the Tree . LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.162

All <font> Canker <$$font> , <font> filth <$$font> , and <font> worms
<$$font> must be picked clean off , LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.163

and bind some clay well mixt with <font> hay <$$font> about the <font>
canker'd <$$font> place : LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.164

If the Tree grow but poorly , which is for the most part caused by the
ill temper of the <font> soil <$$font> , open the ground about , the
<font> roots <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.165

and put in some <font> manure <$$font> proper to cure it .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.166

<font> Slitting <$$font> the <font> bark <$$font> is an excellent
additional help to most of the foresaid evils , LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.167

and also for <font> bark-binding <$$font> , some advice that the <font>
bark <$$font> be cut according to the <font> grain <$$font> of it , as
in <font> Apple-trees <$$font> , <font> Pear-trees <$$font> , &c.
<font> straight <$$font> down ; in <font> Cherries <$$font> , &c.
<font> round <$$font> about the Trees . LANGF-1696-E3-H,114.168

<P_115>

But I have found in the same land , some kinds of <font> Fruit-trees
<$$font> very subject to some of these <font> evils <$$font> ; and
others prosper very well ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,115.170

when once you discover this , <paren> because it@ @'s utterly in vain to
make ground and trees , of different <font> genius <$$font> agree
together <$$paren> you must make it your business by degrees , to change
your Trees , till you have left none against which your <font> soil
<$$font> beareth such an implacable hatred , and furnish it with such as
will flourish , and be fruitful . LANGF-1696-E3-H,115.171

If any of your Trees are <font> galled <$$font> , by being bound to
<font> stakes <$$font> , or by <font> thorns <$$font> , or otherwise ,
lay some <font> clay <$$font> upon the gall'd place
LANGF-1696-E3-H,115.172

and wrap <font> hay-bands <$$font> about them . LANGF-1696-E3-H,115.173

Big <font> Plants <$$font> also , that upon their removal have had their
tops cut off , are apt to die from the place they were cut off at , to
the next <font> sprig <$$font> , or <font> branch <$$font> upon them ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,115.174

these dead parts ought to be cut off close to the next good <font> twig
<$$font> or <font> shoot <$$font> , and covered with <font> clay
<$$font> , as in <font> graffing <$$font> , that the head may be well
grown over , by such <font> twig <$$font> or <font> shoot <$$font> , and
the wet prevented of getting into the <font> pith <$$font> , to damage
the Tree . LANGF-1696-E3-H,115.175

<font> Sect. <$$font> 2 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,115.176

<font> Hares <$$font> and <font> Rabbets <$$font> are very mischievous
to <font> Nurseries <$$font> , and young <font> Orchards <$$font> , by
<font> peeling <$$font> off the <font> bark <$$font> of the <font>
Plants <$$font> : LANGF-1696-E3-H,115.177

If your fence be a wall , or close <P_116> pale , or water , there@ @'s
little danger of them ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,116.178

but because such fences about <font> Orchards <$$font> are rare , and no
other can keep them out , some expedient must be made use of .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,116.179

Some have used <font> Hay-ropes <$$font> , bound about the Tree , from
the ground to a sufficient height ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,116.180

but this were endless in a <font> Nursery <$$font> ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,116.181

it may be done in an <font> Orchard <$$font> ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,116.182

but there are other ways to be preferred before it .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,116.183

Others therefore <font> dawb <$$font> the bodies of the trees over with
<font> Tar <$$font> , which being used alone , endangers the life of
very young <font> Plants <$$font> , and extreamly hardens the <font>
bark <$$font> , and otherwise hurts them , which evil is prevented by
mixing the <font> Tar <$$font> with any kind of Grease , and boiling
them on a fire , so as both may incorporate , LANGF-1696-E3-H,116.184

then with a brush , or little broom , daub over the body of the Tree ,
as high as <font> Hare <$$font> or <font> Rabbet <$$font> can reach ;
and if this be done in <font> November <$$font> , it will preserve the
<font> Trees <$$font> for that whole year , with that once doing , it
being the <font> winter time <$$font> only that they will feed upon the
<font> bark <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-H,116.185

Some use Grease alone , LANGF-1696-E3-H,116.186

and then it may require to be laid on <font> twice <$$font> in a Winter
. LANGF-1696-E3-H,116.187

<P_117>

Some thin stuff out of a <font> House of Office <$$font> , or the thick
tempered with Water , and brush'd on once in a Winter hath been often
used with good success . LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.189

Or the <font> White-wash <$$font> which Plasterers white Houses with ,
done once a Year over the Trees with a Brush , preserves them from
<font> Hares <$$font> , <font> Rabbits <$$font> , or <font> Deer
<$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.190

<font> Sect. <$$font> 3 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.191

If you find <font> Pismires <$$font> or <font> Ants <$$font> breed about
, or near the <font> roots <$$font> of any of your Trees , cast away the
Earth they lodge in , LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.192

and supply its place with some <font> stiff clay <$$font> ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.193

if they breed distant in several places , some direct to daub the Tree
about with <font> Tar <$$font> , that their Feet may be taken in it ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.194

but you heard already that@ @'s prejudicial to young Trees ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.195

but if they pester you extreamly , and your Tree be young , you may bind
a single <font> list <$$font> , or <font> shread <$$font> of <font>
Cloth <$$font> about it , LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.196

and once a week <paren> when <font> Buds <$$font> and <font> Blossoms
<$$font> are putting forth , for that is the chief time they prejudice
them <$$paren> <font> daub <$$font> the <font> Cloth <$$font> over with
<font> Tar <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.197

<font> Sect. <$$font> 4 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.198

<font> Moles <$$font> are to be kill'd , especially in Seed-plots and
Nurseries ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.199

Spring-traps ; or Box-traps are best to destroy them , not easily
describ'd , LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.200

but are now known almost generally . LANGF-1696-E3-H,117.201

<P_118>

I have heard that <font> Water Rats <$$font> will spoil a whole <font>
Nursery <$$font> , getting through <font> Moleholes <$$font> ; and
barking or eating the young <font> Roots <$$font> :
LANGF-1696-E3-H,118.203

I found several Roots so served ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,118.204

and it being near a <font> Fish-pond <$$font> , I suspected it was done
by them ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,118.205

but finding also a <font> Snake <$$font> in a hole among the Roots , I
knew not whether that might not be the Enemy . LANGF-1696-E3-H,118.206

<font> Efts <$$font> {HELSINKI:Ests} , or <paren> as some call them
<$$paren> <font> Askers <$$font> , are also said to be pernicious to
Trees ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,118.207

but these three last accidents are so rare and inconsiderable , that it@
@'s needless to labour much about Remedies against them , only as men
find them to destroy them . LANGF-1696-E3-H,118.208

<font> Sect. <$$font> 5 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,118.209

The greatest prejudice to <font> fruit <$$font> , is by <font> blastings
<$$font> , <font> frosts <$$font> immediately succeeding rain , <font>
Caterpillars <$$font> , or <font> black Flies <$$font> , that eat up
<font> buds <$$font> , <font> leaves <$$font> , and <font> blossoms
<$$font> : LANGF-1696-E3-H,118.210

There@ @'s one way used to help in all these cases , for <font>
Orchard-fruit <$$font> ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,118.211

but I know not how it should be useful for any but the last two , for
which I dare commend it . LANGF-1696-E3-H,118.212

And that is , that when in the Spring you perceive these <font>
Caterpillars <$$font> , or <font> Flies <$$font> appear , make fires of
something that will smoak , so near the <font> Orchard <$$font> , and in
such places that the wind may carry the <font> smoak <$$font> as much
through the Trees as may be . LANGF-1696-E3-H,118.213

A thing frequently used is <font> Hempsheaves <$$font> , <P_119> <paren>
as it@ @'s called <$$paren> being the stalk of the <font> Hemp <$$font>
, when the <font> tow <$$font> is separated from it ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,119.214

and it@ @s certainly very good ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,119.215

but bad <font> Chaff <$$font> ; <font> wet straw <$$font> , or <font>
moldy Hay <$$font> , or any thing of that nature may serve turn .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,119.216

<font> Snails <$$font> are pernicious to <font> Wall-fruit <$$font> ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,119.217

therefore destroy as many of them as you can , when they are best to be
discovered , which is early in the morning . LANGF-1696-E3-H,119.218

And to preserve your <font> Wall-fruit <$$font> from <font> blasting
winds <$$font> and <font> Frosts <$$font> ; it will be necessary to
cover them in the nights , and cold days by hanging before them <font>
Matts <$$font> or <font> Blankets <$$font> : LANGF-1696-E3-H,119.219

some stick <font> branches <$$font> of <font> broom <$$font> before the
<font> blossoms <$$font> and young tender <font> fruit <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,119.220

To preserve <font> ripe fruit <$$font> from <font> birds <$$font> ,
spread an old <font> Net <$$font> , before the <font> Wall-fruit
<$$font> , or upon the <font> Dwarf-trees <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,119.221

<font> Sect. <$$font> 6 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,119.222

I have endeavour'd to direct the Reader by true Rules , which if
observed , he would not fall into those vulgar Errors which are frequent
in practice ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,119.223

but because for want of warning , some people may continue in them ,
thinking they have a further knowledge or better Judgment , I shall
endeavour to refute those I have most taken notice off in use .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,119.224

<P_120>

1 . Some set <font> Trees <$$font> too deep , LANGF-1696-E3-H,120.226

and plead for it , that otherwise the Tree may be in danger of dying ,
if the next Summer prove very hot : LANGF-1696-E3-H,120.227

But to prevent that hazard it@ @'s better to raise Earth about it , and
cover it with Dung , Fearn , or Straw , and in the Summer with the Grass
mowed from Grass-plots , and set it not too deep whereby the Tree may
put forth its Roots in the upper Turf , which is generally the best Land
in all Ground . LANGF-1696-E3-H,120.228

For in some Land a deep hole will draw in Water in the Winter , which
standing under and about the Roots , may chill and starve them ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,120.229

other Lands in the bottom are <font> Rocky <$$font> ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,120.230

have a <font> Fox-bent <$$font> , <font> Cat-brain <$$font> , or <font>
stiff Clay <$$font> , and <font> binding Gravel <$$font> , unfit for
Trees to root in , LANGF-1696-E3-H,120.231

and yet may have that depth of Earth above it , that some <font>
Fruit-trees <$$font> being set light , may prosper reasonably well .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,120.232

2 . Others for curiosity use graffing several kinds of Fruit on one
Stock , which hath often this Evil , that the one kind <paren> being of
swifter growth than the other <$$paren> overtops and keeps under its
fellow . LANGF-1696-E3-H,120.233

But if a Man have a few Trees in a secure place , he may graff two or
three sorts on one Head of choice Summer <P_121> Fruit , whereof he is
content with a little Fruit of each kind of eating only ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,121.234

and by pruning he may make them grow somewhat equal .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,121.235

3 . Some out of curiosity <paren> instead of <font> Clay <$$font>
<$$paren> when they graff <font> Trees <$$font> , cover the Heads of the
Stocks with <font> Lime <$$font> mix'd with Hair ; others with <font>
Bees-wax <$$font> or some such things compounded ; the first of which
groweth so hard that the Stock can@ @not grow to cover , nor the <font>
Scion <$$font> enlarge it self as it would , LANGF-1696-E3-H,121.236

and the Lime kills often Stock and all , as will salt Clay , such as is
used on Drinking-Vessels ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,121.237

the latter is either melted by the heat of the Sun in Summer ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,121.238

and runs off the Stock , LANGF-1696-E3-H,121.239

and being thin , the heat of the Sun hardens the Sap which the Stock
puts up to a Crust , that it groweth not to bark or wood , as it should
do ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,121.240

and if it be compounded of so hard a substance that it melteth not , it
hath the like effect as the Lime : So that upon tryal , there is nothing
better than good Clay mix'd with long Hay ; and laid on somewhat thick ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,121.241

for that keeps it from the heat of the Sun , as well as too much wet ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,121.242

and with Hay it will keep on much longer than otherwise .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,121.243

<P_122>

4 . Many neglect keeping the Heads of Stocks clay'd after the first
time when they are graffed , LANGF-1696-E3-H,122.245

but it@ @'s very necessary to do it till the Stock be near covered ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,122.246

for it hastens it in covering , whereby the <font> Scions <$$font> grow
faster , and wet is prevented from the perishing the Stock .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,122.247

5 . Another Evil is , when Men set well grown Trees , that they must
cut off the Head where it may be an inch over ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,122.248

they consider not to cut it at a Branch , LANGF-1696-E3-H,122.249

and so the top often dieth a little at the Head ; whereas if they did
cut it off a little sloap at a Branch or small Sprig , and put Clay
thereon , as in graffing , that Branch would cover the top , and keep
the Heart sound . LANGF-1696-E3-H,122.250

If you do it not at the setting of the Tree , then the Year after , when
it hath put forth Branches , cut off the top sloap-wise , where it is
alive , at the uppermost Branch you would preserve , and then clay it :
You will find advantage in the growth of the top and soundness of the
body of the Tree . LANGF-1696-E3-H,122.251

6 . In pruning big Branches of any Tree , do it in <font> March
<$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-H,122.252

and cut it not so close to the Body as to hurt it , nor yet so long that
it be a Stump , LANGF-1696-E3-H,122.253

but leave it highest in the middle , LANGF-1696-E3-H,122.254

for then it will <P_123> not have so deep a hole in its growing to cover
, which otherwise it@ @'s apt to have , and to hold the wet .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,123.255

This pruning can be no ways so well done as with such a broad Chissel as
I have described . LANGF-1696-E3-H,123.256

7 . The first Summer after you have set a Tree , some let Shoots grow
out near the Butt , and in several places on the Body , though so low
that they never intend they shall continue . LANGF-1696-E3-H,123.257

These had best be cut off at the first springing out , that they rob not
the top of Sap . LANGF-1696-E3-H,123.258

If you have any high Standards , such as are proper to be planted in
Fields , or Forest Trees in Avenues , it will be necessary to have such
another Chissel ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,123.259

but instead of an Iron handle let it be made with a Socket , which fix
on a Staff about two or three yards long , LANGF-1696-E3-H,123.260

and let it have Edges likewise on the lower part on each side the Socket
; LANGF-1696-E3-H,123.261

with this you may , as you walk about your Trees , cut off such young
Shoots as grow out of the hands reach , and yet such as you would not
have continue , first cutting them upwards , and then with the other
Edge cutting downwards the little Tippet left on the upper <P_124> side
, that it be smooth , and even to the Body . LANGF-1696-E3-H,124.262

8 . I have known some Country Gardiners in pruning Wall-Fruit-trees
yearly cut off the young Shoots or Branches that grew side-ward , as
well as outward , from the Elder-wood , and leave the Wall almost bare ;
whereas it@ @'s those young Shoots chiefly that bear Fruit the Year
following : LANGF-1696-E3-H,124.263

And therefore the better to inform the Reader in Pruning , it will be
necessary to shew what Years Branches bear Fruit in each kind , or in
the most common sort of Fruit-trees . LANGF-1696-E3-H,124.264

1 . <font> Vines <$$font> and <font> Shrubs <$$font> , as <font>
Gooseberries <$$font> , <font> Currans <$$font> , &c. bear Fruit for
the most part on the Branches they put forth the same Year , so that in
pruning these you may cut off much of the <font> Shoots <$$font> of the
foregoing Year , and old <font> Wood <$$font> , as you see occasion ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,124.265

and there will be the more Sap to put forth fresh ones the Year after ,
provided you leave plenty of Buds for them to put forth at , and with
this Caution , that such as grow very luxurious in Wood are not apt to
bear , LANGF-1696-E3-H,124.266

and there the more you cut off , the more they will run into the same
Evil . LANGF-1696-E3-H,124.267

<P_125>

2 . <font> Stone Fruit-trees <$$font> , generally bear on the <font>
Branches <$$font> of the foregoing Year , LANGF-1696-E3-H,125.269

therefore leave a sufficient number of them . LANGF-1696-E3-H,125.270

3 . <font> Apple <$$font> and <font> Pear-trees <$$font> bear Fruit on
the <font> Branches <$$font> that are of two years growth before the
bearing year . LANGF-1696-E3-H,125.271

And thus you shall find it for the most part ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,125.272

and although <font> Fruit <$$font> may often in all these sorts seem to
be on older Wood than I mention , yet if you search into it you will
find <paren> where it seems so <$$paren> that it grows on some sort
short Stalk put forth as near <paren> as can be judged <$$paren> as I
have set it down . LANGF-1696-E3-H,125.273

You will therefore find it often necessary to practice the direction
formerly given in this Book of taking off some of the old Wood of Trees
, LANGF-1696-E3-H,125.274

<heading>

CHAP. 8 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,125.276

<$$heading>

<font> Sect. <$$font> 7 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,125.278

And when your Trees are young let them not fill the Wall so thick as
many Trees are apt to do , otherwise you will find many will not bear
well young , LANGF-1696-E3-H,125.279

and when they grow bigger you must cut them thinner , which will be
worse for the Tree . LANGF-1696-E3-H,125.280

Another Evil is common in suffering too much Fruit to grow upon Trees
<paren> especially Wall-Trees <$$paren> wherefore if it be so , pluck
off some where they stand <P_126> in Clusters , LANGF-1696-E3-H,126.281

Green <font> Apricocks <$$font> will serve for Tarts .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,126.282

These foregoing Observations may seem trivial and of small concern ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,126.283

but you will find a due observation of them will conduce much to the
health and welfare of your Trees and Fruit . LANGF-1696-E3-H,126.284

<heading>

CHAP. XIII . LANGF-1696-E3-H,126.286

SOME PARTICULAR RULES ABOUT SOME KINDS OF FRUIT-TREES BESIDES THE
GENERAL RULES ALREADY MENTIONED . LANGF-1696-E3-H,126.287

<$$heading>

<font> Sect. <$$font> 1 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,126.289

<font> Grapes <$$font> seldom or never ripen well in this <font> Isle .
<$$font> without help of Art and Industry , to which purpose take these
directions . LANGF-1696-E3-H,126.290

1 . To <font> plant <$$font> such as ripen soonest in the Year , that
they may have as much of the <font> summer <$$font> heat at <font>
ripening time <$$font> as may be . LANGF-1696-E3-H,126.291

2 . Let the Wall you plant them against be a full <font> South <$$font>
, or but a little inclining to the <font> East <$$font> ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,126.292

or if you have a <font> half-round <$$font> , or corner in a Wall , or
the back of <P_127> a brick Chimney , make use of such places for them .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,127.293

<font> Vines <$$font> will prosper well against a high Wall ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,127.294

yet that is not altogether so necessary but that low Walls may serve
turn , LANGF-1696-E3-H,127.295

and the higher may be reserved for such <font> Fruit-trees <$$font> as
will not do well without them : LANGF-1696-E3-H,127.296

That of a <font> Tarras-walk <$$font> may do well for <font> Vines
<$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-H,127.297

and the <font> Gravel-walk <$$font> under the <font> Wall <$$font> will
mightily encrease the heat about them . LANGF-1696-E3-H,127.298

If you plant any <font> Trees <$$font> against your <font>
Dwelling-house wall <$$font> , there may be some narrow places between
two Windows , or the like , where other <font> Fruit-trees <$$font> have
not room to spread : LANGF-1696-E3-H,127.299

A Vine may grow up there , and above those narrow places enlarge it self
where ever it meets with room . LANGF-1696-E3-H,127.300

You may also plant a <font> Vine <$$font> betwixt every <font>
fruit-tree <$$font> that groweth against your <font> hottest walls
<$$font> , and let it spread a little in the <font> Summer <$$font> time
into the <font> Fruit-trees <$$font> on either side especially if the
<font> fruit <$$font> of such Trees use to be early ripe , or that they
bear little Fruit , or have not been so long set as to have covered the
Wall . LANGF-1696-E3-H,127.301

And though such <font> Vines <$$font> can@ @not extend themselves to
that bigness , as those planted where they have more room ; <P_128> yet
by this means you will make advantage of such portions of your Wall , as
otherwise you could have had little benefit from .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.302

<font> Sect. <$$font> 2 . LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.303

The best ground for them is that which is <font> rich <$$font> and
<font> dry <$$font> , inclinable to <font> stony <$$font> or <font>
gravel <$$font> , so it bind not ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.304

the best Dung to fatten the Earth they grow in is Horse or Sheeps-dung :
LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.305

Make bare the <font> Roots <$$font> in the beginning of Winter ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.306

and throw in plenty of the same Dung most Winters .
LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.307

The best way of propagating of them is , in <font> November <$$font> to
lay a Branch of that Years growth into the Earth , under the old Tree ,
without cutting it off , LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.308

lay as many <font> joynts <$$font> or <font> buds <$$font> in the Earth
{SIC:Farth} as you can , leaving but one or two out ;
LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.309

for it puts forth its <font> roots <$$font> chiefly at the <font> joynts
<$$font> at a Years end , LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.310

or in the <font> February come twelve month <$$font> , cut it off from
the old one , LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.311

and plant it where you design it should grow ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.312

lay it in the Earth in the same posture it lay in before ,
LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.313

and also lay some of the <font> Buds <$$font> of the <font> new wood
<$$font> , that grew out since it was first laid down , that it may gain
the more <font> Roots <$$font> , leaving out of the ground again not
above one or <font> two buds <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-H,128.314

<P_129>

You may chance to have Suckers of an old Vine which will be sure to grow
. LANGF-1696-E3-H,129.316

Or you may take <font> Cuttings <$$font> of <font> Vine-branches
<$$font> of that Years growth , and set them in good <font> warm loose
<$$font> Land , LANGF-1696-E3-H,129.317

and many will grow ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,129.318

if it be in the place you intend they shall always stand in , next
<font> year <$$font> lay down a part of that which hath grown out , to
root also , LANGF-1696-E3-H,129.319

or else upon removal lay in the new growth all but a <font> bud <$$font>
or two , with that part which is already rooted :
LANGF-1696-E3-H,129.320

If it have made but small growth the first <font> year <$$font> , lay
part of the second <font> years <$$font> growth in the ground , it will
more advantage them by helping them to good <font> roots <$$font> , than
the loss of a <font> year <$$font> or two@ @'s growth in the top will
amount to . LANGF-1696-E3-H,129.321

If you have an old <font> Vine <$$font> , that beareth not well , lay
down in <font> February <$$font> , or <font> March <$$font> some of the
strongest <font> branches <$$font> of the foregoing <font> year <$$font>
, <paren> that grow low <$$paren> in the <font> mold <$$font> under the
old Tree , without cutting them off , leaving out of the ground a <font>
bud <$$font> or two to grow , and your <font> wall <$$font> will quickly
be furnished with new , and fresh <font> branches <$$font> ; so that by
degrees you may cut off many of the old <font> branches <$$font> of the
Vine ; LANGF-1696-E3-H,129.322

for though one Vine may <P_130> cover abundance of walling , yet three
or four <font> roots <$$font> in that compass will strengthen it the
more to bear . LANGF-1696-E3-H,130.323

