<BEGIN_latimer-1549-e1-h>

<P_21P>

Here haue I an occasion by the way somwhat to saye vnto you yea , for
the place that I alledged vnto you before oute of Hieremy the xlviii.
Chapter . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,21P.3

And it was spoken of a spirituall worcke of God , a worke that was
commaunded to be done , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,21P.4

and it was of sheddynge bloude and of destroying the cities of Moab .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,21P.5

For <paren> sayeth he <$$paren> curssed be he yat kepeth <P_22P> backe
hys sworde frome sheddynge of bloud . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.6

As Saule when he kepte backe the sworde from shedding of bloude , at
what tyme he was sent agaynst Amalech , was refused of God for beinge
disobedient to Goddes commaundementes , in that he spared Agag ye kyng .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.7

So that , that place of ye prophet was spoken of them that wente to the
distruction of the cityes of Moab , amonge the which there was one
called Nebo , whyche was muche reproued for idolatrie , supersticion ,
pryde , auarice , crueltie , tiranny , and for hardenes of herte , and
for these sinnes was plaged of God and destroyed .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.8

Nowe what shall we saye of these ryche citizens of London ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.9

What shall I saye of them ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.10

shal I cal them proude men of London , malicious men of London ,
mercylesse men of London . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.11

No , no , I may not saie so , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.12

they wil be offended wyth me than . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.13

Yet must I speake . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.14

For is there not reygning in London , as much pride , as much
coueteousnes , as much crueltie , as much opprission , as much
supersticion , as was in Nebo ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.15

Yes , I thynke and muche more to . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.16

Therfore I saye , repente O London . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.17

Repent , repente . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.18

Thou heareste thy faultes tolde the , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.19

amend them LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.20

amend them . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.21

I thinke if Nebo had had the preachynge yat thou haste : they wold haue
conuerted . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.22

And you rulers and officers be wise and circumspect ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.23

loke to your charge LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.24

and see you do your dueties LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.25

and rather be glad to amend your yll liuyng then to be angrye when you
are warned or tolde of your faulte . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.26

What a_do was there made in London at a certein man because he sayd ,
and in dede at that time on a iust cause . Burgesses quod he , nay
butterflies . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.27

Lorde what a_do there was for yat worde . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.28

And yet would God they were no worse then butterflies .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.29

Butterflyes do but theyre nature , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.30

the butterflye is not couetouse , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.31

is not gredye of other mens goodes , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.32

is not ful of enuy and hatered , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.33

is not malicious , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.34

is not cruel , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.35

is not mercilesse . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.36

The butterflye gloriethe not in hyr owne dedes ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.37

nor preferreth the tradicions of men before Gods worde ;
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.38

it committeth not idolatry LATIMER-1549-E1-H,22P.39

nor worshyppeth <P_23P> false goddes . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.40

But London can not abyde to be rebuked LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.41

suche is the nature of man . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.42

If they be prycked , they wyll kycke . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.43

If they be rubbed on the gale ; they wil wynce .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.44

But yet they wyll not amende theyr faultes , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.45

they wyl not be yl spoken of . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.46

But howe shal I speake well of them . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.47

If you could be contente to receyue and folowe the worde of god and
fauoure good preachers , if you coulde beare to be toulde of youre
faultes , if you coulde amende when you heare of them : if you woulde be
gladde to reforme that is a_misse : if I mighte se anie suche
inclinacion in you , that leaue to be mercilesse and begynne to be
charytable I would then hope wel of you , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.48

I woulde then speake well of you . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.49

But London was neuer so yll as it is now . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.50

In tymes past men were full of pytie and compassion
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.51

but nowe there is no pitie , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.52

for in London their brother shal die in the streetes for colde ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.53

he shall lye sycke at theyr doore betwene stocke and stocke . I can not
tel what to call it , and peryshe there for hunger ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.54

was there any more vnmercifulnes in Nebo ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.55

I thynke not . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.56

In tymes paste when any ryche man dyed in London , they were wonte to
healp the pore scholers of the vniuersitye wyth exhibition .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.57

When any man dyed , they woulde bequeth greate summes of money towarde
the releue of the pore . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.58

When I was a scholer in Cambrydge my selfe , I harde verye good reporte
of London LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.59

and knewe manie that had releue of the rytche men of London ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.60

but nowe I can heare no such good reporte , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.61

and yet I inquyre of it , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.62

and herken for it , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.63

but nowe charitie is waxed colde , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.64

none helpeth the scholer nor yet the pore . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.65

And in those dayes what dyd they whan they helped the scholers ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.66

Mary they maynteyned and gaue them liuynges that were verye papists and
professed the popes doctrine LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.67

and nowe that the knowledge of Gods word is brought to lyght , and many
earnestelye studye and laboure to set it forth now almost no man
healpeth to maynteyne them . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.68

Oh London London , repente LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.69

repente , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,23P.70

for I thynke God is more displeased wyth London then euer he was with
the <P_24P> citie of Nebo . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.71

Repente therfore LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.72

repent London LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.73

and remembre that same God liveth {COM:preceding_word_"liveth"_emended}
{HELSINKI:lieth} nowe yat punyshed Nebo , euen the same god and none
other , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.74

and he wyl punyshe synne as well nowe as he dyd then ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.75

and he will punishe the iniquitie of London as well as he did then of
Nebo . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.76

Amende therfore LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.77

and ye that be prelates loke well to your office ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.78

for right prelatynge is busye labourynge and not lordyng .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.79

Therfore preache and teach LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.80

and let your ploughe be doynge , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.81

ye lordes I saye that liue lyke loyterers , loke well to your office ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.82

the ploughe is your office and charge . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.83

If you lyue idle and loyter , you do not your duetie ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.84

you folowe not youre vocation , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.85

let your plough therfore be going and not cease , that the ground maye
brynge foorth fruite . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.86

But nowe me thynketh I heare one saye vnto me , wotte you what you say ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.87

Is it a worcke ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.88

Is it a labour ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.89

how then hath it happened yat we haue had so manye hundred yeares so
many vnpreaching prelates , lording loyterers and idle ministers ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.90

Ye woulde haue me here to make answere and to showe the cause thereof .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.91

Nay thys land is not for me to ploughe , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.92

it is to stonye , to thorni , to harde for me to plough .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.93

They haue so many thynges yat make for them , so many things to laye for
them selues that it is not for my weake teame to plough them .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.94

They haue to lay for them selues longe customes Cerimonyes , and
authoritie , placyng in parliamente and many thynges more .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.95

And I feare me thys lande is not yet rype to be ploughed .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.96

For as the saying is , it lacketh wethering LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.97

this greare {COM:sic} lacketh wetheringe LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.98

at leaste way it is not for me to ploughe . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.99

For what shall I loke for amonge thornes but prickyng and scrachinge ?
what among stones but stumblyng ? What <paren> I had almost sayed
<$$paren> among serpenttes but stingyng ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.100

But thys muche I dare say , that sence lording and loytrying hath come
vp , preaching hath come downe contrarie to the Apostells times .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.101

For they preached LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.102

and lorded not . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.103

And nowe they lorde LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.104

and preache not . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.105

For they that be lordes wyll yll go to plough .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.106

It is no mete office for them . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.107

It is not semyng for their state . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,24P.108

<P_25P>

Thus came vp lordyng loyterers . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.110

Thus crept in vnprechinge prelates , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.111

and so haue they longe continued . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.112

For howe many vnlearned prelates haue we now at this day ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.113

And no meruel . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.114

For if ye plough men yat now be , were made lordes they woulde cleane
gyue ouer ploughinge , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.115

they woulde leaue of theyr labour and fall to lordyng outright , and let
the plough stand . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.116

And then bothe ploughes not walkyng nothyng shoulde be in the common
weale but honger . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.117

For euer sence the Prelates were made Loordes and nobles , the ploughe
standeth , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.118

there is no worke done , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.119

the people sterue . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.120

Thei hauke , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.121

thei hunt , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.122

thei card , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.123

they dyce , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.124

they pastyme in theyr prelacies with galaunte gentlemen , with theyr
daunsinge minyons , and with theyr freshe companions , so that
ploughinge is set a syde . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.125

And by the lordinge and loytryng , preachynge and ploughinge is cleane
gone . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.126

And thus if the ploughemen of the countrey , were as negligente in theyr
office , as prelates be , we shoulde not longe lyue for lacke of
sustinaunce . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.127

And as it is necessarie for to haue thys ploughinge for the sustentacion
of the bodye : so muste we haue also the other for the satisfaction of
the soule , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.128

or elles we canne not lyue longe gostly . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.129

For as the bodie wasteth and consumeth awaye for lacke of bodily meate :
so doeth the soule pyne a_way for default of gostly meate .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.130

But there be two kyndes of inclosynge to lette or hinder boeth these
kyndes of plougheinge . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.131

The one is an inclosinge to let or hinder ye bodily ploughynge , and the
other to lette or hynder the holiday ploughyng , the church ploughinge .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.132

The bodylye plougheyng , is taken in and enclosed thorowe singulare
commoditie . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.133

For what man wyll lette goe or deminishe hys priuate commoditie for a
commune welth ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.134

and who wyll susteyne any damage for the respe`cte of a publique
commoditie ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.135

The other plough also no man is diligent to sette forward ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.136

nor no man wyll herken to it , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.137

but to hinder and let it , al mennes eares are open ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.138

yea and a greate meany of this kynde of ploughmen which are very busie
and woulde seme to be verie good worckmen . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,25P.139

I <P_26P> feare me some be rather mocke gospellers then faythful
ploughmen . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.140

I knowe many my selfe that professe the gospel , and lyue nothyng there
after . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.141

I knowe them , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.142

and haue bene conuersaunt wyth some of them . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.143

I knowe them , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.144

and I speake it wyth an heauy herte , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.145

there is as litle charitye and good liuinge in them as in any other ,
accordyng to that which Christe sayed in the Gospel to the greate numbre
of people that folowed hym , as thoughe they had had an earneste zeale
to his doctrine , wher as in deede they had it not . Non qui vidistis
signa , sed quia comedistis de panibus . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.146

Ye folowe me <paren> sayth he <$$paren> not because ye haue seene the
sygnes and myracles that I haue done , but because ye haue eaten the
breade and refreshed your bodyes . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.147

Therefore you folowe me , so that I thynke manye one nowe_a_dayes
professeth the gospel for the lyuynge sake , not for the loue they beare
to gods word . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.148

But they that wil be true ploughmen muste worke faythfullye for Goddes
sake , for the edifiynge of theyr bretherne . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.149

And as diligentelye as the husband man plougheth for the sustentacion of
the bodye : so diligently muste the prelates and ministers labour for
the fedinge of the soule : LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.150

boeth the ploughes muste styll be doynge , as mooste necessarye for man
. LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.151

And wherefore are magistrates ordayned , but that the tranquillitie of
the commune weale maye be confirmed limiting both ploughes .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.152

But nowe for the defaulte of vnpreaching prelates me thinke I coulde
gesse what myghte be sayed for excusynge of them :
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,26P.153

They are so troubeled wyth Lordelye lyuynge , they be so placed in
palacies , couched in courtes , ruffelynge in theyr rentes , daunceynge
in theyr dominions , burdened with ambassages , pamperynge of theyr
panches lyke a monke that maketh his Jubilie , mounchynge in their
maungers , and moylynge in their gaye manoures and mansions , and so
troubeled wyth loyterynge in theyr Lordeshyppes : that they canne
<P_27P> not attende it . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.154

They are otherwyse occupyed , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.155

somme in the Kynges matters , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.156

some are ambassadoures , some of the pryuie counsell , some to furnyshe
the courte , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.157

some are Lordes of the Parliamente , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.158

some are presidentes , and some comptroleres of myntes .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.159

Well , well . Is thys theyr duetye ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.160

Is thys theyr offyce ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.161

Is thys theyr callyng ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.162

should we haue ministers of the church to be comptrollers of the myntes
? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.163

Is thys a meete office for a prieste that hath cure of soules ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.164

Is thys hys charge ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.165

I woulde here aske one question : LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.166

I would fayne knowe who comptrolleth the deuyll at home at his parishe ,
whyle he comptrolleth the mynte ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.167

If the Apostles mighte not leaue the office of preaching to be deacons ,
shall one leaue it for myntyng ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.168

I can not tell you , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.169

but the sayinge is , that since priests haue bene minters , money hath
bene wourse then it was before . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.170

And they saye that euylnes of money hath made all thinges dearer .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.171

And in thys behalfe I must speake to England .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.172

Heare my contrey England , as Paule sayed in his firste epistle to the
Cor. vi. Chap. LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.173

for Paule was no sittynge bishoppe , but a walkinge and a preachynge
byshop . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.174

But when he wente from them , he lefte there behind hym the ploughe
goynge styll , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.175

for he wrotte vnto them LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.176

and rebuked them for goynge to lawe and pleadynge theyr causes before
heathen Judges , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.177

is there , <paren> sayeth he <$$paren> vtterlye amonge you no wyse manne
, to be an arbitratoure in matters of iudgement ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.178

What ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.179

not one all {COM:sic} that canne iudge betwene brother and brother ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.180

But one brother go to lawe wyth an other , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.181

and that vnder heathen Judges ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.182

Constituite contemptos qui sunt in ecclesia : et cete .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.183

Appoynte them Judges that are moost abiecte , and vyle in the
congregation , whyche he speaketh in rebukynge them
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.184

for <paren> sayth he <$$paren> Ad erubescenciam vestram dico . I speake
it to youre shame . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.185

So England I speake it to thy shame . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,27P.186

Is there neuer a noble man to be a Lorde president , but <P_28P> it
muste be a prelate ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.187

Is there neuer a wyse man in the realme to be a comptroller of the minte
? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.188

I speake it to your shame , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.189

I speake it to youre shame . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.190

Yf there be neuer a wyse man , make a water bearer , a tinker , a cobler
, a slaue , a page , comptroller of the mynte .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.191

Make a meane gentylman , a groome , a yeoman , make a poore begger Lorde
president : LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.192

Thus I speake not that I would haue it so , but to your shame . Yf
there be neuer a gentleman meete nor able to be Lorde presidente .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.193

For whye are not the noble men and yong gentlemen of England so brought
vp in knoweledge of God and in learnynge that they maye be able to
execute offices in the commune weale ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.194

The Kynge hath a greate meanye of wardes LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.195

and I trowe there is a courte of wardes , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.196

why is there not a schole for the wardes as well as there is a courte
for their landes ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.197

Whye are they not set in scholes , where they maye learne ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.198

Or why are they not sent to the vniuersities that they maye be able to
serue the kyng when they come to age ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.199

Yf the wardes and yonge gentlemen were well brought vp in learnyng and
in the knowledge of God , they woulde not when they come to age , so
much geue them selues to other vanities . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.200

And if the nobilitie be wel trayned in godly learnynge , the people
would folowe ye same traine . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.201

For truly such as the noble men be , suche wyll the people be .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.202

And nowe the onely cause , why noble men be not made Lord presidentes ,
is because they haue not bene brought vp in learninge :
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.203

Therefore for the loue of God , appoynte teachers and scholemaisters
{COM:preceding_word_"scholemaisters"_emended} , you that haue charge of
youth , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.204

and giue the teachers stipendes worthy their paynes , that they maye
brynge them vp in grammer , in Logike , in rethorike , in Philosophe ,
in {HELSINKI:in_in} the ciuile lawe , and in that whiche I can not leaue
vnspoken of , the word of God . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,28P.205

Thankes be vnto God the nobilitie , other wyse is verie well broughte vp
in learninge and godlines , to the great ioye and comfort of England ,
so that there is nowe good hope in the youth , that we shal an other day
haue a flourishinge <P_29P> common welth , considering theyr godly
education . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.206

Yea , and there be al_ready noble men ynough <paren> though not so many
as I woulde wishe <$$paren> able to be Lorde presidentes , and wyse men
ynough , for the mynte . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.207

And as vnmeete a thynge it is for byshoppes to be Lorde presidentes or
priestes to be mynters , as it was for the Corrhinthians to pleade
matters of variaunce before heathen Judges . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.208

It is also a sclaunder to the noble men , as thoughe they lacked
wysedome , and learninge to be able for suche offices , or elles were no
men of consciences , or elles were not meete to be trusted , and able
for suche offices : LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.209

And a prelate hath a charge and cure other wyse ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.210

and therfore he can not discharge his dutie , and be a Lorde president
to . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.211

For a presidentshippe requireth a whole man , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.212

and a byshoppe can not be two menne . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.213

A bishoppe hath his office , a flocke to teache , to loke vnto ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.214

and therfore he can not meddle wyth an other office , which alone
requireth a whole man . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.215

He should therfore gyue it ouer to whome it is meete , and laboure in
his owne busines , as Paule writeth to the Thessalonians .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.216

Lette euerie man do his owne busines , and folow his callying .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.217

Let the priest preache , and the noble men handle the temporal matters .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.218

Moyses was a meruelous man , a good man . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.219

Moyses was a wonderful felowe , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.220

and dyd his dutie being a maried man . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.221

We lacke suche as Moyses was . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.222

Well , I woulde al men woulde loke to their dutie , as God hath called
them , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.223

and then we shoulde haue a florishyng christian commune weale .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.224

And nowe I would aske a straung question . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.225

Who is the most diligent bishoppe and prelate in al England , that
passeth al the reste in doinge his office LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.226

I can tel , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.227

for I knowe him , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.228

who it is I knowe hym well . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.229

But nowe I thynke I se you lysting and hearkening , that I shoulde name
him . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.230

There is one that passeth al the other , and is the most diligent
prelate and preacher in al England . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.231

And will {COM:preceding_word_"will"_emended} ye knowe who it is ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.232

I wyl tel you . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.233

It is the Deuyl . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,29P.234

<P_32L>

In any wyse , let no suche a wone prepare vnto him self manye horsses .
etc. LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.236

In speakynge these wordes , ye shal vnderstand , that I do not entend to
speake agaynste the strengthe , polysye , and prouision of a kyng , but
agaynst excesse , and vayne truste that kynges haue in them selues ,
more then {they_have_trust} in the liuing god the authour of al goodnes
, and geuer of all victory . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.237

Many horses are requisite for a king , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.238

but he maye not excede in them , nor triumphe in them , more then is
nedeful , for the necessary affayres and defence of the realme :
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.239

what meaneth it , that god hath to do wyth the kynges stable ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.240

But only he would be mayster of his horsses , the Scripture sayeth ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.241

In altis habitat . He dwelleth on hye , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.242

it foloweth . Humilia respicit . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.243

He loketh on lowe thynges , yea , vpon the Kynges stables . and vpon al
the offyces in hys house . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.244

God is great grand mayster of the Kynges house ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.245

and wil take accoumpt of euery one that beareth rule therin , for the
executing of their offices , Whether they haue iustly and truely serued
the kyng in their offices or no . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.246

Yea god loketh vpon the kynge hym selfe , if he worketh well or not .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.247

Euery kyng is subiecte vnto God , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.248

and all other men are subiectes vnto ye king .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.249

In a king god requireth faith , not exces of horsses .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.250

Horsses for a kynge be good and necessarye , if thei be wel vsed .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.251

But horsses are not to be preferred aboue pore men .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.252

I was ones offendid with the kynges horses , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,32L.253

and therfore toke occasion to speake in the presens of the kynges
maiestye that dead is , <P_33L> whan Abbeis stode .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.254

Abbeis were ordeyned for the comforte of the pore , Wherfore I sayde it
was not decent that the kings horsses shuld be kept in them <paren> as
manye were at that tyme <$$paren> the lyuynge of poore men therby
minished and taken a_way : LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.255

But after ward a certayne noble man sayd to me , what hast thou to do
with ye kinges horsses ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.256

I answered , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.257

and sayd , I speake my conscience as goddes word directeth me .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.258

He said horsses be ye mayntenaunces and parte of a kynges honoure , and
also of hys realme , wherefore in speakyng againste them ye are against
the kynges honoure . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.259

I answered . God teacheth what honoure is decente for the kynge and for
al other men accordynge vnto their vocations .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.260

God apoynteth euery king a sufficient lyuinge for hys state and degre
boeth by landes and other customes . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.261

And it is lawfull for euery kyng to enioye the same goodes and
possessyons . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.262

But to extorte and take awaye the ryghte of the poore , is agaynste the
honoure of the kinge . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.263

And you do moue the kinge to do after that manner , then you speake
agaynste the honoure of the kynge . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.264

For I ful certifye you , extorcioners , violent opressers , in_grossers
of tenamentes and landes , throughe whose couetousnes , villages decaye
and fall downe , the kinges leige people for lacke of sustinaunce are
famished and decayed . They be those whyche speke a_gainst the honour
of the kynge . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.265

God requireth in the king and al magistrates a good herte , to walke
directlye in hys wayes . And in all subiectes , an obedience dewe vnto
a kynge . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.266

Therefore I pray god both the king and also we his people maye endeuer
diligently {COM:preceding_word_"diligently"_emended} to walke in his
wayes , to hys greate honoure and our profite .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.267

Let hym not prepare vnto him selfe to manye wyues . etc.
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,33L.268

Al_thoughe we reade heare that the kinges amongest the Iewes , had
libertye to take more wyues then one , we maye not therefore atempte to
walke in_ordinatly <P_34L> and to thinke that we may take also many
wiues . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.269

For Christe hath for_byden thys vnto vs Christians .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.270

And lette vs not impute synne vnto the Iewes because they hadde many
wyues . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.271

For they hadde a dispensation so to do . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.272

Christe limiteth on wyfe vnto vs only . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.273

And it is a greate thynge for a man to rule one wyfe ryghtly , and
ordinatly . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.274

For a woman is frayll and procliue vnto all euels ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.275

a woman is a very weake vessel , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.276

and maye sone deceyue a man , and brynge hym vnto euell .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.277

Many examples we haue in holy scripture . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.278

Adam had but one wyfe , called Eue , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.279

and howe sone had she brought hym to consent vnto euell , and to come to
destruction , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.280

How dyd wycked Iesabell preuente kynge Hachabs herte from god and al
godlines , and finally vnto destruction . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.281

It is a very hard thynge for a man to rule wel one woman .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.282

Therfore let oure kynge , what tyme hys grace shal@ @be so mynded to
take a wyfe to chose hym one whych is of god , that is , whyche is of
the housholde of fayth . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.283

Yea let all estates be no lesse circumspect in chosynge her , takynge
great deliberation , and then shal not need dyuorsementes , and such
myscheues to the euel example and sclaunder of our realm ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.284

And that she be one as the kyng can fynd in hys hert to loue and leade
hys life in pure and chaste esposage , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.285

and then shall he be the more prone and redy to aduance gods glorye ,
punishe , and extirpe , the great lecherye vsed in this realme .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.286

Therefore we ought to make a continuall prayer vnto god , for to graunt
oure kynges grace suche a mate as maye knyt hys hert and heres ,
accordyng to goddes ordynaunce and lawe , and not to consider and cleaue
onely to a politike matter or coniunction , for the enlargynge of
dominions , for suertye and defence of contres , settyng apart the
institution and ordinaunce of God . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,34L.287

We haue nowe a prety <P_35L> litle shilling , in dede a very pretye one
. LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.288

I haue but one think in my pursse , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.289

and the laste daye I had put it awaye almoste for an olde grote ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.290

and so I truste some wyll take them . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.291

The fynes of the siluer I can not se . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.292

But therin is prynted a fyne sentence : that is . Timor Domini fons
{SIC:sons} vitae vel sapientiae . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.293

The feare of the Lorde is the fountayne of lyfe or Wysdome .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.294

I wolde god this sentence were alwaies printed in the herte of the kyng
in chosynge hys wyfe , and in al hys officers .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.295

For lyke as the feare of God is fons sapientiae or vitae , so the
forgetting of god is fons stulticiae the fontayne of folishnes or of
death , althoughe it be neuer so politike , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.296

for vpon such politike matters death doth ensue and folowe .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.297

All their deuorcementes and other lyke condiciones to the greate
displeasure of all_myghtye God , whiche euylles I feare me , is much
vsed at these daies in the mariage of noble mens children , for ioining
{COM:preceding_word_"ioining"_emended} landes to landes , possessions ,
to possessions , neither the vertuous educacion , nor liuinge being
regarded , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.298

but in the infancy such mariages be made , to the displeasuer of god and
breach of espousals . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.299

Let the king therfor chose vnto him a godly wyfe , wherby he shal the
better liue chast , and in so liuyng all godlines shal encrease and
ryghtewesnes be maynteyned . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.300

Notwithstandyng , I knowe here after , some wyll come and moue your
grace towardes wantonnes and to the inclinacyon of the fleshe and vayne
affections . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.301

But I would your grace should beare in memorye , an hystorye of a good
king called Lewes , that trauelled towardes the holye lande <paren>
whiche was a greate matter in those dayes <$$paren> and by the waye
syckyned , beynge longe absente from hys wyfe .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.302

And vpon thys matter the phisitians dyd agre , yat it was for lacke of a
woman . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,35L.303

And dyd consulte with the <P_36L> bishops therein , who dyd conclude
that because of the distance of hys wyfe <paren> beyng in an other
countrye <$$paren> he should take a wenche . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.304

Thys good kyng hering their conclusion would not assent there vnto ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.305

but sayde , he had rather be sycke euen vnto death then he wold breake
his espousals . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.306

Wo worth such consellers , bishops , nay rather bussardes .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.307

Neuertheless if the king shoulde haue consented to their conclusyon ,
and accomplished the same , yf he had not chansed well , they wolde haue
executed the matter as I haue harde of two yat haue consulted together ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.308

and according to the aduyse of his friend the one of them wroght where
the succession was not good . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.309

The other imputed a pese of reproche to hym for hys such counsell geuen
. LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.310

He excused the matter sayeinge : that he gaue hym none other counsel ,
but if it had byne hys cause he woulde haue done likewise .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.311

So I thinke the bishops wolde haue excused the matter , yf the king
should haue reproued them for their counsell .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.312

I do not rede that the King did rebuke them for their councel ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.313

but yf he had , I knowe what woulde haue ben their aunswere .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.314

They would haue sayde , we geue you no worsse councel , then we wolde
haue folowed oure selues , yf we had ben in like case .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.315

Wel sir , thys Kyng dyd wel , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.316

and had the feare of god before hys eyes . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.317

He wold not walke in bywalkes , where are many balkes .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.318

Amongest many balkinges , is much stumbling LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.319

and by stombling it chaunceth many tymes to fal downe to the ground .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.320

And therfore , let vs not take any biwalkes , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.321

but let gods word directe vs , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.322

let vs not walke after , nor leane to our owne iudgementes and
procedynges of oure forfathers , nor seke not what they dyd , but what
they {COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} shoulde haue done , of which
thyng scrypture admonysheth vs saying : Ne inclinemus praeceptis et
traditionibus patrum neque faciamus quod videtur rectum in oculis
nostris . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,36L.323

<P_37L>

Let vs not inclyne our selues vnto the preceptes and tradycyons of oure
fathers , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.325

nor let vs do that semeth ryght in our eyes . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.326

But suerlye , we wyll not exchange oure fathers doynges and tradicions ,
with scripture , but cheifely lene vnto them and to theyr prescription ,
and do that semeth good in oure owne eyes . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.327

But suerly that is goynge downe the ladder , Scala caeli as it was made
by the Pope came to be a Masse , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.328

but that is a false ladder to bringe men to heauen .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.329

The true ladder to brynge a man to heauen is the knowledge and folowynge
of scripture . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.330

Let the kyng therfore chose a wyfe whych feareth god ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.331

let hym not seke a proude , wanton and one ful of rich treasures and
worldelye pompe . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.332

He shall not multyplye vnto hym selfe to muche gold and siluer .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.333

Is ther to muche thynke you for a kynge ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.334

God doeth alowe muche , vnto a kynge , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.335

and it is expediente that he should haue muche ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.336

for he hath great expenses , and many occasions to spende muche for the
defence and suertie of hys realme and subiectes .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.337

And necessary it is that a kyng haue a treasure all_wayeys in a redines
, for that , and such other affayres , as be dayly in hys handes . The
which treasure , if it be not sufficiente , he maye lawfully and wyth a
salue conscience , take taxis of hys subiectes .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.338

For it were not mete , the treasure , shoulde be in the subiectes purses
whan the money shoulde be occupied , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.339

nor it were not best for themselues , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.340

for the lacke there of , it myght cause both it , and all the rest that
they haue shold not long be theirs , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.341

And so for a necessarye and expedyent occacion , it is warranted by
goddes word to take of the subiectes LATIMER-1549-E1-H,37L.342

But if there be sufficyente treasures , and the burdenynge of subiectes
be for a vayne thyng . So yat he wyl require thus much , or so much of
his subiectes <paren> whyche perchaunce are in great necessitie
<$$paren> , and penurye . Then this couetous intent , and the request
thereof , is to muche , whych god forbiddeth the king her in this
<P_38L> place of scripture to haue . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.343

But who shal se this to much , or tell ye king of this to much .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.344

Thinke you anye of the Kynges preuye chamber ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.345

No . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.346

For feare of losse of fauer . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.347

Shall any of his sworne chapelins ? LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.348

No . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.349

Thei bee of the clausset LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.350

and kepe close such matters . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.351

But the Kynge him selfe must se this to much , LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.352

and yat shal he do by no meanes with the corporal eyes : Wherfore , he
must haue a paier of spectacles , whiche shall haue two cleare syghtes
in them , yat is , ye one is fayth , not a seasonable fayeth , which
shall laste but a whyle , but a fayeth , whiche is continuynge in God .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.353

The seconde cleare sighte is charitie , whych is feruente towardes hys
Chrysten brother . LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.354

By them two , must the Kynge se euer whan he hath to muche .
LATIMER-1549-E1-H,38L.355

