<BEGIN_leland-1539-e1-h>

<P_69>

A mile a this side Akeland Castelle I cam over a bridg of one great arch
on Gaundelesse a praty ryver rising a_vj. miles of by west : and
renning by the south side of Akeland Castelle LELAND-1539-E1-H,69.3

goith a litle beneth it to the great streame of Were .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,69.4

Gaundeles rising by west cummith by Westakeland , by S. Helenes Akeland
, by S. Andreas Akeland , and by Bisshop Akelande .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,69.5

<P_70>

The towne self of Akeland is of no estimation , LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.7

yet is ther a praty market of corne . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.8

It standith on a praty hille bytween 2. ryvers , wherof Were lyith on
the north side , and Gaundelesse on the south , LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.9

and an arow shot or more benethe they meete LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.10

and make one streame , LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.11

and ren to the este . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.12

And ech of these rivers hath an hille by it , so that Bisshop Castelle
Akeland standith on a litle hille bytwixt 2. great hills
{COM:preceding_word_"hills"_emended} . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.13

There was of very auncient a manor place longing {TEXT:logging} to the
Bisshop of Duresme at Akeland . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.14

Antonius de Beke began first to encastellate it , LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.15

he made the greaut haulle , LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.16

there be divers pillors of black marble spekelid with white , and the
exceding fair gret chaumbre with other there . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.17

He made also an exceding goodly chapelle ther of stone welle squarid ,
and a college with dene and prebendes yn it , and a quadrant on the
south west {COM:preceding_word_"west"_emended} side of the castell for
ministers of the college . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.18

Skerlaw , Bisshop of Duresme , made the goodly gate house at entering
ynto the castelle of Akeland . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.19

There is a fair park by the castelle having falow dere , wild bulles and
kin . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.20

From Bisshop Akeland to Walsingham a_7. miles , LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.21

thens to Frosterley 2. milys , LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.22

thens to Stanhop 2. miles , LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.23

thens to Estgate 2. miles , LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.24

thens to Westgate 2. miles , LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.25

thens to Werdale Chapel 2. miles ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.26

and al these places , saving Werdale Chapell , be on the north side of
Were . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.27

The Bisshop of Duresme hath a praty square pile on the north side of
Were ryver caullid the Westgate , LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.28

and thereby is a parke rudely enclosid with stone of a_12. or 14.
miles yn cumpace : LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.29

it is xvj. miles up in Were Dale from Akeland Castelle .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.30

There be , as I hard , sum litle ferme holdes in this park .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.31

On the side of Were river is Stanop . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.32

Stanop is xij. miles from Akeland : LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.33

and is the hedde paroch of Werdale . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.34

Woulsingham on Were sumtime a smaul market , now none , is a_vij. miles
above Akeland . LELAND-1539-E1-H,70.35

<P_71>

The ryver of Were risith a_8. miles above Stanope or more .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.37

And though the upper part of Weredale be not very fertile of corne ; yet
ys there very fine gresse in the dale self wher the ryver passith .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.38

The very hedde of Were risith of 2. smaul waters , Burnhop and Kelope .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.39

Burnhop cummith by south and Kelhop by north , LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.40

they 2. joining make Were . LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.41

Ther cummith also Welop bek {COM:preceding_word_"bek"_emended} in by
Kelhop . LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.42

There resorte many redde dere stragelers to the mountaines of Weredale .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.43

Weredale lying as pece of the west marches of the bisshoprik toward
Westmerland is wel wooddid : LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.44

and so be the quarters of Akeland : LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.45

for by the name it apperith to have beene ful of okes .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.46

Binchester now a poore villag stondith on the south side of Were ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.47

and is but half a mile beneth Castelle Akeland . LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.48

It stondith on the brow of an hille , LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.49

and there I saw , as I roode on the south side , a litle fosse , and
inditia of old buildinges . LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.50

In the ploughid feeldes hard by thys village hath and be founde Romaine
coynes , and other many tokens of antiquite . LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.51

Betwixt Akeland and Bincester is an exceding fair bridg of one arch apon
Were . LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.52

There is another a litle above Duresme caullid Thunderland Bridge .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.53

From Binchester to Branspeth 4. miles , al by mountaine ground , as is
about Akeland , and not fertile of corne , but welle woddid .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.54

Ar I cam by a mile and more to Branspeth I passid by a ford over Were
ryver . LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.55

The village and castelle of Branspeth stondith on a rokky among hilles
higher then it . LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.56

On the southe west part of the castelle cummith doune a litle bek out o
the rokkes and hilles not far of . LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.57

The castelle of Branspeth is stronly set and buildid ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.58

and hath 2. courtes of high building . LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.59

Ther is a litle mote that hemmith a great peice of the first court .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.60

In this court be 3. toures of logging , and 3. smaule ad ornamentum .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,71.61

The <P_72> pleasure of the castelle is in the 2. court :
LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.62

and entering into it by a great toure I saw in schochin in the fronte of
it a lion rampaunt . LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.63

Sum say that Rafe Nevile the first Erle of Westmerland buildid much of
this house . LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.64

The erle that is now hath set a new peace of worke to it .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.65

In the paroch chirch of S. Brandon at Branspeth be dyvers tumbes of the
Nevilles . LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.66

In the quier is an high tumbe of one of them porturid with his wife .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.67

This Neville lakkid heires males , wherapon a great concertation rose
bytwixt the next heire male and one of the Gascoynes .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.68

There lyith also in a chapelle on the south side of the quier a Countes
of Westmerland sister to Bouth Archebisshop of York .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.69

There lyith in that chapelle also the Lord Neville , father to the erle
that is now . LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.70

This Lorde Nevile died his father the erle yet lyving : wherapon the
erle toke much thought and dyed at Horneby Castelle in Richemontshir ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.71

and ther is buried in the paroche chirch . LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.72

The Erle of Westmerland that is now had an elder brother ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.73

and he lyith in a litle tumbe of marble by the high altare on the south
side . LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.74

And at the feete of hym be buried 4. children of the erles that now
lyvith . LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.75

I hard at Branspeth that Rafe the first Erle of Westemerland was buried
at his college of Stanethrop by Raby . And that another of them was
buried at the freres of North-Alverton . LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.76

From Branspeth to Duresme about a_3. miles . LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.77

Or ever I cam nere Duresme by half a mile and more I passid over a
bridge of one great arche , and another smaul , stonding on a praty
river , caullid Dernesse <font> alias <$$font> Devernesse ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.78

and a litle above that cam Broune river ynto it .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.79

Broune risith above Repaire park , LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.80

and so cumming by it goith after into Dernesse . LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.81

Dernesse risith {COM:edition_has_ellipsis} LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.82

and goith into Were at {COM:edition_has_ellipsis} LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.83

The towne self of Duresme stondith on a rokky hille :
LELAND-1539-E1-H,72.84

and stondith as men cum from the south cuntre on the north
{COM:preceding_word_"north"_emended} ripe of Were : the which water so
with his course naturale in a botom windith about , that from Elvet a
greate stone bridge . <P_73> of 14. arches it crepith about the toune
to Framagate bridge of 3. arches also on Were , that betwixt thes 2.
bridges or a litle lower at S. Nicolas the toune except the lenght of
an arow shot is brought in insulam : LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.85

and sum hold opinion , that of auncient tyme Were ran from the place
wher now Elvet bridge is straite down by S. Nicolas now stonding on a
hille : and that the other {COM:preceding_word_"other"_emended} course ,
part for pollicy and part by digging of stones for building of the town
and minstre , was made a valley , LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.86

and so the water-course was conveyid that way , LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.87

but I approve not ful this conjecture . LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.88

The close itself of the minstre on the highest part of the hille is
welle waullid , LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.89

and hath diverse fair gates . LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.90

The chirch self and the cloister be very strong and fair :
LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.91

and at the very est end of the chirch is a crosse isle by side the midle
crosse isle the minstre chirch . LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.92

The castelle stondith stately on the north est side of the minstre ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.93

and Were rennith under it . LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.94

The kepe stondith a_loft LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.95

and is state_buildid of viij. square fascion , and 4. highes of
logginges . LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.96

Bisshop Fox did much reparation of this dungeon : LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.97

and he made beside in the castelle a new kychen with the offices and
many praty chaumbers . LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.98

Tunstal hath also done cost on the dungeon and other places of the
castel , LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.99

and hath buildid a goodly new galery and a stately stair to it , and
made an exceding strong gate of yren to the castelle .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.100

In that part of Duresme toun that is almost exclosid with Were be 3.
paroch chirches and a chapell . LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.101

S. Oswaldes is countid to be auncient . LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.102

There be a_3. paroche chirches mo in the suburbe .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.103

The greatest suburbe is by Elvet bridg , LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.104

and hath certen smaul streates . LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.105

The suburbe over Framagate bridg hath 3. partes . the south streat on
the lift hand , the crosse streate on the midle toward Akeland , and the
3. on the right hand , bering the name of Framagate , and leding to
Chester and to New-Castelle . LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.106

The building of Duresme toun is meately strong , LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.107

but it is nother high nor of costely werke . LELAND-1539-E1-H,73.108

There appere sum peaces <P_74> of waulles of the toune joyning to a gate
of the palace waul . LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.109

but the toun it self with_yn the peninsula is but a smaul thing in
respect of cumpace of al the stately close : so that it alonly may be
caullid the waullid toune of Duresme . LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.110

In the sanctuary or holy chirch yard or sanctuarie of Duresme be very
many auncient tumbes , LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.111

it stondith on the south side of the minster : LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.112

and at the hedde of one of them is a crosse of a_7. fote longe , that
hath had an inscription of diverse rowes yn it , LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.113

but the scripture can@ @not be red . LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.114

Sum say that this crosse was brought out of the holy chirch yarde of
Lindisfarn isle . LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.115

Weremouth is about an_8 miles from Duresme , and about a_vj. from
Tinemouth , or rather Newcastel . LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.116

There is no bridge memorable on Were beneth Duresme but Chester bridge .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.117

Were cummith within a quarter of a mile of the toun self <em> of Chester
<$$em> . LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.118

From Duresme over Framagate bridge to Chester in the Streate , partely
by a litle corne ground , but most by mountainiouse pasture and sum
mores and firres . LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.119

Or I cam in Chester I saw scant half a mile of it Lomeley Castel apon an
hil , having praty wood about it , LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.120

and about Chester self is likewise sum wodde . LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.121

The toune of Chester is chiefly one streate of very meane building yn
lenght : LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.122

ther is beside a smaul streat or 2. about the chirch ; that is
collegiatid , and hath a dene and prebendaries , LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.123

but it is of a very meane building ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.124

and yn the body of the chirch is a tumbe with the image of a bisshop yn
token that S. Cuthberth ons was buried or remained in his feretre there
. LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.125

At the very ende of the toune I passid over Conebrooke ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.126

and ther is a fair stone bridge of 3. arches over it .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.127

Thens to Geteshed vij. miles by montaniouse ground with pasture , heth
, more , and fyrres . LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.128

And a litle a this side Getehed is a great cole pit .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,74.129

From Duresme over Elvet bridge to Sunderland bridges a_2. <P_75> miles
and a half , LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.130

there Were is devidid ynto 2. armes , LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.131

and after shortely meating makith an isle . LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.132

The first bridg as I cam over was but of one arche ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.133

the other was of 3 . LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.134

Thens a mile and more of I cam over Burne broke that goith ynto Were
therabout , LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.135

and a litle above on the hil is Burneham Claxton's house .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.136

Burnham is a man of a_hunderith mark land by the yere .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.137

Then I rode thorough a great wod stonding on a hille ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.138

and so cam by hilly , morisch and hethy ground to S. Andres Akeland 8.
miles from Duresme : LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.139

and left hard on my right hond one of the parkes of Akeland waullid with
stone . LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.140

At S. Andres Akeland the Dene of Akeland hath a great house :
especially for barnes and other houses of husbondry .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.141

From S. Andres Akeland to Raby Castel 5. miles ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.142

part by arable LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.143

but more by pastures and morisch hilly ground baren of wood .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.144

Raby is the largest castel of logginges in al the north cuntery ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.145

and is of a strong building , but not set other on hil or very strong
ground . LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.146

As I enterid by a causey into it ther was a litle stagne on the right
hond : LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.147

and in the first area were but 2. toures , one at ech ende as entres ,
and no other buildid ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.148

yn the 2. area as in entering was a great gate of iren with a tour ,
and 2. or 3. mo on the right hond . LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.149

Then were al the chief toures of the 3. court as in the hart of the
castel . LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.150

The haul and al the houses of offices be large and stately :
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.151

and in the haul I saw an incredible great beame of an hart .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.152

The great chaumber was exceding large , LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.153

but now it is fals_rofid and devidid into 2. or 3. partes .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.154

I saw ther a litle chaumber wherin was in windowes of colerid glasse al
the petigre of the Nevilles : LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.155

but it is now taken doun and glasid with clere glasse .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.156

There is a touer in the castel having the mark of 2. capitale B from
Berthram Bulmer . LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.157

There is another tower bering the name of Jane , bastard sister to Henry
the 4. and wife to Rafe Nevile the first Erl of Westmerland .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.158

Ther long 3. parkes to Raby wherof 2. be plenishid with dere .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.159

The midle park hath a lodge in it . LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.160

And thereby is a chace bering the name of Langeley ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.161

and hath falow dere : LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.162

it is a_3. miles in lenght . LELAND-1539-E1-H,75.163

<P_76>

The king hath a forest of redde deere yn the more land at Midleton an
viij. miles west from Daraby . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.165

Dr. Noteres is parson of Midleton . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.166

Stanthorp a smaul market toun is about half a mile from Raby .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.167

Here is a collegiate chirch , having now a body and 2. isles .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.168

I hard that afore Rafe of Raby tyme ther was that alonly that now is the
south isle . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.169

In this south isle , as I hard , was buried the grauntfather and
grandedam of Rafe Raby , LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.170

and they made a cantuarie there . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.171

In the waul of this isle appere the tumbes and images of 3. ladys ,
whereof one hath a crounet , and a tumbe of a man child , and a flat
tumbe , varii marmoris . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.172

Ther is a flat tumbe also with a playn image of brasse and a scripture ,
wher is buried Richard sun and heire to Edward Lord of Bergevenny .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.173

This Edward was the fift sun of Daraby . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.174

Johanna Bewfort was his mother . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.175

This Edward had another sun caullid George , LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.176

and was lord after : LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.177

and he had Georg also lord , LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.178

and he left Henry now Lorde of Bergevenny . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.179

John by Rafes first wife was Lord Neville . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.180

Richard by Johan his 2. wife was Erle of Saresbyri .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.181

Robert was Bisshop of Duresme . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.182

Georg was Lord Latimer . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.183

Edward was Lord Bergevenny , LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.184

and , as I remembre , Rafe had William that was Lord Falconbridge .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.185

Rafe Neville the first Erl of Westmerland of that name is buried yn a
right stately tumbe of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} alabaster yn
the quire of Stanthorp College , and Margarete his first wife on the
lift hond of hym : LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.186

and on the right hond lyith the image of Johan his 2. wife ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.187

but she is buried at Lincoln by her mother Catarine Swineford Duches of
Lancaster . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.188

This Johan erectid the very house self of the college of Stanthorp ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.189

it is set on the north side of the collegiate chirch ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.190

and is strongly buildid al of stone . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.191

Ther rennith by the north side of the college a bek caullid Langley Bek
. LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.192

it risith a_5. miles {COM:preceding_word_"miles"_emended} of by west in
the paroch of Midleton , LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.193

and cumming thorough Langeley takith the name of it ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.194

and a mile or more beneth goith into Tese lower then Salaby Mr.
Brakenbyris place . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.195

From Stanthorp to Barnardes Castel by meately good corne and pasture 5.
miles . LELAND-1539-E1-H,76.196

This is a meatly praty toun , <P_77> having a good market and meatly
welle buildid . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.197

The toun self is but a part of Gaineford paroch , wher the hed chirch is
6. miles lower on Tese and in the bisshoprike .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.198

The castelle of Barnard stondith stately apon Tese .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.199

The first area hath no very notable thing yn it , but the fair chapelle
, wher be 2. cantuaries . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.200

In the midle of the body of this chapel is a fair marble tumbe with an
image and an inscription about it yn French . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.201

Ther is another in the south waul of the body of the chapelle of fre
stone , with an image of the same . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.202

Sum say that they were of the Bailliolles . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.203

The inner area is very large , and partely motid and welle furnishid
with toures of great logging . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.204

ther belong 2. parkes to this castelle ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.205

the one is caullid Marwood , LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.206

and thereby is a chace that berith also the name of Marwood ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.207

and that goith on Tese ripe up into Tesedale . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.208

There is but a hil betwixt the chaces of Langeley and Marwod .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.209

This is by a nere estimation the course of Tese :
LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.210

Yade More hath the hedde of Tese , LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.211

then it takith a course emong rokkes , LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.212

and reseyving divers other smaul hopes or bekkes ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.213

and cummith much by wild ground for a_8. or x. miles to +Agleston
bridge wel archid : LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.214

then to Barnard Castel bridge very fair of 3. arches :
LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.215

then to Perse bridge {COM:preceding_word_"bridge"_emended} sumtime of 5.
arches , but a late made new of 3. arches . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.216

There is a prati chapel of our Lady hard by Perse bridg of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} the fundation of <em> John Bailliol
<$$em> King of Scottes {COM:preceding_word_"Scottes"_emended} .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.217

Thens to Crofte bridge 5. miles ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.218

and so to Yarham bridge a miles ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.219

and thens to Stokton , wher is a fery , 3. miles ;
LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.220

and so a_4. miles to Tesemouth . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.221

From Barnardes Castelle over the right fair bridge on Tese of 3. arches
I enterid straite into Richemontshire , that stil streaccith up with
that ripe to the very hed of Tese . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.222

From this bridge I ridde a mile on the stony and rokky bank of Tese to
the bek caullid Thuresgylle , a mile from Barnardes Castelle ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.223

and there it hath a bridge of one arche LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.224

and straite enterith into Tese . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.225

The priory of Egleston joinith hard to this bekk LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.226

and also hanggith over the high bank of Tese . LELAND-1539-E1-H,77.227

<P_78>

Ther is a meatly good wood on eche side of Tese about Barnardes Castel .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,78.229

I saw in the body of the chirch of Egleston to very fair tumbes of gray
marble . LELAND-1539-E1-H,78.230

In the greatter was buried , as I lernid , one Syr Rafe Bowes . and yn
the lesser one of the Rokesbys . LELAND-1539-E1-H,78.231

Hard under the clif by Egleston is found on eche side of Tese very fair
marble , wont to be taken up booth by marbelers of Barnardes Castelle
{COM:preceding_word_"Castelle"_emended} and of Egleston , and partly to
have be wrought by them , and partely sold onwrought to other .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,78.232

<P_139>

From Farley I ridde a mile of by woddy ground to a graung great and
welle buildid , that longid to Henton-priorie of Chartusians .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.234

This priory stondith not far of from this graunge on the brow of an
hille abouth a quarter of a mile from the farther ripe of Frome ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.235

and not far from this place Frome goith ynto Avon .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.236

I rodde by the space of a mile or more by woddes and mountaine grounde
to a place , where I saw a rude stone waulle hard on the right hond by a
great lengthe as it had beene a park waulle . LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.237

One sins told me that Henton priory first stode there ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.238

if it be so it is the lordship of Hethorpe that was qyven to them for
their first habitation . LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.239

And about a mile farther I cam to a village , LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.240

and passid over a ston bridge where ranne a litle broke there they
caullid Mitford-water . LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.241

This brooke risith in the rootes of Mendip-hilles a_7. miles or more by
west south west from this bridge , LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.242

and goith about a mile lower into Avon . LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.243

From this bridge to Bath 2. good miles al by mountayne ground and
quarre , LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.244

and litle wood in syte . LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.245

About a mile from Bath I left the way that ledith to Bristow for them
that use from Saresbyri to Bristow . LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.246

Or ever I cam to the bridge of Bath that is over Avon I cam doun by a
rokky hille fulle of fair springes of water : LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.247

and on this rokky hille is sette a longe streate as a suburbe to the
cyte of Bath : LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.248

and in {COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended} this streat is a chapelle of S.
Mary Magdalen . LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.249

Ther is a great gate with a stone arche at the entre of the bridge .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,139.250

<P_140>

The bridge hath v. fair stone arches . LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.252

Bytwixt the bridge and the south gate of Bath I markid fair medows on
eche hand , but especially on the lift hond , LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.253

and they ly by south west on the toun . LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.254

The cite of Bath is sette booth yn a fruteful and pleasant botom , the
which is environid on every side with greate hilles , out of the which
cum many springes of pure water that be conveyid by dyverse ways to
serve the cite . Insomuch that leade beyng made ther at hand many
houses yn the toune have pipes of leade to convey water from place to
place . LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.255

There be 4. gates yn the town by the names of est , west , north and
south . LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.256

The toune waulle within the toune is of no great highth to th@ @eyes :
LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.257

but without it is a` fundamentis of a reasonable highth .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.258

and it stondith almost alle , lakking but a peace about Gascoyn's-tower
. LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.259

In the walles at this tyme be no tourres saving over the toune gates .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.260

One Gascoyne an inhabitante of the toune in hominum memoria made a litle
peace of the walle that was in decay , as for a fine for a faught that
he had committid in the cite : wherof one part as at a corner risith
higher then the residew of the walle , wherby it is communely caullid
Gascoyne-tower . LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.261

There be divers notable antiquitees engravid in stone that yet be sene
yn the walles of Bathe betwixt the south gate and the weste gate : and
agayn betwixt the west gate and the north gate .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.262

The first was an antique hed of a man made al flat and having great
lokkes of here as I have in a coine of C. Antius .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.263

The secunde that I did se bytwene the south and the north gate was an
image , as I tooke it , of Hercules : LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.264

for he held yn eche hand a serpent . LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.265

Then I saw the image of a foote man vibrato gladio & praetenso clypeo .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,140.266

<P_141>

Then I saw a braunch with leves foldid and wrethin into circles .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.268

Then I saw ij. nakid imagis lying a_long , the one imbracing the other
. LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.269

Then I saw to antique heddes with heere as rofelid yn lokkes .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.270

Then I saw a grey-hound as renning , LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.271

and at the taile of hym was a stone engravid with great Romane letters ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.272

but I could pike no sentence out of it . LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.273

Then I saw another inscription , LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.274

but the wether hath except a few lettres clere defacid .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.275

Then I saw toward the west gate an image of a man embracid with 2.
serpentes . LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.276

I took , it for Laocoon . LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.277

Betwixt the weste and the north gate . I saw 2. inscriptions , of the
wich sum wordes were evident to the reader , the residew clene defacid .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.278

Then I saw the image of a nakid man . LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.279

Then I saw a stone having cupidines & labruscas intercurrentes .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.280

Then I saw a table having at eche ende an image vivid and florishid
above and beneth . LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.281

In this table was an inscription of a tumbe or burial wher in I saw
playnly these wordes : vixit annos xxx . LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.282

This inscription was meately hole but very diffusely written , as
letters for hole wordes , and 2. or 3. letters conveid in one .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.283

Then I saw a._2 images , wherof one was of a nakid manne grasping a
serpent in eche hand , as I tooke it : LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.284

and this image was not far from the north gate .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.285

Such antiquites as were in the waulles from the north gate to the est ,
and from the est gate to the south , hath been defacid by the building
of the monastery , and making new waulles . LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.286

I much doubte wither these antique workes were sette in the tyme of the
Romans dominion in Britayne in the waulles of Bath , as they stand now :
or wither they were gatherid of old ruines ther , and sins set up in the
walles reedified in testimonie of th@ @antiquite of the toun .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.287

There be 2. springes of whote wather in the west south west part of the
towne . Wherof the bigger is caullid the Crosse Bath , bycause it hath
a cross erectid in the midle of it . LELAND-1539-E1-H,141.288

This bath is much frequentid of people deseasid with <P_142> lepre ,
pokkes , scabbes , and great aches , LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.289

and is temperate and pleasant , having a_11. or 12. arches of stone in
the sides for men to stonde under yn tyme of reyne .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.290

Many be holp by this bathe from scabbes and aches .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.291

The other bathe is a_2._hunderith foote of , LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.292

and is lesse in cumpace withyn the waulle then the other , having but 7.
arches yn the waulle . LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.293

This is caullid the Hote Bathe ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.294

for at cumming into it men think that it wold scald the flesch at the
first , LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.295

but after that the flesch ys warmid it is more tolerable and pleasaunt .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.296

Both these bathes be in the midle of a litle streat ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.297

and joine to S. John's hospitale : so that it may be thought that
Reginalde Bisshop of Bathe made this hospitale nere these 2. commune
bathes to socour poore people resorting to them .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.298

The Kinges Bathe is very faire and large standing almost in the midle of
the towne , and at the west end of the cathedrale chirch .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.299

The area that this bath is yn is cumpassid with an high stone waulle .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.300

The brimmes of this bath hath a litle walle incumpasing them ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.301

and in this waul be a_32. arches for men and women to stand separately
yn . LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.302

To this bath do gentilmen resort . LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.303

Ther goith a sluse out of this bath , LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.304

and servid in tymes past with water derivid out of it 2. places in Bath
priorie usid for bathes : els voide ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.305

for in them be no springes . LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.306

The colour of the water of the baynes is as it were a depe blew se water
, LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.307

and rikith like a sething potte continually , having sumwhat a
sulphureus and sumwhat onpleasant savor . LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.308

The water that rennith from the 2. smaul bathes goit by a dike into
Avon by west bynethe the bridge . LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.309

The water that goith from the Kinges Bath turnith a mylle ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.310

and after goith into Avon above Bath-bridge . LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.311

In al the 3. bathes a man may evidently se how the water burbelith up
from the springes . LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.312

Ther be withyn the walles of Bath paroche chirchis , of the which the
tourrid steple of the paroche chirch at the north gate semith to be
auncient . LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.313

There is a paroche chirch and a suburbe without the north-@ @gate .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,142.314

<P_143>

There is an hospital of S. John hard by the Crosse Bathe , of the
fundation of Reginalde Bisshop of Bathe . LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.316

The toun hath of a long tyme syns bene continually most mayntainid by
making of clothe . LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.317

There were in hominum memoria 3. clothiers at one tyme , thus namid ,
Style , Kent and Chapman , by whom the toun of Bath then florishid .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.318

Syns the death of them it hath sumwhat decayed .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.319

It apperith in the booke of the antiquitees of the late monasterie of
Bath that King Osric in the year of our Lord 676 , Theodore then beyng
Arche-bisshop of Cantwarbyri , did erect a monasterie of nunnes at Bath
, LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.320

and Bertane was the first abbatisse therof . LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.321

It apperith by a charte that one Ethelmod , a great man , gave , by the
leave of King +Adelrede , in Theodore th@ @archbisshop of Cantwarbyri@
@'s tyme , landes to one Bernguid abbatisse of Bath , and to one
Foulcburc . LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.322

The book of th@ @antiquite of the abbay of Bath makith no great mention
of any great notable doyng of Offa King of the Merches at Bathe .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.323

The prior of Bath told me , that after the nunnes tyme ther wer secular
chanons in S. Peter's chirch at Bath ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.324

paraventure Offa King of Merches set them ther ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.325

for I have redde that Offa did a notable act at S. Peter's in Bath .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.326

Or els the chanons cam yn after that the Danes had racid the nunry there
. LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.327

Eadgar was a great doer and benefactor to S. Peter's at Bath , in whos
tyme monkes were yn Bathe , and sins ; except Alfarus Erl of Merch ,
that was a scurge of monkes , expellid them for a tyme .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.328

John a phisitian , born at Tours yn France , and made Bisshop of Welles
, did obteine of Henry the first to sette his se at Bath ;
LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.329

and so he had the abbay landes given onto hym , LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.330

and then he made a monk prior ther , deviding the old possessions of the
monastery with hym . LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.331

This John pullid doun the old chirch of S. Peter at Bath ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.332

and erectid a new , much fairer , LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.333

and was buried in the midle of the presbyteri thereof , whos image I saw
lying there a_9. yere sins , at the which tyme al the chirch that he
made lay to wast , and was onrofid , and wedes grew about this John of
Tours' sepulchre . LELAND-1539-E1-H,143.334

<P_144>

This John of Tours erectid a palace at Bath in the south west side of
the monasteri of S. Peter's at Bath ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.336

one gret squar tour of it with other ruines yet appere .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.337

I saw at the same tyme a fair great marble tumbe ther of a bisshop of
Bath , out of the wich they sayid that oyle did distille :
LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.338

and likely ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.339

for his body was enbaumid plentifully . LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.340

There were other divers bisshops buried ther . LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.341

Oliver King Bisshop of Bath began of late dayes a right goodly new
chirch at the west part of the old chirch of S. Peter ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.342

and finishid a great peace of it . LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.343

The residue of it was syns made by the priors of Bath : and especially
by Gibbes the last prior ther , that spent a great summe of mony on that
fabrike . LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.344

Oliver King let almost al the old chirch of S. Peter's in Bath to go to
ruine . LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.345

The walles yet stande . LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.346

King Eadgar was crounid with much joy and honor at S. Peter's in Bath ;
wherapon he bare a gret zeale to the towne , LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.347

and gave very great frauncheses and privileges onto it . In knowledge
wherof they pray in al their ceremonies for the soule of King Eadgar .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.348

And at Whitsunday-tyde , at the which tyme men say that Eadgar there was
crounid , ther is a king electid at Bath every yere of the tounes men in
the joyfulle remembraunce of King Edgar and the privileges gyven to the
toun by hym . LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.349

This king is festid and his adherentes by the richest menne of the toun
. LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.350

From Bath to Palton al by hilly ground but plentiful of corne and grasse
an_eight miles . LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.351

From Palton to Chuton by like ground about a_2. miles .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.352

There is a goodly new high_tourrid steple at Chuton .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.353

From Chuton to Welles by hilly ground but lesse fruteful partely in
Mendepe about a_5. miles . LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.354

The toune of Welles is sette yn the rootes of Mendepe hille in a stony
soile and ful of springes , whereof it hath the name .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.355

The chefest spring is caullid Andres welles , LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.356

and risith in a medow plot not far above the est end of the cathedrale
chirch , first renning flat west and entering into Coscumb water sumwhat
by south . LELAND-1539-E1-H,144.357

<P_145>

The toune of Welles is large . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.359

I esteme it to lak litle of a_2. miles in cumpace ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.360

al for the most part buildid of stone . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.361

The streates have streamelettes of springes almost yn every one renning
, LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.362

and occupiyth making of cloth . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.363

Mawdelyne was a late a great clothiar yn Wellys ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.364

and so is now his sunne . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.365

The chifest of the toun lyith by est and west , and sum parte cast out
with a streat by south , in the out part wherof was a chapelle , as sum
say , of Thomas Beket . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.366

Ther is but one paroch chirch in Welles , LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.367

but that is large , LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.368

and standith in the west part of the toun : LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.369

and is dedicate to Sainct Cuthberte . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.370

There is an hospitale of 24. poore menne and wymen at the north side of
S. Cuthbertes chirch , LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.371

there is a cantuary preste . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.372

The hospitale and the chapelle is buildid al in lenghth under one roofe
from west to est . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.373

Nicolas Budwith Bisshop of Bath was founder of this ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.374

and brought it almost to the perfection , LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.375

and that that lakkid was completid by one John Storthwayt , one of the
executors of the testament of Bubwith . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.376

There was an other hospitale of S. John yn the town , stonding hard on
the ripe by south of S. Andreas streme . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.377

This hospitale was foundid by {COM:edition_has_ellipsis} and Hughe ,
bisshops . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.378

Clerk Bisshop of Bath had a late this house gyven to hym by the king for
the lordship of Dogmeresfeld . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.379

There is a conduct in the market place derivid from the bisshopes
conduct by the licens of Thomas Bekington Bisshop sumtyme of Bath , for
the which the burgeses ons a yere solemply visite his tumbe , and pray
for hys sowle . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.380

There be xij. right exceding fair houses al uniforme of stone high and
fair_windoid in the north side of the market place , joining hard to the
north west part of the bisshop's palace . LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.381

This cumly peace of work was made by Bisshop Bekington , that myndid ,
yf he had lyvid lengger , to have buildid other xij. on the south side
of the market steede , the which work if he had complishid it had bene a
spectable to al market places in the west cuntery .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,145.382

Wyllyam Knight , now Bisshop of Bath , buildith a crosse in the market
place , a right sumptuus peace of worke : in the <P_146> extreme
circumference wherof be vij. faire pillers , LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.383

and in another circumference withyn them be vj. pillers and yn the
midle of this circumference one piller ; LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.384

al these shaul bere a volte , LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.385

and over the volte shaul be domus civica . LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.386

The area afore the bisshop's palace lyith est of the market stede ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.387

and hath a fair high waul toward the market stede , and a right goodly
gate house yn it , made of late by Bisshop Bekingtun , as it apperith by
his armes . LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.388

On the south side of this area is the bisshop's palace dichid brodely
and waterid about by the water of S. Andres streame let into it .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.389

This palace ys strongely waullid and embateld castelle lyke ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.390

and hath in the first front a godly gate house yn the midle , and at
eche end of the front a round towr , LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.391

and 2. other round towers be lykelyhod yn the southside of the palace ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.392

and then is ther one at every corner . LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.393

The haul of the palace ys exceding fayre . LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.394

The residew of the house is large and fair . LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.395

Many bisshops hath bene the makers of it , as it is now .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.396

The chanons of Welles had there houses , afore the translation of the se
to Bath , wher now the bisshop's palace is . LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.397

John of Tours first Bisshop of Bath put them out ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.398

and they syns hath buildid them a_xij. very faire houses , partely on
the north side of the cimitery of the cathedrale chirch , partely
without . LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.399

Bishop Bekington buildid the gate house at the west ende of the
cemiterie . LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.400

The decanes place is on the northe side of the cimitery .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.401

Ther is at the est ende of the cimitery a volt and a gate , and a galery
over , made by Bekington . LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.402

From Welles to Glessenbyri about a_5. miles from north to south west .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.403

Fyrst yn the toune over S. Andres water by S. John's , aboute a
quarter of a mile out of Welles I passid over a litle broket , an arme
of S. Andres water or Welles water : LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.404

And ther as I passid over it I saw hard on the lifte hand a stone bridge
of one arche . LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.405

This arme shortly after joynith yn the medowes with the principal part
of Welles water . LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.406

And about half a mile beyond this bridg I passid over another brook
caullid Coscumbe water a bigger streme then Welles water .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,146.407

I lernid there , that Welles water metith with Coscumbe <P_147> water on
the right hond not far from the causey , LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.408

and so go yn one botom to the mere . LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.409

There is a castelle on an hille in this medow about Coscumb water ,
cujus ruinae adhuc apparent , communely caullid Fenne-Castel .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.410

Cosecumbe broke risith a mile above Shepton , LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.411

then to Shepton , LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.412

then to Coscumb a mile . LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.413

Then to Dultingcote bridge a_3. miles . LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.414

Then about a mile dim. {COM:half?} to the bridges yn the way betuixt
Welles and Glessenbyri . LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.415

Then a mile or more of I cam to a praty streame of water that at the
stone bridge that I passid over cam doun by the lifte hand :
LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.416

and hard above the bridge of one stone arche brake ynto 2. partes ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.417

and therby I passid over 2. litle stone bridgges .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.418

Then about half a mile farther I cam to a few houses ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.419

and so enterid into a very great playne medow of 6. or 7. miles about
in cumpace by estimation , LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.420

and so passid about a mile farther by a causey onto Hartelake bridg of
one arche of stone . LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.421

As much of this playne medow or more as is weste of this causey cis
pontem de Hertlak is caullid Cranelmore . LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.422

That part that lyith by est of it , is caullid Seggemore .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.423

The water of Sowey cummith thorough this bridge of stone ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.424

and risith in the rootes of Mendepe-hille by est at Doulting village
owte of a welle bering the name of S. Aldelm .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.425

A mile by est or ever this streame cum to Hartelak bridg ther is an arme
cast out by force out of Sowey water , and a marsch walle made by mennys
policy betwixt this arme forcid out and the principale streame of Sowey
, LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.426

and this waulle continuith to Hartelak bridge , and mile lower :
LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.427

and then booth go soone after into the mere . LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.428

If this marsch waulle were not kept , and the canales of eche partes of
Sowey river kept from abundance of wedes , al the plaine marsch ground
at sodaine raynes wold be overflowen , and the profite of the meade lost
. LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.429

From Harkeley bridg I passid by a litle bridge over the arme of Sowey .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,147.430

As much of this more or medow ground that lyith beyond <P_148> Hartelake
bridge by west south west is caullid Glessenbyri-More .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.431

From Hartlake bridg I passid by a low about a quarter of a mile :
LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.432

and then I conscendid by a litle and a litle to hilly ground a hole
miles ryding , LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.433

and so enterid into Glessenbyri . LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.434

The chief streate and longgest of the towne of Glessenbyri lyith by est
and weste , LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.435

and at the market crosse in the west ende there is a streate by flat
south and almost northe . LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.436

There is a market kept in Glessenbyry every weke on the Wensday .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.437

Ther be 2. paroche chirchis yn Glessenbyri , LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.438

S. John Baptiste on the north side of the principal streat of the toune
. LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.439

This is a vary fair and lightsum chirch : LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.440

and the est part of it is very elegant and isled .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.441

The body of the chirch hath arches on eche side .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.442

The quier hath 3. arches on eche side . LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.443

The quadrate tour for belles at the west end of the chirch is very high
and fair . LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.444

Ther lyith on the north side of the quier one Richard Atwell that died
circa annum D. 1472 . LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.445

This Atwelle did much cost in this chirch , LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.446

and gave fair housing that he had buildid in the toune onto it . In
Latten called ad fontem . LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.447

Johanna wife to Atwelle lyith buried in a lyke marble tumbe on the south
side of the quier . LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.448

Ther lyith one Camel a gentilman in a fair tumbe in the south part of
the transept of the chirch . LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.449

Briwetun river cummith from Briwetun x. miles of to the west part of
the toun of Glessenbyri , LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.450

and so rennith to the mere a_2. miles lower . LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.451

Or ever this river cum to Glessenbyri by a mile it cummith to a bridge
of stone of a_4. arches comunely caullid Pontperlus , wher men fable
that Arture cast in his swerd . LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.452

The river brekith at this bridge ynto 2. partes , wherof the
principalle goith to Glessenbyri . LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.453

The other goith thoroug low morisch grounde , LELAND-1539-E1-H,148.454

and metith <P_149> again with the principal streame or ever that it
goith into the mere . LELAND-1539-E1-H,149.455

The mere is as at high waters in winter a_4. miles in cumpace , and
when it is lest a_2. miles and an half , and most communely 3. miles .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,149.456

This lak or mere is a good mile yn lenght : LELAND-1539-E1-H,149.457

and at the ende of it toward west it cummith again in alveum ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,149.458

and going about a mile it brekith ynto 2. armes , whereof the one goith
to Highe-bridge , the other to Rookes-bridge , LELAND-1539-E1-H,149.459

and so the armes goith a sundre to the by_crekes .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,149.460

From Wellys by south to Doultingcote bridge of stone , under the whiche
Coscumbe water rennith about a mile al by very ille rokky way .
LELAND-1539-E1-H,149.461

Thens I passid about a mile more by lyke ground ,
LELAND-1539-E1-H,149.462

and this far I saw sum store of elme wood . LELAND-1539-E1-H,149.463

