<BEGIN_locke-1685-e3-h>

<P_44>

20 . Let his bed be hard and rather quilts then feathers .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,44.3

Hard lodging strengthens the parts whereas being buried every night in
feathers melts and dissolves the body and is often the cause of
weakenesse and the forerunner of an early grave , and besides the stone
which has commonly its rise from this warme wraping of the reins .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,44.4

Severall other indispositions and that which is the root of <P_45> them
all a tender weakely constitution is very much oweing to downe beds .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.5

Besides he that is used to hard lodging at home will not misse his sleep
<paren> where he has most need of it <$$paren> when he travells abroad
for want of his soft bed and his pillars laid in order ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.6

and therefore I thinke it would not be amisse to make his bed after
different fashons . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.7

Sometimes lay his head higher sometimes lower , that he may not feele
every litle change he must be sure to meet with , who is not designed to
lye alwayes in my young masters bed at home and to have his maid to lay
all things in print and tuck him in warme . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.8

The great cordiall of nature is sleepe , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.9

he that misses it will suffer by it , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.10

and he is very unfortunate who can take his cordiall only in his mothers
guilt cup and not in a wooden dish . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.11

He that can sleepe soundly takes the cordial LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.12

and matters not whether it be on a soft bed or on the hard boards ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.13

t@ @is sleepe only that is the thing necessary . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.14

21 . One thing more there is which has a great influence upon the
health , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.15

and that is goeing to stoole regularly . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.16

People that are very loose have seldome strong thoughts or strong bodies
, LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.17

but the cure of this both by diet and medecine being much more easy then
the contrary evill there needs not much to be said about it ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.18

for if loosnesse come to threaten either by its {SIC:it} violence or
duration it will soone enough and sometimes too soone make a phisitian
be sent for , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.19

and if it be moderate and short it is commonly best to leave it to
nature . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.20

On the other side costiveness has too its ill effects
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.21

and is much harder to be dealt with by physique , purgeing medicines
which seeme to give releife rather increasing then removeing the evill .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.22

22 . It haveing been an inconvenience that my owne natural constitution
disposed me to , I would have been glad of a cure .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.23

Not findeing it in books I set my thoughts on worke beleiveing that
greater changes then that might be made in our bodys if we tooke the
right course and proceeded by rationall steps . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,45.24

<P_46>

23 . 1 . Then I considerd that goeing to stoole was the effect of
certaine motions of the body espetially of the peristaltique motion of
the guts . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,46.26

24 . 2 . I considerd that several motions that were not perfectly
voluntary might yet by use and constant application be brought to be
habitual if by any unintermitted custome it were at certaine seasons
endeavourd to be constantly produced . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,46.27

25 . 3 . I had observed some men who by takeing after supper a pipe of
tobacco never failed of a stoole and begun to doubt with myself whether
it were not more custome then the tobacco that gave them that benefit of
nature LOCKE-1685-E3-H,46.28

or at least if the tobacco did it it was rather by exciteing a vigorous
motion in the guts then by any purging quality , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,46.29

for then it would have had other effects . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,46.30

26 . Haveing thus once got the opinion that it was possible to make it
habituall , the next thing was to consider what way and meanes was the
likeliest to obteine it . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,46.31

27 . 4 . Then I guessd that if a man after his first eating in the
morning would presently solicit nature and trye whether he could strain
himself soe as to obteine a stoole , he might in time by a constant
application bring it to be habituall . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,46.32

The reasons that made me choose this time was 1. because the stomach
being then empty , if it received any thing gratefull to it <paren> for
I would never have any one eat {COM:preceding_word_"eat"_emended} but
what he likes and when he has an appetite <$$paren> it was apt to
imbrace it close by a strong constriction of its fibres , which
constriction I was apt to thinke might probably be continued on in the
guts and soe increase their peristaltique motion , as we see in the
Ileus that an inverted motion being begun anywhere below continues
itself all the whole length and makes even the stomach obey that
irregular motion . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,46.33

2 . because when men eat they usualy relax their thoughts
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,46.34

and {SIC:on} the <P_47> Spirits then free from other imployments are
more vigorously distributed in the lower belly , which thereby
contribute to the same effect . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,47.35

3 . Because when ever men have leisure to eat they have leisure enough
also to make soe much court to Madam Cloacina as would be necessary to
our present purpose , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,47.36

but else in the variety of humane affairs and accidents it was
impossible to affix it to any hower certain , whereby the custome would
be interrupted , whereas men in health seldome failing to eat once a day
, though the hower changed the custome might still be preservd .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,47.37

28 . Upon these grounds I proceeded to make an Experiment in myself
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,47.38

and therefore constantly after my first eating which was seldome till
dinner I went to the necessary house whether I found myself cald or noe
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,47.39

and there endeavourd to put nature upon her duty .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,47.40

I can@ @not tell what success I had in the begining , it being now a
long time since , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,47.41

but this I am sure that I got such an habit of goeing to stoole that I
doe not now once in a month faile of it after my first eating , though
sometimes the hower very much alters , unlesse it be by my own neglect ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,47.42

for whether I have any motion or noe if I goe to the place and doe my
part , I am sure to have nature very obedient , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,47.43

and this I thinke any one else may doe that will at first but take
constantly a litle pains with himself . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,47.44

29 . I would therefore advise you that this course should be taken with
your Son . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,47.45

Every day presently after he has eaten his breakefast let him be set
upon the stoole as if disburthening were in his power as much as filling
his belly {COM:is_in_his_power} , and let not him nor his maid know
anything to the contrary but that it is soe , and if he be forced to
endeavour by being hinderd from his play or eating again till he has
been effectually at stool or at least donne his utmost I doubt not but
<P_48> in a litle while it will become habituall to him ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.46

for children that are usually intent on their play and very heedlesse of
any thing else , often let passe these motions of nature when she calls
on them but gently , which often not being repeated they doe by degrees
bring themselves into an habituall costivenesse . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.47

30 . How far you will thinke this worth tryall in your owne health I
can@ @not tell , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.48

this I am sure LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.49

if you need it it may not {COM:preceding_word_"not"_emended} be
disadvantageous to you , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.50

and if any one goes to stoole once in 24 howers I thinke it enough .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.51

31 . This is all I have to trouble you with concerning his management
in the ordinary course of his health . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.52

Perhaps it will be expected from me that I should give him some
directions of physick to prevent diseases . For which I have only this
one very sacredly to be observed , never to give children any physick
for prevention . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.53

The rules I have already given will I suppose doe that better than all
the Apothecarys shops and medicines in the County ;
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.54

have a great care of tampering that way , least instead of preventing
you draw on diseases . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.55

Nor even upon every litle indisposition is physick to be given or the
physitian to be cald , espetially if he be a busyman that will presently
fill their windows with gally_pots and their stomachs with drugs .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.56

It is safer to leave them wholy to nature then to put them into the
hands of one forward to tamper or that thinkes children are to be curd
in ordinary distempers by any thing but diet or by a method very litle
distant from it , it seeming suitable both to my reason and experience
that the tender constitutions of children should have as litle donne to
them as is possible and as the absolute necessity of the case requires .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.57

A litle cold stild red popywater which is the true surfet water , with
ease and abstinence from flesh , often puts an end to several distempers
in the beginning which by too forward applications might have been made
lusty diseases . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,48.58

<P_49>

When such a gentle treatment will not prevent the growing mischeife but
that it will turne into a formed disease , to which your children are as
well liable as others , it will be time to seeke the advice of some
sober discreet physitian . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,49.60

In this part I hope I shall finde easy beleive LOCKE-1685-E3-H,49.61

and noe body can have a pretence to doubt of a physitians advice when he
counsells you not to be too forwards in makeing use of physick and
physitians . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,49.62

32 . And thus I have donne with what concernes the body and health ,
which reduces itself to these few and easily observeable rules , plenty
of open air and sleepe , plain diet , noe wine nor strong drinke , and
very litle or noe physick , not too warme or strait clothing ,
espetially the head and feet kept cold and the feet often used to cold
water and exposed to wet . Due care being had to keepe the body in
strength and vigour , soe that it may be able to obey and execute the
orders of the minde . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,49.63

The next and principall businesse is to set the minde right , that in
all occasions it may be disposed to doe noething but what may be
suitable to the dignity and exellency of a rationall creature .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,49.64

33 . If what I have said in the begining of this discourse be true as I
doe not doubt but it is , viz. That the differences to be found in the
manners and abilitys of men is oweing more to their Education then
anything else , we have reason to conclude that great care is to be had
of the formeing childrens mindes and giveing them that season early
which shall influence their lives always after . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,49.65

For when they doe well or ill the praise or blame will be laid there .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,49.66

And when any thing is donne untowardly the common saying will passe upon
them , That it is suitable to their breeding . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,49.67

34 . As the strength of the body lies chiefely in being able to <P_50>
endure hardships , soe also does that of the minde .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.68

And the great principle and foundation of all vertue and worth is placed
in this , That a man is able to deny himself his owne desires , crosse
his owne inclinations , and purely follow what reason directs as best
though the appetite leane the other way . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.69

35 . The great mistake I have observed in peoples breeding children has
been that this has not been taken care enough of in its due season .
That the minde has not been made obedient to rules and pliant to reason
when at first it was most tender , most easy to be bowed .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.70

Parents being wisely ordend by nature to love their children are very
apt , if reason watch not their natural affection very warily , are apt
I say to let it run into fondnesse . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.71

They {COM:preceding_word_"They"_emended} love their litle ones
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.72

and t@ @is their duty , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.73

but they often with them cherish their fault too .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.74

They must not be crossed forsooth , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.75

they must be permitted to have their wills in all things ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.76

and they being in their infancys not capeable of great views their
parents thinke they may safely enough indulge their litle irregularitys
and make themselves sport with that pretty perversnesse which they
thinke well enough becomes that innocent age . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.77

But Solon very well replyd to a fond parent that would not have his
child corrected for a perverse trik but excused it saying t@ @was a
small matter , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.78

ay said Solon but custome is a great one . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.79

36 . The fondling must be taught to stricke and call names ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.80

must have what he cryes for , and doe what he pleases .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.81

Thus parents by humoring and cockering them when litle corrupt the
principles of nature in their children , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.82

and wonder afterwards to taste the bitter waters when they themselves
have poisond the fountains . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.83

For when the children are grown up and these ill habits with them , when
they are now too big to be dandled and their parents can noe longer make
use of them as play things , then they complain that the brats are
untoward , perverse , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.84

then they are offended to see them willfull , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,50.85

<P_51>

and are troubled with these ill humors which they themselves inspired
and cherishd in them , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.87

and then perhaps too late would be glad to get out those weeds which
their own hands have planted and which now have taken too deep root to
be easily extirpated . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.88

For he that has been used to have his will in every thing as long as he
has been in coats , why should we thinke it strange that he should
desire and contend for it still when he is in breetches .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.89

Indeed as he grows more towards a man , it shows his faults the more ,
soe that there be few parents then soe blinde as not to see them , soe
insensible as not to feele the ill effects of their owne indulgence .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.90

He had the will of his maid before he could speake or goe ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.91

he had the mastery of his parents ever since he could prattle ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.92

and why now he is grown up , is stronger and wiser then he was then ,
why now of a suddain must he be restraind and curbd ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.93

why must he at 7 , 14 , or 20 yeares old loose the priviledg which the
parents indulgence till then soe largely allowd him ?
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.94

Trye it in a Dog or an horse or any other creature ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.95

and see whether the ill and resty triks they have learnt when young are
easily to be mended when they are knit , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.96

and yet none of these creatures are half soe willfull and proud , are
half so desirous to be masters of themselves and others , as man .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.97

37 . We are generally wise enough to begin with them when they are very
young LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.98

and discipline betimes those other creatures we would make usefull to us
. LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.99

They are only our ofspring that we neglect in this point
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.100

and haveing made them ill children we foolishly expect they should be
good men . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.101

For if the child must have {COM:preceding_word_"have"_emended} wine and
sugar plumbs when he has a minde to it rather then make the poore baby
cry or be out of humour , why when he is grown up must not he
{COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} be satisfied too if his desires carry
him to wine or women ? LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.102

They are objects as suitable to the longing of that age as what he cried
for when litle was to the inclination of a child .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,51.103

The fault lies <P_52> not in haveing desires suitable to the
apprehensions and appetites of these severall ages but in the not
haveing them subject to the rules and restraints of reason .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,52.104

The difference lies not in the haveing or not haveing appetites but in
the power to govern and deny our selves in them .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,52.105

And he that is not used to submit his will to the reason of others when
he is young will scarce hearken or submit to his owne reason when he is
of an age to make use of it . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,52.106

And what a kinde of man such a one is like to make is easy to forsee .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,52.107

38 . I looke upon it then that the principall of all vertue and
Excellency lyies in a power of denying our selves the satisfaction of
our own desires where reason does not authorize them .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,52.108

This power is to be got and improved by custome , made easy and familiar
by an early practise . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,52.109

If therefore I might be heard I would advise that contrary to the
ordinary way children should be used to submit their desires and goe
without their longings even from their very cradles .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,52.110

From the time that they began to understand any thing they should be
taught to know that they were not to have any thing because it pleased
them , but because it was thought fit for them . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,52.111

If things suitable to their wants were supplied to them soe that they
were never sufferd to have any thing because they cried for it , they
would learne to be content without it , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,52.112

would never crye for mastery , nor never be half soe uneasy to
themselves and others as they are because from the first begining they
are not thus handled . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,52.113

If they were never sufferd to obteine any thing by the impatience they
expresse for it , they would noe more crye for other things then they
doe for the moon . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,52.114

39 . I say not this as if children were not to be indulged in any
<P_53> thing , or that I expected they should in hanging sleeves have
the reason and conduct of counsellors . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.115

I consider them as children that must be tenderly used , that must play
and have play things . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.116

That which I meane is that when ever they desire any thing not fit for
them to have or doe , they should not be permitted it because they were
litle and desird it . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.117

Nay what they once craved , were importunate for , or once cried for ,
they should be sure for that very reason to be denyd .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.118

I have seen children at a Table who what ever was there never asked for
any thing but contentedly tooke what was given them ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.119

and at another place I have seen others cry for every thing they saw ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.120

must be served out of every dish , and that first too .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.121

What made this vast difference but that one was accustomd to have what
he cald or cried for , the other to goe without it .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.122

The younger they are , the lesse I say are there unruly and disorderly
appetites to be complyd with , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.123

and the lesse reason they have of their owne , the more are they to be
under the absolute power and restraint of those in whose hands they are
. From which I confesse it will follow that none but discreet people
should be about them . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.124

If the world commonly does otherwise I can@ @not help that ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.125

I am telling you what I thinke should be , which if it were already in
fashon I thinke I need not trouble you with such a discourse as this .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.126

And I beleive when you have considerd of it you will be of opinion with
me that the sooner this way is begun with children the easier it will be
for them and their governours too . And that this ought to be observd
as an inviolable maxime that what ever once is denied them they are
certainly not to obteine by crying or importunity unlesse one has a
minde to teach them to be impatient importunate and troublesome by
rewarding them when they are soe . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.127

40 . I advise you therefore if you intend ever to governe your son to
begin it now . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,53.128

Let the rules you prescribe him and what you say <P_54> be inviolably
observed . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.129

If you will have him have the obedience of a son hereafter doe you be
sure to keep and shew the authority of a father now , if you would have
him stand in awe of you imprint it presently , and as he approaches more
to a man admit him nearer to your familiarity , so shall you have him
your obedient subject <paren> as is fit <$$paren> whilst he is a child ,
and your affectionate freind when he is a man . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.130

For me@ @thinkes they misplace mightily the treatment due to their
children who are indulgent and familiar when they are litle , but severe
to them and keep a distance when they are grown up .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.131

For liberty and indulgence can doe noe good to children ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.132

their want of judgment makes them stand in need of restraint and
discipline , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.133

and on the contrary imperiousnesse and severity is but an ill way of
treating of men who have reason of their owne to guide them , unlesse
you have a minde to make your children when grown up weary of you and
secretly to say dayly within themselves , when will you die , father .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.134

41 . I imagin every one will judg it reasonable that their children
when litle should looke upon their parents as their Lords , their
absolute Governors , and as such stand in awe of them . And that when
they are grown up they should looke on them as their best and their only
sure freinds , and as such love and reverence them .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.135

The way I have mentiond , if I mistake not , is the only one to obteine
this , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.136

we must looke upon our children when grown up to be like to our selves ,
with the same passions , the same desires . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.137

We would be thought rational creatures and have our freedome ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.138

we love not to be uneasy under the constant rebukes and browbeatings ,
the severe humors and great distance of those we converse with .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.139

Who ever is soe when he is a man will looke out other Company , other
freinds , other conversation , with whom he can be at ease .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,54.140

If therefore a strict hand be kept over children from the begining they
will in <P_55> that age be tractable and quietly submit to it , as never
haveing known any other , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.141

and if as they grow up to the use of reason the rigor of government be
as they deserve it gently relaxed , the fathers brow be more smoothed to
them , and the distance by degrees abated , his former restraints will
increase their love when they finde it was only a kindenesse to them and
a care to make them capable to deserve the favour of their parents and
the esteeme of everybody else . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.142

42 . Thus much for the method of your discipline in generall .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.143

If you thinke a strict hand at all is to be held upon children I thinke
it should be most soe when they are youngest , from the time they are
capable of understanding any thing . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.144

Feare and awe ought to give you the first power over their mindes , and
Love and Freindship in riper years to hold it . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.145

For the time must come when they will be past the rod and correction ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.146

and then if the Love of you make them not obedient and dutifull , if the
Love of vertue and reputation keepe them not in laudible courses , I
aske what hold will you have then upon them to turne them to it .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.147

Indeed feare of haveing a scanty portion if they displease you may make
them slaves to your estate , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.148

but they will never_the_lesse be ill and wiked in private ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.149

and that restraint will not last always . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.150

Every man must some time or other be trusted to himself and his own
conduct , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.151

and he that is a good , a vertuous , an able man must be made soe within
, LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.152

and therefore what he is to receive from Education , what is to sway and
influence his life , must be something put into him betimes , habits
woven into the very principles of his nature , and not a counterfeit
carriage and dissembled outside put on by feare only to avoid the
present anger of a father who perhaps may disinherit him .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.153

43 . This being laid downe in general as the method ought to be taken ,
t@ @is fit we now come to particulars . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,55.154

I have spoke soe much of carrying a strict hand over children that
perhaps I shall be suspected <P_56> of not considering enough what is
due to their tender ages and constitutions , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.155

but that opinion will vanish when you have heard me a litle further .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.156

For I am very apt to thinke that great severity of punishment does but
very litle good , nay great harme , in Education ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.157

and I beleive it will be found that caetris paribus those children who
have been most chastised seldome make the best men .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.158

All that I have hitherto contended for is that whatsoever rigor is
necessary it is more to be used the younger children are , and haveing
by a due application wrought its due effect is to be relaxd and changed
into a milder sort of government . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.159

The first thing parents are to doe is to get an awe upon the mindes of
their children and then by that and not by blowes to bring them to
submit their will perfectly to theirs . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.160

44 . First then I would have children very seldome beaten .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.161

T@ @is to make slaves and not vertuous men to use them to be governd by
the feare of the scourge , and to know noe other motive of their actions
, noe other rule of right and wrong but the cudgle .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.162

Two faults and only two there be that I would have them whipd for to
give them the greater abhorrence of them , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.163

and that is Lyeing and obstinacy or rebellion , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.164

and in these two I would have it orderd soe that the shame of the
whiping and not the pain should be the greatest part of the punishment .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.165

Shame of doeing amisse and deserving chastisement is the only true
restraint belonging to vertue , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.166

the smart of a rod if shame accompanies it not soon weares out ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.167

and will quickly by use loose its terror , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,56.168

and I have known the children of a person of quality kept in awe by the
feare of haveing their shoes puld off , as much as others by
apprehensions of a rod hangeing over <P_57> them ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.169

and some such punishment I thinke better then beating ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.170

for t@ @is shame of the fault and the disgrace that attends it that they
should stand in feare of , rather then paine , if you would have them
have a temper truely ingenuous . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.171

45 . A lie is so ill a quality and the mother of soe many ill ones that
spawn from it and take shelter under it that I would have a child be
bread up in the greatest abhorrence and detestation of it imaginable .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.172

It should be deeply imprinted on his minde that it is soe base a thing ,
soe great a fault , that it is against all custome and practise ,
against common sense to pardon it in a gentleman
{COM:preceding_word_"gentleman"_emended} , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.173

and therefor it being a fault that none but tinkers and coblers , rogues
and beggerboys commit , he is not ever to expect impunity if he be ever
guilty of it . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.174

46 . Another thing that will require punishment is stubbornesse and an
obstinate disobedience . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.175

Whatever particular action you bid him at present doe or forbeare you
must be sure to see yourself obeyd . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.176

Noe quarter in this case , noe resistance , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.177

for when it once come to be a triall of skill and contest for mastery
<paren> as if you command and he refuses it is <$$paren> between you you
must be sure to carry it whatever blows it cost , if a nod or words will
not prevaile ; unlesse for ever after you intend to live in obedience to
your son . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.178

But here lies the difference between these two faults and the ways of
reforming them . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.179

A lie unlesse it be very grosse you need not always seeme to take notice
of , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.180

and soe trye to give him an abhorrence of it by gentler ways ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.181

but obstinancy being an open defiance you can@ @not overlooke ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.182

and since the occasions of punishment , espetially beating , are as much
to be avoided as may be , I would not have it often brought to this
point . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.183

If the awe I spoke of be once got , a looke will be sufficient in most
cases , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.184

nor indeed should the same carriage be expected from young children as
from those of riper years . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,57.185

They <P_58> must be permitted the foolish and childish actions suitable
to their ages without takeing notice of them . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.186

I thinke the severity I spoke of is not to extend itself to such an
unseasonable restraint . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.187

Keep them from vice and vicious dispositions and such a kinde of
behaviour in generall will come with every degree of their age as is
suitable to that age and the company they ordinarily converse with .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.188

But that your words may always carry weight and authority with them , if
it shall happen upon any occasion that you bid him leave off the doeing
of any even childish thing you must be sure to carry the point and not
let him have the mastery . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.189

But yet I say I would have the father seldome interpose his authority
and command in these cases . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.190

I thinke there are better ways of prevailing with them ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.191

and a gentle perswasion and reasoning <paren> when the first point of
submission to your will is got <$$paren> will most times doe much better
. LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.192

You will perhaps wonder to finde me mention reasoning with children ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.193

and yet I can@ @not but thinke that the true way of dealing with them .
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.194

They understand it as early as they doe language ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.195

and if I misobserve not they love to be treated as rational creatures
sooner then is imagind . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.196

T@ @is a pride should be cherishd in them and , as much as can be , made
the great instrument to traine them by . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.197

47 . It may be doubted concerning whiping , when as the last remedy it
comes to be necessary , at what time and by whom it should be donne ,
whether presently upon the commiting of the fault whilst it is yet fresh
and hot , and whether the parents themselves should beat their children
. LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.198

As to the first I thinke it should not be donne presently , least
passion mingle with it , and soe though it exceed the just proportion
yet it loose the authority , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.199

for even children discerne when we doe things in passion ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.200

but as I said before that has most weight with them that appeares
sedately to come from their parents reason , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.201

and they are not without this destinction . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,58.202

Next <P_59> if you have any discreet servant capable of it and has the
place of governing your childe I thinke it is best the smart should come
more immediately from another hand though by the parents order , who
should see it donne , whereby the parents authority will be preservd and
the childs aversion for the pain it suffers be rather turned on the
person that immediately inflicts it . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,59.203

For I would have a father seldome stricke his childe but upon very
urgent necessity and as the last remedy , LOCKE-1685-E3-H,59.204

and then perhaps it will be fit to doe it soe that the childe should not
quickly forget it . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,59.205

But as I said before beating is the worst and therefore the last meanes
to be used in the correction of children , and therefore never but in
cases of extremitys and that very very seldome . LOCKE-1685-E3-H,59.206

