<BEGIN_lords-1539-e1-h>

<P_1.2,123>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXLV_THE_LORDS_OF_THE_COUNCIL_TO_KING_HENRY_VIII=TH=,_RESPECTING_THE_LORD_LAWARRE,_A._D._1539>

<P_1.2,124>

Our most bounden dueties right humbly remembred to your most excellent
Maieste . LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,124.5

Please your most noble Grace to be advertised that We your most humble
subjects and obedient servaunts have this present daye employed all our
most diligence , industrie , and activite to trye oute the veray botom
and pith of suche things as the Lorde Lawarre hath ben detected to have
offended your Majeste . LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,124.6

But as yet we can fynde no sufficient grounde to committe hym to prison
into your Graces Towr . LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,124.7

And for thies two or thre dayis th'@ @affaires <paren> as your Maieste
knoweth <$$paren> be suche that we have differred tyll the same be
passed the further enserching , with all meanes possible to trye the
very effect of his detection . LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,124.8

In the meane tyme we have in your Maiesties name commaunded hym to write
all suche things as he hath allredy confessed , and that can come to his
mynd . And further , that upon payne of his allegeaunce he shal kepe
his house , and commone with no maner suspecte persone tyll we shall
further declare unto hym your graciouse pleasur .
LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,124.9

Beseching your most noble and benigne Grace that , seen upon
consyderacion that we fynde as yet no sufficient mater agenst hym , and
that having respect as@ @well to your mercyfull clemencye , as also to
your Graces honor , that wold not have hym upon a weak grounde <paren>
wherof he myght clere hym self afterwarde <$$paren> to be extremely
handeled , we have respyted his Emprisonement .
LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,124.10

It may please <P_1.2,125> your Highnes not to be offended therewith ,
but to pardone us as we trust your Highnes of your most gracious
disposition woll . LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,125.11

Assuredly if we shuld have committed hym to the Towr , howesoever the
matier shuld waye , it shuld so moch touch his honeste , and he by the
same shuld be put to such a rebuke , that he shuld never be hable to
recover it . LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,125.12

Therefore agayn , most humbly prostrate at your Maiesties fete , we
beseche the same to pardone us : not doubting but in the same and all
other your Highnes maters we shal not faile to endevoyre our selfs
according to our most bounden dueties as shal@ @be , we hoope , to your
Graces satisfaction and contentement . LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,125.13

Prayeng Allmyghty God to maynteyne your Ma=ties=. prosperouse regne ,
honor , and lif , to our fruition long to endure .
LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,125.14

Writen at your Graces Cite of London , the first daye of Decembr the
xxx=th= yere of yo=r= most prosperouse and noble regne .
LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,125.15

Your Maiesties most bounden feithfull and humble subjects servaunts and
beadesmen Thomas Audeley . T. Norfolk . Charlys Suffolk . Thomas
Crumwell . Robt. Sussex . E. Hertford . W. Southampton
LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,125.16

" To the Kings moost Royall Maieste . " LORDS-1539-E1-H,1.2,125.17

