<BEGIN_machyn-1556-e1-h>

<P_38>

The xxvj day of July cam unto the Towre my lord marqwes of Northamton ,
by and my lord Robart Dudley , and the bysshop of London , and ser
Recherd Corbett ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.3

and after cam in to the Towre my lord cheyffe justes Chamley , the lord
Montyguw , at v of the cloke at nyght . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.4

The xxvij day of July the duke of Suffoke , maister Cheke
{COM:preceding_word_"Cheke"_emended} the kynges scolmaster , maister
Coke , and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} ser John Yorke , to the
Towre . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.5

The xxxj day of July was delevered owt of the Towre the duke of Suffoke
; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.6

and the sam day rod thrugh London my lade Elssabeth to Algatt , and so
to the qwens grace her sester , with a_M=l=. hors with a_C. velvett
cotes . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.7

The sam tyme cam to the Flett the yerle of Ruttland and my lord Russell
, in hold . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.8

The qwen's {COM:preceding_word_"qwen's"_emended} grace mad <em> sir
Thomas <$$em> Jarnyngham vyce-chamburlayn and captayne of the garde ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.9

and ser Edward Hastyngs her grace mad ym the maister of the horsse the
sam tym . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.10

<em> The iij day of August the Queen came riding to London , and so to
the Tower ; making her entrance at Aldgate , which was hanged , <$$em>
and a grett nombur of stremars <em> hanging about the said gate ; <$$em>
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.11

and all the strett unto Ledynhalle and unto the <em> Tower were laid
with <$$em> graffvell , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.12

and all the crafts of London stood <em> in a row , with <$$em> ther
banars and stremars hangyd over ther heds . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.13

Her grace cam , and a-for her a_M=l=. velvet cotes and cloaks
{COM:preceding_word_"cloaks"_emended} in brodere ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.14

and the mar of London bare the mase , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.15

and the erle of Arundell bare the sworde , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.16

and all the trumpets blowing {COM:preceding_word_"blowing"_emended} ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.17

and next her my lade Elssabeth , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.18

and next her the duches of Norffoke , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.19

and next her the marqwes of Exseter , <em> and other <$$em> lades ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.20

and after her the aldermen , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.21

and then the gard with bowes and gaffylens , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,38.22

and all the reseduw departyd <em> at Aldgate <$$em> in gren and whyt ,
<P_39> and red and whyt , and bluw and gren , to the nombur of iij_M=l=.
horse and speres and gaffelyns . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.23

The fenerall , the iiij day of August , of my lade Browne , the wyche
she ded in chyld-bed ; with a harold and iiij banars of armes , and mony
schochyons ; and a gret dolle , and many mornars , and a gret dener to
the pore and ryche ; the wyff of ser Antony Brown in Sussex .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.24

The v day of August cam to the Towre doctur dene of Westmynster , master
Cokes . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.25

The sam day cam out of the Marsalsay the old bysshop of London , Bonar ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.26

and dyvers bysshopes bryng hym home unto ys plasse at Powlles ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.27

and doctur Cokes whent to the sam plasse in the Marselsay that the
bysshope was in . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.28

The v day of August cam in to the Towre my lord Ferrys by ... at ix of
the cloke , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.29

and so whent he a-for the consell , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.30

and so with-in a_n@ @owre he was delevered unto ser John Gage ,
constabull of the Towre , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.31

and so he had the custody of my lord for that tyme .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.32

<em> The Queen released from prison the lord Courtenay , soon after
created earl <$$em> of Denshyre , and odur moo . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.33

And the Qwene grace mad ser Edward Hastyngs master of the horse , and
ser Thomas Jernyngham vysse-chamburlayne and captayn of the gard , and
master Rochastur master controller ; my lord marqwes of Wynchaster lord
tresorer of England , and dyvers odur offeserse , and dyvers odur .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.34

The vj day of August cam in-to the Towre , from <em> Calais , ser <$$em>
Hare Dudley , that was gohyng in-to Franse . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.35

The viij day of August was bered the nobull kyng Edward the vj ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.36

and vij yere of ys rayne ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.37

and at ys <em> bereing was <$$em> the grettest mone mad for hym of ys
deth <em> as ever <$$em> was hard or sene , boyth of all sorts of
-pepull , wepyng and lamentyng ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,39.38

and furst of alle whent a grett company of chylderyn in ther surples ,
and clarkes syngyng , and then ys father's bedmen , and then ij harolds
, and then a standard with a dragon , and then a grett nombur of <P_40>
ys servants in blake , and then anodur standard with a whyt greyhond ,
and then after a grett nombur of ys officers
{COM:preceding_word_"officers"_emended} , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.39

and after them comys mo harolds , and then a standard with the hed
offesars of ys howse ; and then harolds , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.40

Norey bare the elmett and the crest on horsbake , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.41

and then ys grett baner of armes in-@ @brodery , and with dyvers odur
baners , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.42

and then cam rydyng maister Clarensshuws with ys target , with ys garter
, and ys sword , gorgyusly and ryche , and after Garter with ys
cotte_armur in brodery , and then mor harolds
{COM:preceding_word_"harolds"_emended} of armes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.43

and then cam the charett with grett horsses trapyd with velvet to the
grond , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.44

and hevere horse havyng a {COM:preceding_word_"a"_emended} man
{COM:preceding_word_"man"_emended} on ys bake in blake , and ever on
beyryng a banar-roll of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} dyvers kynges
armes , and with schochyons {COM:preceding_word_"schochyons"_emended} on
ther horses , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.45

and then the charett kovered with cloth of gold , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.46

and on the charett {COM:preceding_word_"charett"_emended} lay on a
pycture lyeng recheussly with a crown of gold , and a grett coler , and
ys septur in ys hand , lyheng in ys robes <em> and the garter about his
leg , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.47

and a coat in embroidery of gold ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.48

about the corps were borne four banners , a banner of the order ,
another of the red rose , another of queen Jane <paren> Seymour
<$$paren> , another of the queen's mother . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.49

After him went a goodly horse , covered with cloth of gold unto the
ground , and the master of the horse , with a man of arms in armour ,
which <$$em> was offered , boyth the man and the horsse .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.50

<em> There was set up a goodly <$$em> hersse in Westmynster abbay with
banar -rolls {COM:preceding_word_"-rolls"_emended} and pensells , and
honge with velvet a-bowt . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.51

The sam day , the wyche was the viij day of August , cam to London <em>
the good <$$em> yerle of Darbe , with iiij=xx= in cottes of velvet and
oder ij_C._xviij yomen in a leveray , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.52

and so to Westmynster . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.53

The ix day of August cam the bysshope of Wyncheaster owt of the Towre
conducted {COM:preceding_word_"conducted"_emended} by the yerle of
Arundell to ys owen parish of sant Mare Overeys , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.54

and from thens with my lord of Arundell to dener to Bayth plasse .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,40.55

<P_41>

The x day of August was drounyd vij men at London
{COM:preceding_word_"London"_emended} bryge by folij ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.57

on was master Thomas of Brygys the leyff-tenants
{COM:preceding_word_"leyff-tenants"_emended} sune and heire ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.58

and iij gentyllmen more , be-syd odur ; and one ...
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.59

The xiij day of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} August dyd pryche at
Powlles crosse doctur Bourn {COM:preceding_word_"Bourn"_emended} parsun
of hehnger {COM:High_Ongar} , in Essex , the qwen's
{COM:preceding_word_"qwen's"_emended} chaplen , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.60

and ther <em> was a <$$em> gret up-rore and showtyng at ys sermon , as
yt were {COM:preceding_word_"were"_emended} lyke mad@ @-pepull , watt
yonge -pepell and woman as {COM:preceding_word_"as"_emended} ever was
hard , as herle-borle , and castyng up of capes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.61

if {COM:preceding_word_"if"_emended} my lord mer and my lord Cortenay ad
not ben ther , ther had bene grett myscheyff done .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.62

The xvj day of August was a man sett on the pelere for forgeng of falss
letters in odur mens name . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.63

The xvij day of August was mad a grett skaffold in Westmynster hall
agaynst the morow , for the duke of Northumberland commyng to be raynyd
{GLOSS:arraign} , with odur , as the marqwes of Northamton and the yerle
of Warwyke . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.64

The xviij day of August was reynyd at Westmynster hall the marqwes of
Northamton , and the duke , and th'@ @erle of Warwyke ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.65

and so they wher condemnyd to be had to the place that thay cam fro ,
and from thens to be drane thrugh London onto Tyburne , and ther to be
hangyd , and then to be cott downe , and ther bowells to be brentt , and
ther heds to be sett on London bryge and odur places
{COM:preceding_word_"places"_emended} . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.66

<em> The xix day were arraigned at Westminster hall sir Andrew Dudley ,
sir John Gates , sir Harry <$$em> Gattes , ser Thomas Palmer , and cast
<em> to be hanged and <$$em> quartered . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.67

The sam day was a gret feyre at Chelsay beyond
{COM:preceding_word_"beyond"_emended} Westmynster ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.68

and ther was dyvers howsses brent , and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} dyvers barnes with corne brent , to
the nombur ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.69

The xx day of August dyd pryche at Powlles crosse master Wattsun ,
chaplayn unto {COM:a_blank_in_the_edition} , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.70

and ther wher <em> present all the <$$em> craftes of London in ther best
leveray , syttyng on formes , every {COM:preceding_word_"every"_emended}
craft by them-seylff , and my lord mere and the aldermen , and ij_C. of
<em> the guard , <$$em> to se no dysquyet done . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,41.71

<P_42>

The sam day was bered master Kyrtun , alderman and marchand tailler ,
and marchand of the stapull of Cales , a-for non .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.73

The xxj of August was , by viij of the cloke in the mornyng , on the
Towre hylle a-boythe x_M=l=. men and women for to have seen
{COM:preceding_word_"seen"_emended} the execussyon of the duke of
Northumberland , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.74

for the skaffold was mad rede , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.75

and sand and straw was browth , and all the men that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} longest {COM:sic} to the Towre , as
Hogston , Shordyche , Bow , Ratclyff , Lymhouse , Sant Kateryns , and
the waters of the Towre , and the gard , and shyreyffs offesers ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.76

and evere man stand in order with ther holbardes ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.77

and lanes made , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.78

and the hangman was ther , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.79

and sodenly they wher commondyd to depart
{COM:preceding_word_"depart"_emended} . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.80

And the sam tym after was send for my lord mer and the aldermen and
cheyffest of the craftes in London , and dyvers of the consell ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.81

and ther was sed mas a-for the Duke <em> and the rest <$$em> of the
presonars . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.82

The xxj day of August was sett on the pelere ij men ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.83

on a prest and a-nodur a barbur , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.84

and boyth ther herers nayllyd to the pelere , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.85

the parsun of sant Alberowgh {COM:St._Ethelburga} with-in Bysshope-gate
for hannus wordes and sedyssus wordes aganst the qwen's
{COM:preceding_word_"qwen's"_emended} magesty hygnes at the sermon at
Powlles crosse , that was the Sonday the xiij day of August , and for
the up-rore that was ther don . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.86

The prest . twys ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.87

The xxj day of August was a proclamasyon , that no man shuld reson
aganst her grases magesty and her conselle , dohyng the wyche she wyll
doe to the honor of God and ys mother . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.88

The xxiij day of August was the sam prest sett on the pelere agayne for
mo wordes {COM:preceding_word_"wordes"_emended} .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.89

The sam day be-gane the masse at sant Nicolas Colabay , goodly song in
Laten , and tapurs , and <em> set on <$$em> the owtter and a crosse , in
old Fysstrett . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.90

Item , the next day a goodly masse songe at
{COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} sant Necolas Wyllyms , in Laten , in
Bredstrett . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,42.91

<P_43>

The xxv day of August was bornyd the Great
{COM:preceding_word_"Great"_emended} Hare {COM:Harry} , the grettest
shype in the world , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.93

and yt was pete and yff yt had plesyd God , at Wolwych , by
{COM:preceding_word_"by"_emended} neckclygens and for lake of over-syth
; the furst <em> yere of queen Mary . <$$em> MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.94

The xxviij day of August ded ser John Haryngton
{COM:preceding_word_"Haryngton"_emended} knyght , of Rottland-shyre ,
with-in in Saynt Ellens , Bysshopgatt stret , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.95

and from that day that he ded tyll he was cared in-to ys contray , was
mas and dirige evere day songe ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.96

and Monday the iiij day of September , he
{COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} whent in-to the contray in a horse
lytter , with ys standard and ys penon of armes , and after ys horsse
... with iiij pennons of armes borne a-bowt hym , and with a goodly
helmet gylt , with targett , sword , and crest , and a_x dosen of
schochyons , and x dosen of pensells for a herse , and staff torchys ,
and a herse of wax , and a fere mageste , and the walans gylded and
frynged , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.97

and so to Ware , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.98

and so forwards {COM:preceding_word_"forwards"_emended} .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.99

The vj day of September cam owt of the Towre my lord Ferrys , my lord
cheyff justys Chamlay , and my lord Montyguw , unto the denes place ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.100

for ther satt the consell , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.101

and ther thay wher delevered and dyscharged of the Towre with a grett
fyne . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.102

The iij day of August , at Rychemond , was my lord Cortnay created the
yerle of Denshyre of owre nobulle qwene Mare . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.103

<em> The xij day of September the citizens began to adorn the city
against the Queen's coronation ; to hang the streets , and prepare
pageants at <$$em> Fanchyrche and Grasse-chyrche and Leaden-hall , in
Gracyus strett , and at condutt in Cornhyll , and <em> the great conduit
in <$$em> Chepe , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.104

at standard in Chepe , the crosse reparyd , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.105

at {COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} the lytyll coundytt , a pagantt in
Powlles chyrche-yard {COM:preceding_word_"chyrche-yard"_emended} ,
a-nodur pagant and mony spechys , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.106

and Ludgat nuly reparyd , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.107

and mony chylderyn ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.108

<em> at the condytt <$$em> in Flettstrett a pagantt , and nuwe trymmyd
<em> very gorgyously {COM:preceding_word_"gorgyously"_emended} <$$em> ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.109

and the strett hangyd , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.110

and plases for every <em> craft to stand <$$em> severally
{COM:preceding_word_"severally"_emended} , mad with tymber from evere
craft {COM:preceding_word_"craft"_emended} ther standyng ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.111

and so to remane unto evere halle <em> for ever <$$em> when they shall
have nede for shyche dohyng . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,43.112

<P_44>

The xxj day of September was the obseqwe of the baron of Dudley ser John
Dudley at Westmynster , the bake-syd of Sant Margatts ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.114

and ther was at ys beryng prestes and clarkes syngyng in Laten , the
prest havyng a cope and the clarke havyng the halewater sprynkull in ys
hand , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.115

and after a mornar baryng ys standard , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.116

and after a-nodur beyryng ys gret baner of armes gold and sylver ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.117

and a-nodur beyryng ys elmett , mantyll , and the crest a bluw lyon's
{COM:preceding_word_"lyon's"_emended} hed standyng a-pon a crowne of
gold , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.118

and after a-nodur mornar bayryng his {COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended}
targett , and a-nodur ys sword , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.119

and after cam master Somersett the harold bayryng ys cott_armur of gold
and selver , and then the corse covered with cloth of gold to the grond
, and iiij of ys men beyryng hym , and ys armes hangyd a-pone the cloth
of gold , and xij men of ys servands bayryng xij stayffs torchys bornyng
to the chyrche ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.120

and in the qwer was a hersse mad of tymbur and covered with blake ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.121

and armes apon the blake , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.122

and after the mornars a grett compene ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.123

and a-for the durge began , the harold cam to the qwer dore
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.124

and prayd for ys soll by ys stylle , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.125

and so began the durge song in Laten , all the lessons ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.126

and then the harold prayd for a {SIC:a_for} masse ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.127

and so the masse songe in Laten ; and after ys helmet ofered , and cott
and targatt , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.128

and after all was endyd offered the standard and the baner of armes ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.129

and so hom to dener , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.130

and ther was goodly ryngyng and a gret doll ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.131

The xxj day of September was a grett wache in ...
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.132

ser Edward Hastynges , the master of the horse , in sant George's
{COM:preceding_word_"George's"_emended} on the banke a-bowt my lord of
Wynchester ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.133

for ther wher serten taken , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.134

and Sowthwarke w ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.135

The xxiiij day of September dyd pryche master doctur Fecknam at Powlles
crosse , the Sonday a-for the qwuen's
{COM:preceding_word_"qwuen's"_emended} crounasyon ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.136

he mad a godly sermon as was hard in that place .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.137

The xxviij day of September the Qwen's
{COM:preceding_word_"Qwen's"_emended} grace removed from Sant James ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.138

and so to Whyt Hall , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.139

and ther her grace took her barge unto the Towre ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,44.140

and ther all the craftes and the mare and the aldermen in bargurs with
stremars and mynstrells , as trumpets <P_45> wettes , shames , and
regalls , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.141

and with a gret shooting {COM:preceding_word_"shooting"_emended} of
gunes tyll her grace cam in-to the Towr , and ...
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.142

The xxix day of September the Qwuen's
{COM:preceding_word_"Qwuen's"_emended} grace mad knyghts of the Bathe xv
; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.143

the furst was the yerle of Devonshyre , the yonge yerle of Surray , the
iij=de= lord of Borgane , and lord Barkley , the lord Monjoye , lord
Sowche , ser Wylliam Pallet , my lord Cardyff , the lord Wyndsore@
{COM:preceding_word_"Wyndsore's"_emended} @'s sune , sir
{COM:a_blank_in_the_edition} Ryche's
{COM:preceding_word_"Ryche's"_emended} sune , sir Clynton , ser
{COM:a_blank_in_the_edition} Pagett , ser Robart Rochaster , ser Hare
Jernyngham , ser Edward Dormer . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.144

The xxx day of September the Qwuyen's
{COM:preceding_word_"Qwuyen's"_emended} grace cam from the Towre thrugh
London , rydyng in a charett gorgusly be-sene unto Westmynster ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.145

by the way at Fanche-chyrche a goodly pagant , with iiij grett gyants ,
and with goodly speches , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.146

the geneways {COM:Genoese} mad yt ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.147

at Grache-chyrche a-nodur goodly pajant of esterlyngs makyng ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.148

and at Ledyne-hall was nodur pagant hangyd with cloth of gold , and the
goodlyst playng with all maner of musyssoners , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.149

and ther was on blohyng of a trumpet all the day longe ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.150

at the conduyt in Cornhyll a-nodur of the sete ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.151

and at {COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} the grett condutt a-nodur
goodly on , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.152

and the standard pentyd and gyldyd , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.153

and the crosse pentyd ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.154

and at {COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} the lytyll conduyt a goodly
pagant ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.155

in Powlles chyrche-yerde ij pagants ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.156

and ij scaffolds on Powlles stepull with stremars ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.157

and Ludgat pentyd ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.158

at the conduyd in Flett-stret a goodly pajant and pentyd ...
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.159

holy {COM:a_closing_square_bracket_follows_the_word_"holy"} water-stokes
and sensers and copes ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.160

Westmynster chyrche , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.161

and ther her grace hard masse , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.162

and was crounyd a-pon a he stage , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.163

and after <em> she was <$$em> a-nontyd Qwene , the forst day of October
. MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.164

<em> When all <$$em> was don , her grace cam to Westmynster hall ...
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.165

yt was iiij of the cloke or she whent to dener <em> or past
{COM:preceding_word_"past"_emended} <$$em> ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.166

and ther the duke of Norffoke rod up and done the hall ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.167

my lord the yerle of Darbe he constabull , the yerle of Arundell he
boteler , and my lord of Borgane cheyff larderer , master Dymmoke the
qwyen's {COM:preceding_word_"qwyen's"_emended} champyon ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.168

and ther was <em> great <$$em> melode
{COM:preceding_word_"melode"_emended} ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,45.169

<P_46>

and the erle of Devonshyre bare the sword , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.171

and the yerle of Westmorland bare the cape of mantenans ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.172

and the erle of Shrowsbery bare the crowne , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.173

and the duke of Norffoke <em> was earl <$$em> marshall , and the yerle
of Arundell lord stuard , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.174

and the erle of Surray was doer under the duke ys grandshyr ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.175

and the erle of Woseter was her grace's
{COM:preceding_word_"grace's"_emended} carver that day at dener ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.176

my lord Wyndsore was {COM:a_blank_in_the_edition} ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.177

and at the end of the tabull dynyd my lade Elisabeth and my lade Anne of
Cleyff ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.178

and so yt was candyll-lyght or her grace or she had dynyd ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.179

and so anon {COM:preceding_word_"anon"_emended} her grace toke barge .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.180

The ij day her grace mayd lxxiiij knyghts , the morowe after her
crownnasyon , the wyche her be ther names folowyng :
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.181

The iiij day of October was cared to the Towre the archebysshope of
Yorke , and dyvers odur to {COM:a_blank_in_the_edition} .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.182

The v day of October the Qwuen's {COM:preceding_word_"Qwuen's"_emended}
grace rod unto Westmynster chyrche , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.183

and ther her grace hard masse of the Holy-gost , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.184

and ther wher ij bysshopes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.185

on delevered her the shepter and odur thyng . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.186

Her grace rod in her parlement robes , and all the trumpeters blohyng
a-for them all ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.187

and so , after her grace had hard masse , they whent to the Parlement
howsse all to-geyther , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.188

and the yerle of Devonshyre bare the sworde , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.189

and the yerle of Westmorland bare the cape of mayntenans .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.190

The xxij of October dyd pryche at Powlles doctur Westun , dene of
Westmynster , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.191

and <em> there at <$$em> evere gatt in Powlles cherche yerd wher mad ,
<em> to prevent the breaking in of <$$em> horses , and for grett throng
of -pepull , grett bars . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.192

The xxij day of October was bered the good lady
{COM:preceding_word_"lady"_emended} Bowes , the wyff of ser Marten
Bowesse late alderman and goldsmyth of London , with harolds , and with
a_C. men and women in gownes and cotes of ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.193

and xxiiij gownes of mantyll frys , alff men and the half
{COM:preceding_word_"half"_emended} women , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.194

and ys howse and the strett and the chyrche hangyd with blake clothe ,
and with ther armes a-pon the blake ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.195

hangyd with blake and armes , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,46.196

and ther wher iiij grett candyllstykes <P_47> gyldyd , with iiij grett
tapurs of ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.197

and ij grett whytt branchys bornyng gyldyd , and the compeny of Clarkes
, and prestes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.198

and then cam the corpse with iiij penons of arms borne a-bowt her ...
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.199

stayffes torchys bornyng a-bowt her with xij of ys servands beyryng of
them ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.200

and then cam the cheyffe mornars ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.201

and then my lord mare and the swordbeyrer , and ser Hare Hubbellthorne
and ser Rowland Hyll knyghtes , and mornars many , and ij knyghts
{COM:preceding_word_"knyghts"_emended} more , and dyvers gentyllmen ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.202

and after the craft of Goldsmyths
{COM:preceding_word_"Goldsmyths"_emended} ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.203

and when all was done they whent , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.204

and the durge , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.205

so home to ys placsse ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.206

and the marow after a goodly masse song in Laten , and a sermon ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.207

and when all was done they whent to dener ther .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.208

The xxix day of October dyd pryche . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.209

<em> The same day the new Lord Mayor went <$$em> toward Westmynter <em>
attended by the <$$em> craftes of London in ther best leveray ... with
trumpets blohyng and the whets playng ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.210

a goodly fuyst {GLOSS:pinnace} trymmed with banars and guns ...
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.211

waytyng of my lord mayre's {COM:preceding_word_"mayre's"_emended} barge
unto Westmynster MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.212

and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} all the craftes bargers with
stremars and banars <em> of every <$$em> craft , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.213

and so to the Cheker , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.214

and so hom-wards ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.215

my lord mayre landyd at Banard Castyll MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.216

and <em> in St. Paul's <$$em> chyrche-yerd dyd hevere craft wher set in
array {COM:preceding_word_"array"_emended} : MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.217

furst wher ij tallmen bayreng ij gret stremars of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} the Marchand-tayllers armes ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.218

then cam on <em> with a <$$em> drume and a flutt playng , and a-nodur
with a gret fife {COM:preceding_word_"fife"_emended}

all they in blue sylke , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.220

and then cam ij grett wodyn {GLOSS:wood-men,_or_savage_men_of_the_wood}
armed {COM:preceding_word_"armed"_emended} with ij grett clubes all in
grene , and with skwybes bornyng ... with gret berds and syd here , and
ij targets a-pon ther bake ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.221

and then cam xvj trumpeters blohyng , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.222

and they {SIC:then} cam in blue {COM:preceding_word_"blue"_emended}
gownes , and capes and hosse and blue sylke slevys ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.223

and evere man havyng a target and a gayffelyn to the nombur of lxx ...
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,47.224

and then cam a duyllyll , and after the bachelars all in a leveray , and
skarlett <P_48> hods ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.225

and then cam the pagant of sant John Baptyst gorgyusly , with goodly
speches ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.226

and then cam all the kynges trumpeters blowhyng , and evere trumpeter
havyng skarlet capes , and the wetes capes and godly banars , and then
the craftes , and then the wettes playhyng , and then my lord mayre's
{COM:preceding_word_"mayre's"_emended} offesers , and then my lord mayre
and ij good henchmen , and then all the aldermen and the shreyffes ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.227

and so to dener ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.228

and after dener to Powlles , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.229

and all them that bare targets dyd bare
{COM:preceding_word_"bare"_emended} after stayfftorches , with all the
trumpets and wettes blowhyng thrugh Powlles , thrugh rondabowt the qwer
and the body of the chyrche blowhyng , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.230

and so home to my lord mere's {COM:preceding_word_"mere's"_emended}
howsse . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.231

The v day of November dyd pryche master Feknam at sant Mare Overays
a-for non , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.232

and ther wher at ys sermon the yerle of Devonshyre , ser Antony Browne ,
and juge Morgayn , and dyvers odur nobull men . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.233

The sam day at after-non dyd prych master Feknam at sant Sthevyns in
Walbroke , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.234

and ther wher serten -pepull mad besenes for the sermon ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.235

and ther wher juge Browne , ser Rownland Hyll , ser Rechard Dobes , ser
John Yorke ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.236

and sum wher sent to the mare , and to the Conter .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.237

<em> The 13th of November were arraigned at Guildhall doctor Cranmer ,
archbishop of Canterbury , the lord <$$em> Gylfford Dudlay , the sune of
the duke of Northumberland , and my lade Jane ys wyff , the doythur of
the duke of Suffoke-Dassett , and the lord Hambrosse Dudlay , <em> and
the <$$em> lord Hare Dudlay , the wyche lade Jane was proclamyd Queen
{COM:preceding_word_"Queen"_emended} : MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.238

they all v wher cast for to dee . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.239

The xix day of November dyd pryche master Feknam at sant Stheyns in
Walbroke , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.240

and ther he mad the goodliest sermon that ever was hard of the blessed
sacrament of the body and blud for to be after the consecracion .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.241

The xxiiij day of November dyd ryd in a cart
{COM:preceding_word_"cart"_emended} Cheken , parsun of sant Necolas
Coldabbay , round {COM:preceding_word_"round"_emended} a-bowt London ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.242

for he sold ys wyff to a bowcher . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,48.243

<P_97>

The xiiij day of November be-gane the knyll for the most ryght reverent
father in God my lord chaunseler of England , doctur Sthevyn Gardener ,
byshope of Wynchastur , and of the preve consell with kyng Henry the
viij=th= and unto quen Mare quen of England ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.245

and with a hersse of iiij branchys , with gylt candyllstykes , and ij
whytt branchys and iij dosen of stayffes-torchys , and all the qwyre
hangyd with blake and armes , and a durge songe ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.246

and the morow masse of requiem , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.247

and alle bysshoppes and lordes and knyghtes and gentyllmen ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.248

and my lord bysshope Bonar of London did syng masse of requiem ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.249

and doctur Whyt bysshope of Lynkolne dyd pryche at the sam masse ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.250

and after all they whent to his plasse to dener .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.251

The sam day at after-none was durge in evere parryche in London , and a
hersse and ryngyng , and the morow masse of requiem ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.252

and so prayd for after the old custom . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.253

The xxj day of November at none be-gane the knyll for my lord chanseler
, MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.254

for then was the body browt to the chyrche of sant Mare Overes , with
grett compene of prestes and clarkes , and alle the bysshopes ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.255

and my lord of London dyd exsecute the offes , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.256

and ware ys myter ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.257

and ther wher ij goodly whyt branchys bornyng , and the harsse with
armes and tapers {COM:preceding_word_"tapers"_emended} bornyng , and
iiij dosen of stayffes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.258

and all the qwyre with blake , and ys armes ; and afor the corse the
kyng of haroldes with ys cot , and with v baners of ys armes , and iiij
of emages wrothe with fyne gold and inowlle ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.259

and the morowe-masse iij masse , one of the Trenete , on of owre Lade ,
and the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} iij of requiem for ys solle ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.260

and after to dener ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.261

and so he was put in a hersse tyll a day that he shall be taken up and
cared unto Wynchaster to be bered ther . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,97.262

<em> The xxvj of November a stripling was whipt about London , <P_98>
and about Paul's cross , for speaking against the bishop <$$em> that dyd
pryche the Sonday a-for . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.263

The iiij day of Desember was a voman <em> set in the <$$em> pelere for
beytyng of her chyld with rodes MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.264

and ... to peteusly ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.265

and the sam day was a man and a voman cared a-bowt London at a care-arse
for baudry and ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.266

The furst day of December was reseyvyd with pressessyon my lord
cardenall Pole into Westmynster abbay ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.267

and ther mett hym xviij {COM:preceding_word_"xviij"_emended} <em>
bishops , <$$em> MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.268

and the bysshope of Yorke dyd menyster with ys myter ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.269

<em> and they <$$em> whent a pressessyon a-bowt the chyrche and the
cloyster . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.270

The ix day of Desember was the parlement adjourned
{COM:preceding_word_"adjourned"_emended} at the Whyt Hall , her grace's
{COM:preceding_word_"grace's"_emended} place - the iij yere ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.271

and so to Sant James thrughe the parke . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.272

The x day of Desember was had to the Towre ser Anthony Kyngston knyght ,
and to the Flett , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.273

and cam owt a-gayn shortely after . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.274

The xiij day of Desember was bered at sant Androwes in the Warderobe
master Recherd Stokdun , gentyllman of the warderobe , with ij goodly
whyt branchys and xiij stayffes-torchys , and xiij pore men ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.275

and thay had gownes of mantell frysse , and iiij grett tapurs , and
money mornars ; and the strett hangyd with blake and armes ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.276

and money prestes syngyng ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.277

and the morowe masse and alffe a trentall of masses ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.278

and after the offeryng a sermon by {COM:preceding_word_"by"_emended} a
doctur callyd master Sydnam , a gray frere of Grenwyche .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.279

<em> The xv day of December , before the sermon at Paul's cross began ,
an old man , a shepherd , <$$em> be-gane to spyke serten thynges and
rayllyng , <em> whereupon he was <$$em> taken and carett to the conter
for a tyme . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.280

The xviij day of Dessember be-twyn <em> 8 and 9 <$$em> of the cloke in
the mornyng , was cared in-to Smythfeld to be bornyd on master <em>
Philpot , archdeacon of Winchester , <$$em> gentyllman , for herese .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,98.281

<P_99>

The xx day of Dessember was bered at sant Donstones in the Est master
Hare Herdsun , altherman of London and skynner , and on of the masturs
of the hospetall of the gray frers in London , with men and xxiiij women
in mantyll fresse gownes , a hersse of wax , and hong with blake ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.283

and ther was my lord mare and the swordberer in blake , and dyvers odur
althermen in blake , and the resedew of the aldermen , at ys beryng ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.284

and all the masters , boyth althermen and odur , with ther gren stayffes
in ther handes , and all the chylderyn of the gray frersse , and iiij
men in blake gownes bayryng iiij gret stayffes-torchys bornyng ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.285

and then xxiiij men with torchys bornyng ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.286

and the morowe iij masses songe ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.287

and after to ys plasse to dener ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.288

and ther was ij goodly whyt branchys , and mony prestes and clarkes
syngyng . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.289

The xij even was at Henley a-pon Temes a mastores Lentall wedow mad a
soper for master John Venor and ys wyff , and I and dyver odur neybors ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.290

and as we wher at soper , and or whe had supt , ther cam a_xij wessells
, with maydens syngyng with ther wessells , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.291

and after cam the cheyff wyffes syngyng with ther wessells ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.292

and the gentyll-woman had hordenyd a grett tabull of bankett , dyssys of
spyssys and frut , as marmelad , gynbred , gele , comfett , suger plat ,
and dyver odur ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.293

dwellyng in Ive-lane , stuard unto master G MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.294

... ser Rechard Recherdsun , prest , with ij whytt ... , xij
stayfftorchys , and iiij grett tapurs , a dolle , and a knell at Powlles
, and a-nodur at sant Feyths . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.295

The xxij day of January whent in-to Smythfeld to berne betwyn vij and
viij in the mornyng v men and ij women ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.296

on of the men was a gentyllman of the ender tempull ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.297

ys nam master Gren ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.298

and they wer all bornyd by ix at iij postes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,99.299

and ther wher a commonment thrughe London over nyght that no yong folke
<P_100> shuld come ther , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.300

for ther the grettest number {COM:preceding_word_"number"_emended} was
as has byne sene at shyche a tyme . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.301

The v day of Feybruary was bered master Crystopher
{COM:preceding_word_"Crystopher"_emended} Allen , sum-tyme altherman of
London , in sant ... in London , with iij dosen torchys , on dosen of
staff-torchys {COM:preceding_word_"staff-torchys"_emended} , ij whyt
branchys , and iiij grett tapurs , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.302

and pore men and women had gownes , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.303

and ther wher mony mornars in blake , a_lx ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.304

and the xxviij was the monyth's {COM:preceding_word_"monyth's"_emended}
mind {COM:preceding_word_"mind"_emended} MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.305

The viij day of Feybruary dyd pryche at Powlles crosse master Peryn , a
blake frere , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.306

and at the sam sermon was a prest , on ser Thomas Samsun , dyd penanse
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.307

for he had ij wyffes , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.308

and a shett abowt hym , and a tapur in ys hand bornyng a-for the precher
, and the mayre of London and the althermen and worshephull men , and
mony odur . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.309

The xij day of January was bered in Essex master Leygett , justes of
pesse , with ij whyt branchys and a_v dosen of torchys , and iiij gret
tapurs and a gret dolle , and mony mornars , and a gret dener ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.310

and shroyff sonday was ys monyth myne , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.311

and ij_dosen stayffes more , and a grett dolle to the pore and
a_ij_dosen skochyons ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.312

Grenwyche , and to the courtt gatt for the Spaneardes and odur , one
master Kayes kepyng there {COM:preceding_word_"there"_emended} tavarne
and vetell . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.313

The xxiiij day of Feybruary was the obsequies of the most reverentt
father in God , Sthevyn Gardener , docthur and bysshope of Wynchastur ,
prelett of the gartter , and latte chansseler of England , and on of the
preve consell unto Kyng Henry the viij and unto quen Mare , tyll he ded
; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.314

and so the after-none be-gane the knyll at sant Mare Overes with ryngyng
, MACHYN-1556-E1-H,100.315

and after be-gane the durge ; with a palle of cloth of gold , and with
ij whytt branchys , and ij dosen of stayffe-torchys bornyng , and iiij
grett tapurs ; and <P_101> my lord Montyguw the cheyffe mornar , and my
lord bysshope of Lynkolne and ser Robart Rochaster , comtroller , and
with dyvers odur in blake , and mony blake gownes and cotes ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.316

and the morow masse of requeem and offeryng done , be-gane the sarmon ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.317

and so masse done , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.318

and so to dener to my lord Montyguw@ @'s
{COM:preceding_word_"Montyguw's"_emended} ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.319

and at ys gatt the corse was putt in-to a wagon with iiij welles , all
covered with blake , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.320

and ower the corsse ys pyctur mad with ys myter on ys hed , with ys and
ys armes , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.321

and v gentyll men bayryng ys v banars in gownes and hods ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.322

then ij harolds in ther cote_armur , master Garter and Ruge-crosse ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.323

then cam the men rydyng , carehyng of torchys a_lx bornyng , at_bowt the
corsse all the way ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.324

and then cam the mornars in gownes and cotes , to the nombur unto ij_C.
a-for and be-hynd , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.325

and so at sant Gorges cam prestes and clarkes with crosse and sensyng ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.326

and ther thay had a grett torche gyffyn them , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.327

and so to ever parryche tyll they cam to Wynchaster ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.328

and had money as money as cam to mett them , and durge and masse at
evere logyng . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,101.329

<P_196>

The xxviij day of Aprell ther was a man sett on the pelere for
{COM:preceding_word_"for"_emended} lewd wordes and slanderers wordes .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.331

The xxv day of April , was sant Markes day , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.332

the Quen's {COM:preceding_word_"Quen's"_emended} grace supt at Beynard
castyll at my lord of Penproke place
{COM:preceding_word_"place"_emended} , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.333

and after supper the Quen's {COM:preceding_word_"Quen's"_emended} grace
rowed up and downe Temes , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.334

and a_C. {COM:preceding_word_"a"_emended} bottes at_bowte here grace ,
with trumpettes and drumes and flutes and gones , and sqwybes horlyng on
he to and fro , tyll x at nyght , or her grace depertyd ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.335

and all the water-syd st... with a_M. -pepull lokyng one here grace .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.336

The furst day of May ther was {COM:sic} ij pennys was {COM:sic} dekyd
with stremars , baners , and flages , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.337

and trumpetes and drumes and gones , gahyng a Mayng , and a-ganst the
Quen's {COM:preceding_word_"Quen's"_emended} plasse at Westmynster ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.338

and ther they shott and thruw eges and oregns on a-gaynst a-nodur , and
with sqwybes , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.339

and by chanse on fell on a bage of gune-powdur MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.340

and sett dyvers men a'fyre , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.341

and so the men drue to on syd of the penus , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.342

and yt dyd over-swelmed the pennus , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.343

and mony fell in the Temes , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.344

butt , thanke be God , ther was but on man drownyd ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.345

and a_C. bottes abowtt here , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.346

and the Quen's {COM:preceding_word_"Quen's"_emended} grace and her
lordes and lades lokyng out of wyndows ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.347

thys was done by ix of the cloke on May evyn last .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.348

The xxix day of Aprell at Dowgatt in London ther was a mayd dwelling
with master Cotyngham , on of the quen's
{COM:preceding_word_"quen's"_emended} pulters ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.349

the mayd putt in-to a pott of {COM:a_blank_in_the_edition} serten
powyssun MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.350

and browth them unto her mastores , and to iiij of her servandes ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,196.351

and they dyd <P_197> ett them ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.352

and as sone as they had ett them thay be-gane to swell and to vomett
peteusle ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.353

and ther cam a good woman causyd to be feychyd serten dolle of salett
owylle to drynke , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.354

and thanke be to God they be-gayne to mend MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.355

and never one ded of ytt ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.356

and servandes , and ther herers nayled to the pellory
{COM:preceding_word_"pellory"_emended} ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.357

was {COM:sic} thes ij persunes have {COM:sic} dullysly gyffen poyssun
<em> to their <$$em> mastores and ther howshold ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.358

and ether of them ij handes cute off . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.359

The x day of May the parlement was endyd , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.360

and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} Quen's
{COM:preceding_word_"Quen's"_emended} grace whent to the parliament
howsse . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.361

The xj day of May the sam fellow and the maid
{COM:preceding_word_"maid"_emended} was sett on the pelere a-gayne , and
ther thodur handes cut off for the sam offens .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.362

The xij day of May be-gane the Englys service
{COM:preceding_word_"service"_emended} in the quen's
{COM:preceding_word_"quen's"_emended} chapell .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.363

The xv day of May dyd pryche at Powlles cross
{COM:preceding_word_"cross"_emended} master Gryndalle ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.364

and ther was the quens consell , the duke of Norfoke , my lord keper of
the seylle , and my lord of Arundell , my lord treysorer , my lord
marques of Northamtun , my lord admerall , my lord of Sussex , my lord
of Westmorland , my lord of Rutland , and mony mo lordes and knyghtes ,
my lord mare and the althermen ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.365

and after sermon done they whent to my lord mayre to dener , and my lord
Russell . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.366

The xxj day of May dyd pryche at Powlles crosse master Horne ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.367

and ther was my lord mayre and the althermen and mony juges and
sergantes of the law , and a grett nombur of pepull to the nombur
{COM:a_blank_in_the_edition} MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.368

The xxiij day of May cam from be-yonde the see out of France and landyd
at Towr-warff , and cam thrugh London , and unto my lord bysshope of
London docthur Benard , monser Memeranse ij sunes , and ... unto ys
palles to ly ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.369

and mony lords {COM:preceding_word_"lords"_emended} and nobull men
browth them to their logying . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,197.370

<P_198>

... attes and mony mo for serten Frenche-men .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.372

The xxiiij day of May the inbassadurs the Frenche were
{COM:preceding_word_"were"_emended} browth from the byshope's
{COM:preceding_word_"byshope's"_emended} palles by land thrugh
Flet-street unto {COM:preceding_word_"unto"_emended} the quen's pales to
soper , by the most nobull men ther was a-bowt the cowrt ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.373

and ther was the hall and the privy {COM:preceding_word_"privy"_emended}
chambur and the grett chambur of pressens hangyd with ryche clothes of
arres , as ever was sene , and the cloth of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} state boyth hall and grett chamburs ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.374

and they had as great {COM:preceding_word_"great"_emended} chere at
soper , and after a bankett as goodly as has <em> been seen , <$$em>
with all maner musyke tyll mydnyght , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.375

for they wher The xxv day they wher browt to the cowrt with musyke to
dener , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.376

for ther was gret cher ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.377

and after dener to bear {COM:preceding_word_"bear"_emended} and bull
baytyng , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.378

and the Quen's {COM:preceding_word_"Quen's"_emended} grace and the
embassadurs stod in the galere lokyng of the pastym tyll vj at nyght ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.379

and after they whent by water unto Powll wharff ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.380

and landyd , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.381

and contenent unto ther logyng to the byshope of London to soper ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.382

for ther wher gorgyus aparell as has bene sen in thes days .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.383

The xxvj day of May they whent from the byshope's
{COM:preceding_word_"byshope's"_emended} howsse to Powlles warff ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.384

and toke barge , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.385

and so to Parys garden , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.386

for ther was boyth bare and bull baytyng , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.387

and the capten with a_C. of the gard to kepe rowm for them to see the
baytyng . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.388

The sam day was a proclamassyon of v of the actes ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.389

on was for The thursday the xxv day of May MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.390

master John Whyt altherman and grocer ys chyld was cristened in lytyll
sant Barthelmuw be-syd sant Antonys ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.391

thes wher the god-fathers' names , my lord marques of Wynchester now
lord tresorer of England , and my lord byshope of Wynchester docthur
Whytt , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.392

and the god-moder my lade Laxtun , lat the wyffe of ser Wylliam Laxtun
latt mare of London and grocer ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.393

and after ther was waferers and epocras grett plente ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,198.394

and after they whent home to the plasse , with the <P_199> chyld named
{COM:preceding_word_"named"_emended} John Whytt ; the wyche wyff was
master Raff Grenway altherman and grocer of London wyff .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.395

<em> The xxviij day of May ... bishopryke <$$em> of yt by quen Mare ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.396

<em> for that he had <$$em> a wyff , and odur maters that he was fayn to
... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.397

The sam day the inbassadurs of France whent <em> away , <$$em>
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.398

and toke barge toward Grayffhend MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.399

and they had ... gyftes gyffyne them , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.400

and they cared money mastiffs with {COM:preceding_word_"with"_emended}
them for the wolf , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.401

and The xxj day of May was bered at sant <em> Andrew's <$$em> in the
Warderobe mastores Boswell , the wyff <em> of ... <$$em> Boswell clarke
of the wardes , with ij whytt branchys ... , the wyche she ded with
chyld , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.402

and a dosen MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.403

and The xxx day of May was mared in the parryche of sant Andrews in the
Warderobe , master Mathuw , draper , unto the dowther of master Wylliam
Blakwell , towne-clarke of London {COM:preceding_word_"London"_emended}
the mornyng ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.404

and they wher mared in Laten , and masse , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.405

and after masse they had a bryd cupe and waffers and epocras and
muskadyll plente to hevere body ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.406

and after unto master Blakwell's
{COM:preceding_word_"Blakwell's"_emended} plasse to bryke-fast ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.407

and after a grett dener . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.408

The ij day of Juin was bered at lytyll sant Baythelmuw my lade Barnes ,
the wyff of ser George Barnes , knyght , and late mare of London ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.409

and she gayff to pore men and powre women good rosett gownes a
{COM:a_blank_in_the_edition} , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.410

and she gayffe to the powre men and women of Calles
{COM:a_blank_in_the_edition} a-pesse , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.411

and she gayff a_C. blake gownes and cottes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.412

and ther she had penon of armes , and master Clarenshux kyng of armes ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.413

and ther was a_xx clarkes syngyng afor her to the chyrche with blake and
armes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.414

and after master Horne mad a sermon , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.415

and after the clarkes song Te Dewn laudamus in Englys ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.416

and after bered with a songe , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.417

and a-for songe the Englys pressessyon , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.418

and after to the place to dener ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,199.419

ser Wylliam Garrett cheyff morner , and master Altham and master <P_200>
Chamburlayn , and her sunes and doythurs ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.420

ther was a nobull dener . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.421

<em> The vj day of June saint George's feast was kept at Windsor ;
<$$em> MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.422

the yerle of Pembroke was the <em> Queen's substitute , <$$em>
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.423

lord Montycutt and my lord of ... MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.424

ther was stallyd at that tyme the duke of Norfolk
{COM:preceding_word_"Norfolk"_emended} , my lord marques of Northamtun ,
and the yerle of Rutland {COM:preceding_word_"Rutland"_emended} , and my
lord Robart Dudley the master of the quen's
{COM:preceding_word_"quen's"_emended} horse , nuw mad knyghtes of the
Garter , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.425

and ther was gret feasting {COM:preceding_word_"feasting"_emended} ther
, MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.426

and ther be-gane the comunion that day in {SIC:and} Englys .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.427

The xxix day of May was depreved of ys byshopepryke of London doctur
Boner , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.428

and in ys plasse master Gryndall ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.429

and Nowell {COM:preceding_word_"Nowell"_emended} electyd dene of Powlles
, MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.430

and the old dene depreved , master Cole
{COM:preceding_word_"Cole"_emended} . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.431

The xj day of June dyd pryche at Powlles master Sandys
{COM:preceding_word_"Sandys"_emended} , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.432

and ther was my lorde mayre and the althermen , and my lord of Bedford ,
and with dyvers odur nobull men ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.433

and postulles masse mad an end that day , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.434

and masse a' Powlles was non that day , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.435

and the new dene toke possessyon that was afore , by my lord of Bedford
, MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.436

and thys was on sant Barnabe day ; MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.437

and the sam nyght thay had no evyng-song at Powlles .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.438

The sam nyght abowtt viij of the cloke at nyght the Quen's
{COM:preceding_word_"Quen's"_emended} grace toke her barge at Whyt hall
, and mony mo barges , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.439

and rod a-longe by the banke-syd by my lord of Wynchaster place ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.440

and so to Peper alley , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.441

and so crost over to London syd with drumes and trumpetes playhyng ard
be-syd , MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.442

and so to Whyt hall agayne to her palles . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.443

The xviij day of June dyd pryche at Powlles crosse docthur Juell ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.444

and ther was my lord mare and the althermen and master comtroller of the
quens howse ser Edward Rogers , and mony mo , boyth men and women .
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,200.445

The xxj day of June was v bysshopes deprevyd , the bysshope of Lychfeld
and Coventre , and the bysshope of Carley , the <P_201> bysshope of
Westchester , the bysshope of Landaffh , and the bysshope of ...
MACHYN-1556-E1-H,201.446

The xxiij day of June was electyd vj nuw byshopes , com from beyond the
see , master Parker bysshope of Canturbere , master Gryndall bysshope of
London , docthur Score bysshope of Harfford , Barlow Chechastur , doctur
Bylle of Salysbere , doctur Cokes of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended}
Norwyche . MACHYN-1556-E1-H,201.447

