<BEGIN_markham-1615-e2-h>

<P_1,71>

<heading>

CHAP. IIII . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,71.4

OF HORSES FOR TRAUELL ; AND HOW TO MAKE THEM AMBLE .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,71.5

<$$heading>

The <font> Husbandman <$$font> whose occupation is the generall affaires
of the common wealth , as some to the Markets , some to the Citie , and
some to the seates of Iustice ; must necessarilie be imploied almost in
continuall trauell : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,71.7

And therefore it is meet that he be prouided euer of a good and easie
trauelling <font> Horse <$$font> . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,71.8

The markes whereby he shall chuse a good trauelling <font> Horse
<$$font> , are these ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,71.9

he shall be of good colour and shape , leane_headed , and
round_foreheaded , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,71.10

a full eie , open nostrell , wide_iawed , loose_thropld , deepe_neckt ,
thin_crested , broad_breast , flat_chind , out_ribd , cleane_limbd ,
short_iointed , strong_hooued , well_mettald , neither fiery nor crauing
, strong in euerie member and easie to mount and get vp vpon ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,71.11

he shall follow without haling , and stand stil when he is restrained .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,71.12

Now for_as_much as there are a world of good <font> Horses <$$font> ,
which are not easie , and a world of easie <font> Horses <$$font> which
are not good ; you shall by these directions following , <P_1,72> make
anie <font> Horse <$$font> amble whatsoeuer : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,72.13

first then you shall vnderstand that practise hath made diuers men
beleeue that diuers waies they can make a <font> Horse <$$font> amble ,
as by gagging them in the mouthes , by toiling them in deepe earth , by
the helpe of shooes , by galloping and tiring or such like , all which
are ill and imperfect : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,72.14

yet the truth is , there is but one certaine and true way to compasse it
; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,72.15

and that is to make of strong garthwebbe , flat and well quilted with
cotton , foure pastornes for the smals of his fore_legs , vnder his
knees , and for the smals of his hinder legs somewhat below the spauen
ioints , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,72.16

to these pasterns , you shall fixe strong straps of leather , with good
iron buckles , to make shorter or longer at pleasure ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,72.17

and hauing plac't them about his foure legs , you shall take two
seuerall round roapes , of an easie twist made with strong loopes at
either end , and not aboue eight handfuls in length :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,72.18

And these the <font> Horse <$$font> standing in a true proportion , you
shall fasten to the foure straps of leather ; to wit one of them to his
neere forelegs , and his nere hinder leg , and the other to his farre
fore_leg , and his far hinder leg ; which is cald amongst <font>
horsemen <$$font> trauelling : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,72.19

with these you shall let him walke in some inclosed peece of ground till
he can so perfectlie goe in the same , that when at anie time you offer
to chase him , you may see him amble trulie and swiftlie :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,72.20

Then you shall take his backe and ride him with the same tramels , at
least three or foure times a day , till you find that he is so perfect
that no way can be so rough and vneuen , as to compell him to alter his
stroke or goe vnnimblie : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,72.21

This done , you may first take away one tramell , then after the other ,
and onelie wreath about vnder his foure fet_locks , thicke and heauie ,
great rolds of hey or straw ropes , and so ride him with the same a good
space after , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,72.22

for it will make him amble easie : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,72.23

then cut them away , and ride and exercise him without anie <P_1,73>
thing , but the ordinary helpe of the bridles , and there is no doubt
but he will keep his pace to your full contentment and pleasure .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.24

Now during this time of your teaching , if your <font> horse <$$font>
strike not a large stroak and ouer-reach enough , then you shall make
the trauell the straiter ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.25

but if he ouer-reach too much , then you shall giue it more libertie ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.26

and herein you shall finde that an inch straightning , or an inch
inlarging , will adde or abate at least halfe a foote in his full and
direct stroake . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.27

And thus much touching the teaching of anie <font> horse <$$font> to
amble of what nature {SIC:naure} or qualitie so euer hee be , or how
vnapt or vntowarde soeuer to learne . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.28

<heading>

CHAP. V . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.30

OF THE ORDERING AND DYETTING OF THE HUNTING HORSE .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.31

<$$heading>

Some loue hunting for the exercise of their owne bodies , some for the
chase they hunt , some for the running of the hounds , and some for the
training of their <font> horses <$$font> , wherby they may finde the
excellencies of their goodnes and {SIC:aud} indurant :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.33

to him therefore which placeth his delight in the goodnesse of his
<font> horse <$$font> , I would wish him thus to order and diet him ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.34

and hee shall most assuredly come to the true knowledge of the best
worth which is within him ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.35

and if in these rules which I now shewe I bee lesse curious then
formerly I haue beene ; let no man wonder thereat ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.36

but know , that Time <paren> which is the mother of experience <$$paren>
doth , in our labours , shewe vs more newe and more neerer waies to our
ends , then at the first wee conceiued ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,73.37

and though when I first practiced <P_1,74> this art I knew not how to
bring a very fat <font> horse <$$font> from <font> Michaelmas <$$font>
till <font> Christmas <$$font> to shewe his vtmost perfection , knowe
now in one first moneth <paren> though neuer so fowle <$$paren> how to
make him fit for any wager , daring now boldly to aduenture on that with
which before I thought almost present death to offer :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.38

thus doth obseruation and labour finde out the darkest secrets in art .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.39

To begin then with the first ordering of a hunting <font> horse <$$font>
, you shall know that the best time to take him from grasse is about
<font> Bartholmew <$$font> tide , the day being faire drie and pleasant
; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.40

and as soone as he is taken vp , to let him stand all that night in anie
vaste house to empty his body , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.41

the next day stable him , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.42

and giue him wheate strawe if you please , but no longer in any wise ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.43

for though the olde rule is to take vp <font> horses <$$font> bellies
with strawe ; yet it straightneth the guts , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.44

heates the liuer , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.45

and hurteth the winde : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.46

therefore let onely moderate exercise , as riding him forth to water
morning and euening , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.47

and other airings do what you expect strawe should ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.48

and for his food let it be hey that is sweet though rough , and either
old or at least well sweat it the mowe . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.49

After his belly is emptied you shall cloath him first with a single
cloath , whilest the heat indureth , and after with more as you shall
see occasion require , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.50

and when you begin to cloath the <font> horse <$$font> , then you shall
dresse , curry and rubbe him also ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.51

now forasmuch as it is a rule with ignorant <font> horse-men <$$font> ,
that if they haue but the name of keeping a hunting-horse , they will
with all care <paren> without anie reason <$$paren> lay many cloathes
vpon him , as if it were a speciall phisiche , you shall knowe they are
much deceiued therein , and may sooner doe hurt then good with
multiplicitie of cloathes ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.52

therefore to cloath a <font> horse <$$font> right , cloath him according
to the weather , and the temper of his bodie : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,74.53

as thus , if you see your <font> horse <$$font> be slight , <P_1,75>
smooth and well_coloured , then cloath him temperately as with a single
cloth , of canuase or sackcloath at the most ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.54

and if then , as the yeere growes colder , you finde his haire rise or
stare about his necke , flanks , or outward parts ; then you shall adde
to a woollen cloath , or more if neede require till his haire fall
smooth againe , holding it for your rule that a rough coat shews want of
cloathes , and a smooth coate , cloathing enough :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.55

yet if your <font> horse <$$font> haue bin cleane fedde , taken exercise
sufficient and hath not much glut within him , if then you find that in
the night he sweateth in his cloathes , then it is a signe hee is
ouer-fedde , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.56

but if hee be fowle inwardly , or hath not {SIC:out} sweat formerly ,
and now sweats coming to good feeding then you shall augment rather then
diminish anie cloathing , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.57

for his fowlenesse but then breaketh out , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.58

and being euacuated he will come to drienesse of bodie againe , and so
continue all the yeere after ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.59

and surely for an ordinarie proportion of cloathes , I hold a canuasse
cloath , and a cloath of Houswiues woollen to be at full sufficient for
a hunting <font> horse <$$font> . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.60

A hunting <font> horse <$$font> would bee drest in his daies of rest
twice a day , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.61

that is , before hee goe to his morning watring , and before hee goe to
his euening watering ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.62

for the manner of his dressing after he is vncloathed , you shall first
currie him from the tips of the eare to the setling on of his taile ,
all his whole bodie most entirely ouer with an iron combe , his legges
vnder the knees and cambrels only excepted , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.63

then you shall dust him , then currie him againe all ouer with a round
brush of bristels , then dust him the second time , then rubbe all the
loose haires awaie with your hands wet in cleane water , and so rubbe
till the <font> horse <$$font> be as drie as at the first , then rubbe
all his bodie and limbes ouer with an <font> haire-cloath <$$font> .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.64

Lastly , rubbe him ouer with a fine white linnen rubber ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,75.65

then <P_1,76> picke his eyes , nostrels , sheath , coddes , tuell an
feete very cleane , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.66

and so cloath him MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.67

and stop him round with wispes , if you water within the house ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.68

otherwise saddle him after his body is wrapt about in a wollen cloath ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.69

and so ride him forth to the water . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.70

The best water for a hunting <font> Horse <$$font> is , either a running
riuer , or a cleere spring , remote from the stable a mile , or a mile
and a halfe at most , and neere vnto some plaine peece of ground , where
you may scope and gallop after he hath drunke ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.71

and as soone as you bring your <font> Horse <$$font> to the water let
him take his full draught without trouble or interruption :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.72

then gallop and scope him vp and downe a little ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.73

and so bring him to the water againe , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.74

and let him drinke what he please : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.75

and then gallop him againe ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.76

and thus doe till you find he will drinke no more ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.77

then hauing scop't him a little , walke him with all gentlenesse home
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.78

and there cloath him vp , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.79

stop him round with great soft wispes , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.80

and so let him stand an houre vpon his bridle MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.81

and then feed him . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.82

To speake first of the food for hunting <font> Horses <$$font> , the
most ordinary is good sweet found oates , either throughly dried with
age , or els on the kilne , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.83

and if your <font> Horse <$$font> be either low of flesh , or not of
perfect stomacke , if to two parts of those oates you adde a third part
of cleane old beanes , it shall be very good and wholsome ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.84

and if your <font> Horse <$$font> be in diet for a match and haue lost
his stomake , if then you cause those beanes to be spelted vpon a milne
, and so mixt with oats it will recouer him . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.85

The next food which is somewhat stronger , and better , is bread thus
made : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.86

Take two bushels of good cleane beanes , and one bushell of wheat
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.87

and grind them together , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.88

then through a fine raunge bolt out the quantity of two pecks of pure
meale , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.89

and bake it in two or three loues by it selfe ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.90

and the rest sift through a meale siue , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,76.91

and kneade <P_1,77> it with water and good store of barme ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.92

and so bake it in great loues , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.93

and with the courser bread feed your <font> Horse <$$font> in his rest ,
and with the finer against the daies of sore labor .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.94

Now for the houres of his feeding it shall be in the morning after his
comming from water , an houre after hie noone , after his comming from
his euening water , and at nine or ten of the clocke at night vpon the
daies of his rest , but vpon the daies of his exercise , two howers
after he is thorowly colde inwardly , and outwardlie , and then after
according to the houres before mentioned . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.95

Lastly for the proportion of food , you shall keepe no certaine quantity
, but according to the <font> Horses <$$font> stomacke :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.96

that is to say , you shall feede him by a little at once , so long as
hee eates with a good appetite , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.97

but when hee beginnes to trifle or stumble with his meat , then to giue
him no more . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.98

Now for his hey you shall see that it be hie short vplandish hey ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.99

and so it be sweet , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.100

respect not how course or rough it is ; sith it is more to scower his
teeth and coole his stomacke : then for any nourishment expected from
him . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.101

Touching the <font> Horses <$$font> exercise , which is onely in the
following of the <font> hounds <$$font> , you shall be sure to traine
him after those which are most swift and speedy ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.102

for so you shall know the truth , and not be deceiued in your opinion :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.103

Touching the daies it shall be twice a weeke at least , but most
commonly thrice : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.104

As for the quantity of his exercise it must be according to his foulenes
or cleannes ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.105

for if he be very foule you must then exercise moderatelie to breake his
grease , if halfe foule , halfe cleane , then somewhat more to melt his
grease , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.106

and if altogether cleane ; then you may take what you please of him
<paren> prouided that you doe nothing to discourage his spirits
{SIC:sprits} <$$paren> to abate his mettall , or to lame his limbes ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,77.107

and after euery daies exercise be assured to giue him either the same
night <P_1,78> or the next day following , something by way of scowring
or otherwise to take away the grease formerly melted , by meanes whereof
you shall be euer sure to keepe your <font> Horse <$$font> in all good
health and perfection . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.108

The best and most excellentest way to scower or purge your <font> Horse
<$$font> from all grease , glut or filthinesse , within his body which
is a secret hitherto was neuer either sufficiently taught or perfectly
learned ; is to take of Anyseeds three ounces , of Cumming seeds sixe
drammes , of Carthamus a dramme and a halfe , of Fenegreeke-seede one
ounce two drammes , of Brimstone one ounce and a halfe ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.109

beate all these to a fine powder MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.110

and searse them ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.111

then take of sallet oyle a pinte and two ounces , of honie a pound and a
halfe , and of white wine iiij. pints , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.112

then with as much fine white meale as will suffice , make all into a
strong stiffe paste MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.113

and kneade and worke it well : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.114

this paste keepe in a cleane cloth MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.115

for it will last long , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.116

and after your <font> horse <$$font> hath been hunted and is at night ,
or in the morning exceeding thirstie , take a ball thereof as much as a
mans fist and wash and dissolue it in a gallond or two of colde water ,
and it will make the water looke white like milke ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.117

then offer it the <font> horse <$$font> to drinke in the darke , least
the colour displease him ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.118

if he drinke it then feede him , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.119

but if he refuse to drinke it , yet care not MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.120

but let him fast without drinke till he take it , which assuredly he
will doe in twice or thrice offering , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.121

and after once he hath taken it be then assured he will forsake any
other drink for it : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.122

of this drinke your <font> Horse <$$font> can neuer take too much , nor
too oft if hee haue exercise , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.123

otherwise it feedes too sore , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.124

and from all inward infirmities whatsoeuer it is a present remedie :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.125

therefore I would not wish any <font> Horse-man <$$font> of vertue at
any time to be without it , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.126

and being once made it will last three or fowre moneths at least .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,78.127

After your <font> horse <$$font> hath beene exercised , either with
<P_1,79> hunting , running traine-sents or otherwise , you shall euer
coole him well in the fielde before you bring him home ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,79.128

but being come to the stable , you shall neither washe nor walke but
instantly house him , giue him store of fresh litter and rubbe him
therewith and with drie cloathes till there bee not a wet haire about
him , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,79.129

then cloath him with his ordinarie cloathes MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,79.130

and wispe him round , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,79.131

then cast another spare cloath ouer him , which you may bate at your
pleasure , and so let him stand till it be time to feede him . And thus
you may keep any hunting <font> horse <$$font> either for match or
otherwise , in as good state and strength as any <font> Horse man
<$$font> in this kingdome , though he exceede you farre both in
reputation and experience . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,1,79.132

<P_2,104>

<heading>

CHAP. IIII . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,104.135

OF DAIRIES , BUTTER , CHEESE , AND THE NECESSARIE THINGS BELONGING TO
THAT OFFICE . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,104.136

<$$heading>

There followeth now in his place after these knowledges alreadie
rehearsed , the ordering and gouernment of Dairies , with the profits
and commodities belonging to the same ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,104.138

and first touching the stocke wherewith to furnish Dairies :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,104.139

it is to be vnderstood that they must bee Kine of the best choice and
breed that our English hous-wife can possibly attaine vnto ; as of bigge
bone , faire shape , right bredde , and deepe of Milke , gentle , and
kindely . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,104.140

Touching the bignesse of bone , the larger that euerie cow is , the
better she is : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,104.141

for when either age , or mischance shall disable her for the payle ,
being of large bone she may be fed , and made fit for the shambles ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,104.142

and so no losse , but <P_2,105> profit , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.143

and ay other to the payle as good and sufficient as her selfe .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.144

For her shape it must a little differ from the Butchers rules ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.145

for being chose for the Dairie , she must haue all the signes of plenty
of milke , as a crumpl'd horne , a thinne necke , a hayrie dewlappe ,
and a verie large vdder , with foure teats , long , thicke , and sharpe
at the ends , for the most part either all white or {SIC:of} what colour
soeuer the cow be , or at least the fore_part thereof ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.146

and if it bee well haird before and behinde , and smooth in the bottome
, it {SIC:it_it} is a good signe also . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.147

As touching the right breed of Kine though {SIC:through} our nation
generally affoordeth verie good ones , yet some countries doe farre
exceed other countries ; as <font> Che_shire , Lanca-shire , Yorke-shire
<$$font> , and <font> Darbie-shire <$$font> for black Kine ; <font>
Glocester-shire , Somerset_shire <$$font> , and some part of <font>
Wilt-shire <$$font> for red Kine , and <font> Lincolne-shire <$$font>
pide kine : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.148

and from the breeds of these Countries generally doe proceed the breeds
of all other , howsoeuer dispersed ouer the whole Kingdome .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.149

Now for our hus-wifes direction , shee shall choose her dairie from any
of their best breeds before named , according as her opinion and delight
shall gouerne her , onely obseruing , not to mix her breeds of diuerse
kindes , but to haue all of one intire choice without variation ,
because it is vnprofitable ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.150

neither must you by any meanes haue your Bull a forrener from your Kine
, but absolutely either of one Countrie , or of one shape and colour :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.151

Againe in the choice of your Kine you must looke diligently to the
goodnesse and fertility of the soile wherein you liue ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.152

and by al meanes buy no Kine from a place that is more fruitful then
your owne , but rather harder ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.153

for the later will prosper and come on , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,105.154

the other will decay and fall into disease ; as the pissing of blood ,
and such like , for which disease and all other you may finde assured
cures in a little <P_2,106> booke I published , called <font> Cheape and
good <$$font> . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.155

For the depth of milke in Kine <paren> which is the giuing of most milke
<$$paren> being the maine of a Hus-wifes profit , shee shall bee verie
carefull to haue that quality in her beasts .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.156

Now those Kine are said to be deepest of milke , which are new bare ;
that is , which haue but lately calued , and haue their milke deepe
springing in their vdders , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.157

for at that time she giueth the most milke ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.158

and if the quantity then be not conuenient , doutlesse the cow can@ @not
be said to be of deep milch : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.159

and for the quantity of milke , for a Cow to giue two gallons at a meale
, is rare , and extraordinarie ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.160

to giue a gallon and a halfe is much , and conuenient ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.161

and to giue but a gallon certaine is much , and not to be found fault
with : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.162

againe , those Kine are said to be deep of milke which though they giue
not so exceeding much milke as others , yet they giue a reasonable
quantity , and giue it long as al the yeere through , whereas other Kine
that giue more in quantity , wil goe drie , being with calfe some three
moneths , some two , and some one , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.163

but these wil giue their vsuall measure euen the night before they calue
; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.164

and therefore are said to be Kine deep of milke .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.165

Now for the retained opinion , that the Cow which goeth not drie at all
, or very little , bringeth not foorth so good a Calfe as the other ,
because it wanteth much of the nourishment it should enioy it is vaine
and friuolous ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.166

for should the substance from whence the milke proceedeth conuert to the
other intended nourishment , it would bee so superabundant , that it
would conuert either to disease , or putrifaction :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.167

but letting these secret reasons passe , there bee some kine which are
so exceedingly ful of milk , that they must bee milkt at least thrice a
daie , at morning , noone , & euening , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.168

or else they will shed their milke , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.169

but it is a fault rather then a vertue , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.170

& proceedeth more from a laxatiuenesse or loosenesse of milke , then
from any abundance MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,106.171

<P_2,107>

for I neuer saw those three meales , yet equall the two meales of a good
Cow , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.173

and therefore they are not truely called deepe of milke .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.174

Touching the gentlenesse of kine , it is a vertue as fit to be expected
as any other ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.175

for if she bee not affable to the maide , gentle , and willing to come
to the paile and patient to haue her dugges drawne without skittishnesse
, striking , or wildnesse , shee is vtterly vnfitte for the Dayrie .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.176

As a Cow must be gentle to her milker , so she must bee kindly in her
owne nature ; that is apt to conceiue , and bring foorth , fruitfull to
nourish , and louing to that which springs from her ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.177

for so she bringeth foorth a double profit ; the one for the time
present which is in the dairie ; the other for the time to come ; which
is in the maintenance of the stocke , and vpholding of breede .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.178

The best time for a Cow to calue in for the Dairie , is in the later
ende of <font> March <$$font> , and all <font> Aprill <$$font> ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.179

for then grasse beginning to spring to its perfect goodnesse will
occasion the greatest increase of milke that may be :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.180

and one good early Cow will counteruaile two later ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.181

yet the calues thus calued are not to be reared , but suffered to feed
vpon their Dammes best milke , and then to be sould to the Butchers ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.182

and surely the profit will equall charge ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.183

but those Calues which fall in <font> October , Nouember <$$font> , or
any time of the depth of winter may well be reared vp for breed ,
because the maine profit of the dayrie is then spent ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.184

and such breede will holde vp and continue the stocke , prouided that
you reare not vp any calues which are calued in the prime daies ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.185

for they generally are subiect to the disease of the sturdie , which is
dangerous and mortall . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,107.186

The Housewife which only hath respect to her Dayry , and for whose
knowledge this discourse is written <paren> for we haue shewed the
<font> Grasier <$$font> his office in the <font> English Hus-bandman
<$$font> <$$paren> <P_2,108> must reare her Calues vpon the finger with
floten milke , and not suffer them to run with the dammes ; the generall
manner whereof , and the cure of all the diseases incident to them and
all other cattell is fully declared in the booke called <font> Cheape
and good <$$font> . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,108.187

To proceed then to the generall vse of Dairies it consisteth first in
the cattell <paren> of which we haue spoken sufficiently <$$paren> then
in the howers of milking , the ordering of the milke and the profits
arising from the same . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,108.188

The best and most commended howers for milking are indeede but two in
the day , that is {COM:sic} in the spring and summer time which is the
best season , for the dairie is {COM:sic} betwixt fiue and sixe in the
morning , and sixe and seauen a clocke in the euening :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,108.189

and although nice and curious Hus-wiues will haue a third howre betwixt
them , as betweene twelue and one in the after-noone , yet the better
experienst doe not allowe it MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,108.190

and say as I beleeue , that two good meales of milk are better euer then
three bad ones : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,108.191

also , in the milking of a Cowe the woman must sit on the neare side of
the Cowe , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,108.192

she must gently at first handle and stretch her dugges , and moisten
them with milke that they may yeeld out the milke the better and with
lesse paine ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,108.193

shee shall not settle her selfe to milke , nor fixe her paile firme to
the ground till she see the Cowe stand sure and firme , but be ready
vpon any motion of the Cowe to saue her paile from ouer-turning ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,108.194

when she seeth all things answerable to her desire she shall then milke
the Cowe boldly , and not leaue stretching and straining of her teats
til not one drop of milke more wil come from them ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,108.195

for the worst point of Hus-wifery that can bee is to leaue a Cowe halfe
milkt , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,108.196

for besides the losse of the milke it is the only way to make a Cowe
drie and vtterly vnprofitable for the Dairy :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,108.197

the Milke-mayd whilst she is in milking shal do nothing rashly or
sodainly about the Cowe , which <P_2,109> may affright or amase her ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,109.198

but as she came gently so withall gentlenes she shall depart .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,109.199

Touching the well ordering of milke after it is come home to the Dairie
, the maine point belonging therunto is the Hus-wiues cleanlinesse in
the sweet and neate keeping of the Dairy house , where not the least
moat of any filth may by any meanes appeare , but all things either to
the eye or nose so voide of sowernesse or sluttishnesse , that a Princes
bed-chamber must not exceed it ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,109.200

to this must be added the sweet and delicate keeping of her milke
vessels , whether they be of wood , earth or lead , the best of which is
yet disputable with the best Hus-wiues ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,109.201

only this opinion is generally receiued , that the woodden vessell which
is round and shallow is best in colde vaults , the earthen vessels
principall for long keeping , and the leaden vessell for yeelding of
much creame : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,109.202

but howsoeuer , any and all these must be carefully scalded once a day ,
and set in the open aire to sweeten , least getting any taint of
sowernesse into them , they corrupt the milk that shall be put therein .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,109.203

But to proceed to my purpose , after your milk is come home , you shall
as it were straine it from all vncleane things through a neate and sweet
kept syle the form wherof euery Hus-wife knowes ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,109.204

and the bottome of this sile , through which the milke must passe shall
be couered with a very cleane washt fine linnen cloth , such an one as
will not suffer the least mote or haire to goe through it :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,109.205

you shall into euery vessell sile a pretty quantitie of milk , according
to the proportion of the vessell , which the broader it is and the
shallower it is , the better it is , and yeeldeth euer the best creame ,
and keepeth the milke longest from sowring .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,109.206

Now for the profits arising from milke , they are three of especiall
account , as Butter , Cheese , and Milke , to be <P_2,110> eaten either
simple or compounded : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.207

as for Curds , sowre Milke , or Whigge , they come from secondary meanes
, MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.208

and therefore may not bee numbred with these .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.209

For your Butter which onely proceedeth from the Creame , which is the
verie heart and strength of Milke , it must be gathered very carefullie
, diligentlie , and painefullie : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.210

And though cleanlinesse be such an ornament to a Huswife , that if shee
want anie part thereof , shee looseth both that and all good names else
: yet in this action it must be more seriouslie imploid then in anie
other . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.211

To beginne then with the fleeting or gathering of your Creame from the
Milke , you shall doe it in this manner : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.212

The Milke which you did milke in the morning you shall with a fine
thinne shallow dish made for the purpose , take of the Creame about fiue
of the clocke in the euening MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.213

and the Milke which you did milke in the euening you shall fleete and
take of the Creame about fiue of the clocke the next morning ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.214

and the creame so taken off , you shall put into a cleane sweet and well
leaded earthen pot close couered and set in a coole place :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.215

And this creame so gathered you shall not keepe aboue two daies in the
Summer , and not aboue foure in the Winter , if you will haue the
sweetest and best butter : and that your Dairie containe fiue Kine or
more ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.216

but how many or few soeuer you keepe , you shall not by any meanes
preserue your Creame aboue 3. daies in summer , and not aboue sixe in
the Winter . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.217

Your Creame being neately and sweet kept , you shall churme
{COM:sic_with_"m"} or churne it on those vsuall daies which are fittest
either for your vse in the house or the markets adioining neere vnto you
, according to the purpose for which you keepe your Dayrie .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.218

Now the daies most accustomablie held amongst ordinary Huswiues , are
Tuesday and Friday : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,110.219

Tuesday in the after_noone , to serue Wednesday morning <P_2,111> market
, MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.220

and Fryday morning to serue Saturday market ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.221

for Wensday and Saturday are the most generall market daies of this
Kingdome , and Wenseday , Friday , and Saturday , the vsual
fasting_daies of the weeke ; and so meetest for the vse of butter .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.222

Now for churming {COM:sic_with_"m"} take your creame
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.223

and through a strong and cleane cloth straine it into the churne ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.224

and then couering the churne close ; and setting it in a place fit for
the action in which you are imploid as in the summer in the coolest
place of your dairy , and exceeding early in the morning , or very late
in the euening , and in the Winter in the warmest place of your dairie ,
and in the most temperate howres , as about noone , or a little before ,
or after , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.225

and so churne it with swift strokes marking the noise of the same which
will be solid , heauy and intyre vntill you heare it alter , and the
sound is light , sharp , and more spirity : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.226

and then you shal say that your butter breakes , which perceiued both by
this sound , the lightnesse of the churne-staffe , and the sparkes and
drops , which will appeare yellow about the lippe of the churne ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.227

and clense with your hand both the lidde and inward sides of the churne
, MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.228

and hauing put all together , you shall couer the churne againe , and
then with easie stroakes round , and not to the bottome , gather the
butter together into one intire lumpe and body , leauing no peeces
thereof seuerall or vnioyned . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.229

Now for_as_much as there bee manie mischiefes and inconueniences which
may happen to butter in the churning , because it is a bodie of much
tendernesse , and neither will endure much heate , nor much colde :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.230

for if it be ouer heated , it will looke white , crumble , and be bitter
in tast ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,111.231

and if it be ouer cold it will not come at all , but make you wast much
labour in vaine , which faults to helpe if you churne your butter in the
heate of Sommer it shall not be amisse , if during the time of your
churning you <P_2,112> place your Churn in a paile of cold water as deep
as your Creame riseth in the Churne ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.232

and in the churning thereof let your stroakes goe slow ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.233

and be sure that your churne be cold when you put in your creame :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.234

but if you churne in the coldest time of Winter , you shall then put in
your kreame before the churne be cold after it hath been scalded ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.235

and you shall place it within the aire of the fire , and churne it with
as swift stroakes , and as fast as may be , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.236

for the much labouring thereof will keepe it in a continuall warmth ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.237

and thus you shall haue your butter good , sweete , and according to
your wish . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.238

After your butter is churnd , or churnd and gathered well together in
your churne , you shall then open your churne , and with both your hands
gather it well together , and take it from the buttermilke , and put it
into a very cleane boule of wood , or panshion of earth sweetned for the
purpose , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.239

and if you intend to spend the butter sweet and fresh , you shal haue
your boule or panshion filled with very cleane water ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.240

and therein with your hand you shall worke the butter , turning , and
tossing it to and fro till you haue by that labor beaten and washt out
all the buttermilke , and brought the butter to a firme substance of it
selfe without any other moisture , which done , you shall take the
butter from the water , and with the point of a knife scorch and slash
the butter ouer and ouer euerie waie so thick as is possible , leauing
no part through which your knife must not passe ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.241

for this will clense and fetch out the smallest haire or mote , or ragge
of a strainer , and any other thing which by casuall meanes may happen
to fall into it . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.242

After this you shall shreade the butter in boule thin , and take so much
salt as you shal think conuenient , which must by no meanes be much for
sweet butter , and sprinkle it thereupon , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.243

then with your hands worke the butter and the salt exceedingly well
together , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,112.244

and then make it <P_2,113> vp either into dishes , pounds , or halfe
pounds at your pleasure . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.245

If during the month of <font> May <$$font> before you salt your butter
you saue a lumpe thereof and put it into a vessell , and so set it into
the sunne the space of that moneth , you shall finde it exceeding
soueraigne & medicinable for wounds , straines , aches , and such like
grieuances . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.246

Touching the poudring vp or potting of butter , you shall by no meanes
as in fresh butter wash the butter-milke out with water , but onely
worke it cleere out with your hands : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.247

for water will make the butter rusty , or reesse ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.248

this done you shall weigh your butter , and know how many pounds there
is thereof : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.249

for should you weigh it after it were salted , you would be deceiued in
the weight , which done you shall open the butter , and salt it verie
well and throughly , beating it in with your hand till it be generally
disperst through the whole butter ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.250

then take cleane earthen pots , exceedingly well leaded , least the
brine should leake through the same , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.251

and cast salt into the bottome of it : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.252

then lay in your butter , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.253

and presse it downe hard within the same , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.254

and when your pot is filled , then couer the top thereof with salt so as
no butter be seene : MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.255

then closing vp the pot let it stand where it may be cold and safe .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.256

but if your Dairy be so little that you can@ @not at first fil vp the
pot , you shall then when you haue potted vp so much as you haue , couer
it all ouer with salt . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.257

Now there be hus-wiues whose dairies being great , can by no meanes
conueniently haue their butter contained in pots ; as in <font> Holland
, Suffolke , Norfolke <$$font> , and such like ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.258

and therefore are first to take barrels very close and wel made ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.259

and after they haue salted it well , they fill their barrels therewith ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.260

then they take a small stick , cleane , and sweete ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,113.261

and therewith make diuerse holes downe through the <P_2,114> butter euen
to the bottome of the barraill {TEXT:larraill} :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,114.262

and then make a strong brine of water and salt which will beare an egge
, MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,114.263

and after it is boil'd , well skimm'd and cool'd ; then poure it vpon
the toppe of the butter till it swimme aboue the same ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,114.264

and so let it settle . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,114.265

Some vse to boile in this brine a braunch or two of Rosemarie ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,114.266

and it is not amisse , but pleasant and wholsome .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,114.267

Now although you may at anie time betwixt <font> May <$$font> and <font>
September <$$font> pot vp butter , obseruing to doe it in the coolest
time of the morning : yet the most principall season of all is in the
Month of <font> May <$$font> onelie ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,114.268

for then the aire is most temperat , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,114.269

and the butter will take salt the best , MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,114.270

and the lest subiect to reesing . MARKHAM-1615-E2-H,2,114.271

