<BEGIN_masham-1630-e2-h>

<P_78>

<heading:edcomment:49_LADY_ELIZABETH_MASHAM,_N._D._JULY?_1629,_TO_HER_MOTHER>

Deare mother I humbly thank you for the token you sent me .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.4

The ladis at Lees were such abowt their necks with their peticotes and
wastcotes . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.5

I went with my husband to Chelmsford and Langlyes MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.6

and so did only supp at Lees . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.7

He went in his coatch because Jug has to goe gett hir a payer of bodis .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.8

I am glad my husband sent you some of your one cheries and that they cam
at soe fitt a time to my sister Robert . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.9

My lady of Warwick sends all_most evrye day for some ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.10

and this day she charged Jug Altham to goe to Hattfeeld and se a
baskettfull well putt up for hir ; MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.11

and so Jug means to preserv some doble cheries for my sister Garard .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.12

She preserved 2 pownd of single cheries for my sister before ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.13

but I know not whether she will have them or no ; MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.14

if she will not , I will . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.15

I am glad you liked my litle pulletts I sent you ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.16

I will gett some more fatt to send you . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.17

I had hoped to have seen you the next week , MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.18

but my husband is so importuned by Colchester men to be there on Monday
that it hinders my joyrnye because he goeth in his coatch ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.19

but when he coms back I hope to have liberty after our haye .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.20

I am very glad you have overcom your pashon and will see Mr Willyams .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.21

It will be to your grete honer to pass by ofencis ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.22

and if we consider how much God forgivs us we ca@ @not but forgive such
as ofend us , especialy it being the condishon God maks to forgive us if
we forgive others . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.23

He took noe unkindnes that I colde perceave for your not seing him ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.24

he did not speak a word of it tell I asked him . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,78.25

He will <P_79> be very glad to atend you a@ @soone as he can ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,79.26

but it will@ @be longe first , by reson of much busynes which he hath .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,79.27

Both he and we will not sease to pray daly for hapy being thare and your
safe return when the lord shall se it fitt , to whose protectyon I comit
you and ever rest Your obedent daughter Elizabeth Masham
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,79.28

When I here from my brother Knightly you shall here .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,79.29

To my much honoured mother the Lady Barington these
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,79.30

<P_92>

<heading:edcomment:65_LADY_ELIZABETH_MASHAM,_N._D._SUMMER-AUTUMN_1629,_TO_HER_MOTHER>

Deare mother I am wonderfull gladd that it pleaseth God to give you your
health soe well at Harrow . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.33

Mr Dike asked me when I woulde goe see my nue mother ;
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.34

I perseave Harow hath made you younge againe . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.35

When you dare give us leave to think we are clear we shall be glad to se
you . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.36

I thank God we hav had no more ill , MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.37

the boye that had them went a_brode againe within 2 or 3 dayes .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.38

The measels have bin in most placis abowte us , MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.39

but thanks be to God I here of none that dye of them .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.40

It is a wonderfull thing to me to think the lord should lay his hand soe
moderatly upon us in these times wherein we soe much increse in
disobedenc to him , and wherin all sorts of sin soe much abowndeth ;
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.41

but he is a God of longe suffering , MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.42

yet he will be a consuming God allsoe to all such as sett lite by his
smaller tryalls and be not broute neerer to him therby .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.43

I hope yet you will not forgett Hatfeeld ; MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.44

the lord is able longe to continue that strenhth and health ther which
you have got at Harow MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.45

and I hope he will doe soe . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.46

I shall be {SIC:shall-be} gladd to fetch you . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.47

{COM:ten_lines_illegible} that all the distempers of our bodys , which
must need be many while we live here , may be a means of the cureing the
great distempers of our soles , and may make us longe for that home
whare all sorows shall have an end and we shall tryumph in joye and
glorye for ever_more . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.48

I looke evry day to here from my brother Knightly .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.49

Jug Altham longes much for hir cosin Johane Mewex@ @es company ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.50

if you please to give hir leave to come hither I will send for hir and
bringe hir againe to you . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.51

I have inquired abowt Mr Acher MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.52

and I perseve he will have none of hir ; MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.53

I pray if you send to my brother Mewix let him know so much .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.54

Yet his sister is come hether who he puts much confidenc in ;
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.55

it may be if my neece ware here then she mite win hir love and she will
work with hir brother . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.56

I like the gentleman exceeding well by site and discourse .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.57

I feare I may be tedius to you MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.58

therefore with my humble duty I comend you to God MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.59

and rest Your dutyfull daughter Elizabeth Masham MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.60

I desire to be remembred to all my frends with you .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.61

Mr Willyams is to marye Mary Barnerd , Jug Altham's made .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,92.62

My husband remembers <P_93> his servic to you and his love to the rest .
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,93.63

He is in the heate of his harvest . MASHAM-1630-E2-H,93.64

To my much honoured mother the Lady Barrington at Harrow Hill give these
MASHAM-1630-E2-H,93.65

