<BEGIN_merrytal-1526-e1-h>

<P_18>

<heading>

IX . OF HIM THAT SAYD THAT A WOMA~S TONG WAS LIGHTIST MET OF DEGESTIO~
. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,18.4

<$$heading>

A certayn artificer in londo~ there was which was sore syk that coud not
well dygest hys mete | to who~ a physyco~ cam to gyue hym councell
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,18.6

& seyd y=t= he must vse to ete metis y=t= be light of dygestyon as
<P_19> small byrdys | as sparous or swallous & especyall y=t= byrd y=t=
ys callyd a wagtale whose fleshe ys meruelouse lyght of dygestyo~
because that byrd ys euer mouyng & styryng . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,19.7

The sik man heryng the phesicion seyd so answeryd hym
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,19.8

& seyd | Syr yf that be the cause y=t= those birdys be lyght of
dygestyon | Than I know a mete mych lyghter of dygestion tha~ other
sparow swallow or wagtayle | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,19.9

& that ys my wyuys to~g MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,19.10

for it is neuer in rest but euer mouying & styrryng .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,19.11

By thys tale ye may lerne a good generall rule of phesyk .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,19.12

<heading>

X . OF THE WOMAN THAT FOLOWYD HER FOURTH HUSBANDYS HERCE & WEPT .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,19.14

<$$heading>

A woman ther was whych had had .iiii. husba~des .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,19.16

It fortunyd also that this fourth husband died & was brought to chirch
vppon y=e= bere | who~ this woma~ folowyd & made gret mone & wext very
sory . In so mych that her neybours thought she wold sowne & dy for
sorow | wherfor one of her gossyps cam to her & spake to her in her ere
& <P_20> bad her for goddes sake to comfort her self & refrayne that
lamentaco~n MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,20.17

or ellys it wold hurt her gretly & p~auenture put her in ieoperdy of her
lyfe . To who~ this woma~ a~sweryd & sayd | I wys good gosyp I haue
gret cause to morne if ye knew all | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,20.18

for I haue byryed .iii. husbandys besyde thys man |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,20.19

but I was neuer i~ the case y=t= I am now | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,20.20

for there was not one of the~ but whe~ that I folowid the corse to
chyrch yet I was sure alway of an other husba~d before that y=e= corse
cam out of my house | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,20.21

& now I am sure of no nother husband MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,20.22

& therfore ye may be sure I haue gret cause to be sad and heuy .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,20.23

By thys tale ye may se that the olde p~uerbe ys trew that yt is as gret
pyte to se a woman wepe as a gose to go barefote .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,20.24

<heading>

XI . OF THE WOMAN THAT SAYD HER WOOER CAME TO LATE .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,20.26

<$$heading>

<P_21>

A nother woman there was that knelyd at y=e= mas of requie~ whyle the
corse of her husbande lay on the bere in the chyrch . To whom a yonge
man came to speke wyth her in her ere as thoughe hyt had bene for som
matre concernyng the funerallys | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,21.29

howe_be_yt he spake of no such matter MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,21.30

but only wowyd her that he myghte be her husbande | to whome she
answeryde & sayde thus | Syr by my trouthe I am sory that ye come so
late | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,21.31

for I am sped all_redy | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,21.32

For I was made sure yester_day to a nother man .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,21.33

By thys tale ye may perceyue that women ofte tymes be wyse and lothe to
lose any tyme . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,21.34

<P_22>

<heading>

XIII . OF THE HORSMAN OF YRELOND THAT PRAYD OCONER TO HANG VP THE FRERE
. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,22.37

<$$heading>

<P_23>

One callyd Oconer an yrish lorde toke an horseman prysoner that was one
of hys gret enmys | whiche for any request or yntrety y=t= y=e= horsman
made gaue iugement that he shulde inco~tyne~t be ha~gyd |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,23.40

& made a frere to shryue hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,23.41

and bad hym make hym redy to dye . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,23.42

Thys frere y=t= shroue hym examyned hym of dyuers synes
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,23.43

& askyd hym amo~g othere whyche were the grettyste synnys that euer he
dyde | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,23.44

thys horseman answeryd MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,23.45

& sayde one of the grettyst actys that euer I dyde whyche I now most
repent is that when I toke Oconer the laste weke in a churche and ther I
myght haue brennyd hym church and all & because I had conscyence & pyte
of brennyng of the church I taryed y=e= tyme so long y=t= oconer escaped
| MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,23.46

& that same deferring of brennyng of the church & so long taryeng of
that tyme is one of the worst actys y=t= euer I dyd wherof I moste
repente | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,23.47

Thys frere perceyuyng hym in that mynd sayd pece man in the name of god
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,23.48

& change y=t= mynde <P_24> & dye in charite or els thou shalt neuer come
in heuen | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.49

nay quod the hors man I wyll neuer change y=t= mynde what so euer shall
come to my soule | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.50

thys frere p~ceyuyng hym thus {SIC:thys} styll to contynew hys mi~de ca~
to oconer MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.51

& seyd syr in y=e= name of god haue some pyte vppo~ thys mannys sowle
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.52

& let hym not dye now tyll he be in a better mynde |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.53

For yf he dye now he ys so far out of charyte y=t= vtterly hys soule
shalle be dampnyd | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.54

and shewyd hym what mynde he was in & all the hole matter as ys before
shewyd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.55

Thys horsman heryng y=e= frere thys intrete for hym sayd to oconer thys
| MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.56

Oconer thou seeyst well by thys mannys reporte y=t= yf I dye now I am
out of charyte & not redy to go to heuen MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.57

& so it ys y=t= I am now out of charyte in dede |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.58

but thou seest well y=t= this frere ys a good man
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.59

he is now well dysposyd & in charyte | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.60

and he is redy to go to heuen MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.61

& so am not I | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.62

therfore I pray the hang vp thys frere whyle that he hys redy to go to
heuyn MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.63

and lette me tary tyl a nother tyme y=t= I may be i~ charyte and redy &
mete to go to heuyn . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.64

This Oconer heryng this mad answere of hym sparyd the man
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.65

& forgaue hym hys lyfe at that season . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,24.66

By thys ye may se that he that is in daunger of his enmye y=t= hath no
pyte | he can do no better <P_25> than shew to hym the vttermoste of hys
malycyous mynde whych that he beryth toward hym .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,25.67

<heading>

XIV . OF THE PREST THAT SAYD NOTHER CORPUS MEUS NOR CORPUM MEUM .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,25.69

<$$heading>

The archdekyn of Essex y=t= had bene long in auctoryte in a tyme of
vysytacion when all the preestys apperyd before hym callyd asyde .iii.
of y=e= yo~g prestys whych were accusyd y=t= they coud not well say
theyr deuyne seruyce | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,25.71

& askyd of the~ whe~ they sayd mas whether they sayd corpus meus or
corpu~ meu~ . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,25.72

The furst preest sayd y=t= he sayd corpus meus .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,25.73

The seco~d sayd y=t= he sayd corpu~ meu~ . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,25.74

And the~ he askyd of the thyrd how he sayd | whych answeryd & sayd thus
| MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,25.75

syr because it is so gret a dout & dyuers men be in dyuers opynyons |
therfore because I wold be sure I wold not offend whe~ I come to y=e=
place I leue it clene out MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,25.76

& say nothyng therfore | wherfore he then openly rebukyd them all thre .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,25.77

But dyuers that were present thought more defaut in hym because he hym
<P_26> selfe before tyme had admyttyd them to be preestys .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,26.78

By thys tale ye may se that one ought to take hede how he rebukyth an
other lest it torne most to hys owne rebuke . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,26.79

<heading>

XV . OF THE .II. FRERYS WHEROF THE ONE LOUYD NOT THE ELE HED NOR THE
OTHER THE TAYLE . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,26.81

<$$heading>

Two frerys sat at a gentylmans tabyll whych had before hym o~ a
fastyng_day an ele & cut the hed of the ele & layd it vppo~ one of y=e=
Freres tre~chars | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,26.83

but the Frere because he wold haue had of y=e= myddyll part of the ele
sayd to the gentylman he louyd no ele heddes | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,26.84

this gentylman also cut the tayle of y=e= ele MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,26.85

& leyd it on the other Freres tre~char | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,26.86

he lykywyse because he wold haue had of the myddyll p~te of y=e= ele
sayd he louyd no ele taylys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,26.87

Thys gentylma perceyuyng that : gaue the tayle to the Frere y=t= sayd he
louyd not the hed | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,26.88

& gaue the hed to hym that sayd he louyd not y=e= tayle .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,26.89

And as for the myddell part of the ele he ete part him self
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,26.90

& part he gaue to other folke at y=e= table | wherfore these freres for
anger wold ete neuer a <P_27> mossell | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,27.91

& so they for all theyr craft & subtylte were not onely deceyued of y=e=
best mossel of y=e= ele | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,27.92

but therof had no part at al . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,27.93

By this ye se that they that couet the best part somtyme therfore lose
the meane part and all . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,27.94

<heading>

XVI . OF THE WELCHMA~ THAT SHROUE HYM FOR BREKYNG HIS FAST ON THE
FRYDAY . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,27.96

<$$heading>

<P_28>

A welchman dwellynge in a wylde place of walys came to hys curate in the
tyme of lent MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.99

& was co~fessyd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.100

& when his confessyon was in maner at the end the curate asked him
whether he had any other thyng to say y=t= greuyd his co~scye~ce | whych
sore {HELSINKI:fore} abasshyd answeryd no word a gret whyle |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.101

at last by exortacion of hys goostly fader he sayd y=t= there was one
thyng in his mynd that gretly greuyd hys co~scie~ce which he was ashamed
to vtter | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.102

for it was so greuous y=t= he trowid god wold neuer forgyue hym | to
whom the curate a~sweryd & sayd y=t= goddys mercy was aboue all |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.103

& bad hym not dyspayre in the mercy of god | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.104

For what so euer it was yf he were repentau~te y=t= god wold forgyue him
| MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.105

And so by long exortacion at the last he shewyd it
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.106

& seyd thus | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.107

Syr it happenyd onis that as my wyfe was making a chese vppon a fryday I
wold haue sayed whether it had ben salt or fresh
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.108

and toke a lytyll of the whey in my hand MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.109

& put it in my mouth MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.110

& or I was ware part of it went downe my throte agaynst my wyll
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,28.111

& so I brake my fast | to whom the curate sayd & if ther be no nother
<P_29> thyng I warant god shall forgiue the . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.112

So wha~ he had well comfortyd hym w=t= y=e= mercy of god the curate
prayd hym to answer a question & to tell hym treuth |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.113

& when the welchman had promysyd to tell the treuth the curate sayd that
there were robberys and murders done nye the place where he dwelt &
dyuers men fou~d slayne MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.114

& askyd hym whether he were co~sentyng to any of them | to who~ he
answerid & sayd yes MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.115

& sayd he was p~tee to many of them & dyd helpe to robbe and to sle
dyuers of them . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.116

Then the curate askyd hym why he dyd not co~fesse him therof |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.117

the welch man a~sweryd & sayd he toke y=t= for no synne
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.118

for it was a custome amonge them y=t= whan any boty came of any rych
merchaunt rydyng y=t= it was but a good neybours dede one to help a
nother when one callyd a nother | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.119

& so they toke that but for good felyshyp & neybourhod .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.120

Here ye may se y=t= some haue remorse of conscyence of small venyall
sinys & fere not to do gret offencys w=t=out shame of y=e= world or
drede of god : MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.121

& as y=e= co~en puerb is they stu~ble at a straw
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.122

& lepe ouer a blok . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,29.123

<P_30>

<heading>

XVII . OF THE MERCHAU~T OF LO~DO~ THAT PUT NOBLES I~ HIS MOUTH I~ HIS
DETH BED . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,30.126

<$$heading>

A rych couetous marcha~te ther was y=t= dwellyd in Lo~don whych euer
gaderyd money & coud neuer fynd in hys hert to spend noght vppon hym
self nor vppon no ma~ els | whych fell sore syk |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,30.128

& as he lay on hys deth bed had hys purs lyeng at his beddys hed |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,30.129

& had suche a loue to hys money that he put his hand in his purs
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,30.130

& toke out thereof .x. or .xii. li i~ nobles MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,30.131

& put them in his mouth | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,30.132

And because his wyfe and other p~ceyuyd him very syk and lyke to dye
they exortyd hym to be confessyd MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,30.133

and brought y=e= curate vnto him | whych when they had causyd hym to sey
Benedicite y=e= curat bad hym cry god mercy & shew his synnys .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,30.134

Than this syk man began to sey I cry god mercy MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,30.135

I haue offendyd in y=e= .vij. dedly synnys & broken the .x.
comaundementys | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,30.136

& because of the gold in hys mouth he mufflede so in hys speche that the
curate cowde not well vnderstande hym | wherefore the curate asked hym
what he hadde in hys mouthe that letted hys speche |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,30.137

I wys mastere persone quod the syk man muffelynge <P_31> I haue nothyng
in my mouth but a lyttyll money because I wot not whether I shall go
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,31.138

I thoughte I wolde take some spendyng money wyth me
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,31.139

for I wot not what nede I shall haue therof | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,31.140

And incontynent after that seyynge dyed before he was confessed or
repentant that ony man could perceue | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,31.141

and so by lykelyhode went to the deuyll . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,31.142

By thys tale ye may se that they that all theyre lyuys wylle neuer do
charyte to theyr neyghbours | that god in tyme of theyr dethe wyll not
suffer them to haue grace of repentaunce . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,31.143

<heading>

XVIII . OF THE MYLNER THAT STALE THE NUTTYS & OF THE TAYLER THAT STALE
A SHEPE . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,31.145

<$$heading>

<P_32>

There was a certayn ryche husbandman in a vyllage whych loued nottes
meruelously well & set trees of filberdys & other nut trees in his
orchard | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,32.148

& norishid them well all hys lyfe | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,32.149

& when he dyed he made hys executours to make promise to bery w=t= hym
yn hys graue a bage of nottis MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,32.150

or els they sholde not be hys executours | which executours for fere of
losyng theyre romys fulfyllyd hys wyll & dyd so .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,32.151

It happenyd y=t= the same nyght after that he was beryed there was a
mylnere in a <P_33> whyte cote came to this ma~ys garden to th@ @e~te~t
to stele a bag of nottis | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.152

& in y=e= way he met w=t= a tayler in a blak cote an vnthrift of hys
accoyntau~ce MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.153

& shewyd hym hys intent | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.154

This tayler lykewyse shewyd hym y=t= he inte~dyd y=e= same tyme to stele
a shepe | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.155

& so they both there agreyd to go forthward euery man seuerally w=t= hys
purpose MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.156

& after y=t= they apoynted to make good chere ech w=t= other & to mete
agayne in y=e= chyrch porch | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.157

& he that came furst to tary for the other . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.158

This mylner when he had spede of hys nottis came furst to the chyrch
porche MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.159

& there taryed for hys felowe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.160

and the mene whyle satte styll there MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.161

& knakked nottys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.162

It fortuned than the sexten of the church because yt was abowt .ix. of
the clok cam to ryng curfu . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.163

& when he lokyd in y=e= porch & saw one all in whyte knakkyng nottes |
he had went it had bene y=e= dede man rysen owt of hys graue knakkynge
y=e= nottes y=t= were byryed w=t= hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.164

& ran home agayn in all hast MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.165

and tolde to a krepyll y=t= was in hys howse what he had sene .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.166

This crepyll thus heryng rebukyd y=e= sexten MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,33.167

& seyd y=t= <P_34> yf he were able to go he wold go thyder & co~iure
y=e= sprite | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.168

by my trouth quod y=e= sexten & yf thou darst do y=t= I wyl bere the on
my nek MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.169

& so they both agreed . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.170

The sexten toke y=e= crepul on hys nek MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.171

& cam in to y=e= chyrchyard agayn | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.172

& y=e= mylner in y=e= porch saw one comyng bering a thing on his bak
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.173

had went it had ben y=e= taylour co~myng w=t= the shepe
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.174

& rose vp to mete the~ | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.175

& as he cam towarde the~ he askeyd & seyd | Is he fat |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.176

is he fat | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.177

y=e= sexten heryng hym sey so | for fere cast the crepull down
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.178

& seyd fat or lene take hym ther for me | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.179

and ran away | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.180

& the creple by myracle was made hole MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.181

& ra~ away as fast as he or faster | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.182

This mylner perceyuing y=t= they were .ii. & y=t= one ran after a
nother supposyng y=t= one had spyed y=e= tayler stelyng y=e= shepe &
y=t= he had ron after hym to haue taken hym | and fered y=t= som body
also had spyed hym stelyng nottes he for fere left hys nottes behynd hym
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.183

and as secretly as he cowde ran home to hys myll |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,34.184

And anon after y=t= he was gon y=e= tayler cam w=t= the stolyn shepe
vppon hys nek to the chyrch porch to <P_35> seke the mylner
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.185

& when he fownd ther the not shalys he supposyd y=t= hys felow had be
ther and gone home as he was in dede | wherefore he toke vp y=e= shepe
agayne on hys nek MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.186

and went to_ward the myl | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.187

But yet duryng this whyle the sexte~ which ran away went not to hys owne
house MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.188

but we~t to the p~ysh prystis cha~ber | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.189

& shewd hym how the spryte of y=e= man was ryse~ out of hys graue
knakki~g nottes as ye haue hard before | wherfor y=e= prest sayd that he
wold go co~iure hym yf the sexten wold go w=t= hym |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.190

& so they both agreed | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.191

y=e= prest dyd on hys surples & a stole about hys nek
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.192

& toke holy water w=t= hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.193

and cam w=t= the sexte~ toward y=e= church | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.194

& as sone as he enteryd in to y=e= church yarde , The tayler w=t= the
whyte shepe on hys nek intendyng as I before haue shewid yow to go down
to y=e= myll met w=t= them MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.195

& had went y=t= y=e= prest in hys surples had ben y=e= mylner in hys
whyte cote | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.196

& seyd to hym by god I haue hym I haue hym meanyng by the shepe y=t= he
had stolyn | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.197

the prest perceyuynge the tayler all in blak & a whyte thyng on his nek
had went it had ben y=e= deuyll beryng away the spryte of y=e= dede man
y=t= was beryed MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.198

& ran away as faste as he coud takyng y=e= way downe toward the myll |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,35.199

& y=e= sexten ronnyng <P_36> after hi~ . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.200

This tayler seyng one folowyng hi~ had went y=t= one had folowed the
mylner to haue don hym some hurt MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.201

& thought he wold folow if nede were to help y=e= mylner .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.202

& went forth tyl he cam to the myll MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.203

& knokked at y=e= myldore | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.204

y=e= mylner beyng w=t=yn asked who was ther MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.205

y=e= tayler a~swerd & said by god I haue caught one of them & made hi~
sure & tyed hym fast by y=e= leggys menynge by the shepe y=t= he had
stolen & had the~ on hys nek tyed fast by the leggys .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.206

But the mylner heryng hym sey y=t= he had hym tyed fast by the leggys
had wente it had be~ the constable y=t= had take~ the tayler for stelyng
of the shepe & had tyed him by the leggys | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.207

& ferid y=t= he had comen to haue taken hym also for stelyng of the
nottys | wherfore the mylner openyd a bak dore & ran away as fast as he
coud . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.208

The taylour heryng the bak dore openyng we~t on y=e= other syde of y=e=
myll | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.209

& there saw the mylner ronnyng away | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.210

& stode there a littyl whyle musyng w=t= y=e= shepe on his nek .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.211

Then was the parysh preest & the sexte~ standyng there vnder the
mylhouse hydyng them for fere MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.212

& saw the taylour agayn w=t= y=e= shepe on his nek
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.213

had wend styll it had bene the dyuyll w=t= the spryt of the dede man on
hys nek MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.214

& for fere ran away | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,36.215

but because they knew not <P_37> the ground well | the preest lepte into
a dyche almost ouer the hed lyke to be drounyd that he cryed wyth a loud
voyce help help . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,37.216

Then the taylour lokyd about MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,37.217

& saw the mylner ron~e away & the sexten a nother way
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,37.218

& hard the preest cry help : MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,37.219

had wend it had bene the co~stable w=t= a gret co~pany cryeng for help
to take hym & to bryng hym to pryson for stelyng of y=e= shepe wherfore
he threw downe the shepe & ran away a nother way as faste as he coud |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,37.220

& so euery man was afferd of other wythout cause .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,37.221

By thys ye may se well it is foly for any man to fere a thyng to mych
tyll that he se some proue or cause . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,37.222

<P_39>

<heading>

XX . OF THE WOMAN THAT POWRYD THE POTAGE IN THE TUGGYS MALE .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,39.225

<$$heading>

There was a iustyce but late in y=e= realme of englond called master
Uauyfour a very homly man & rude of condycions MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,39.227

& louyd neuer to spe~d mych money | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,39.228

This master Uauyfour rode on a tyme in hys cyrcute in a place of the
north co~trey where he had agreed w=t= the shyryf for a certayn some of
money for hys chargys thorowe the shyre so that at euery Inne & lodgyng
thys master vauefour payd for hys own costys .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,39.229

It fortunyd so y=t= when he cam to a certayn lodgyng he co~maunded one
Torpyn hys serua~t to se y=t= he vsed good husbondry & to haue suche
thynges as were last & to cary it w=t= hym to serue hym at the next
baytyng . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,39.230

Thys Torpyn doyng hys masters co~mau~deme~t toke y=e= brokyn brede
brokyn mete & all sych thi~g y=t= was last MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,39.231

& put it in hys male | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,39.232

The wyfe of y=e= house p~ceyuyng y=t= he toke all suche fragmentys &
vytayle w=t= hym y=t= was last <P_40> & put it in hys male | she brought
vp y=t= podege y=t= was last i~ the pot MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.233

& when torpyn had torned hys bak a lytyll syde she pouryd y=e= podege in
to y=e= male whych ran vpon hys robe of skarlet & other hys garme~tys
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.234

& rayed them very euyll that they were mych hurt therw=t= .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.235

Thys Torpyn sodeynly tornyd him MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.236

& saw it | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.237

reuylyd the wyfe therfor MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.238

& ran to hys master MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.239

& told hym what she had don | wherfor master Uauefour inco~tine~t callyd
y=e= wyfe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.240

& seyd to her thus . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.241

Thou drab quod he what hast thou do~ MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.242

why hast thou pouryd y=e= podege in my male & marryd my rayme~t & gere |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.243

O syr quod y=e= wyfe I know well ye ar a iudge of y=e= realme |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.244

& I perceyue by you : your mi~d is to do ryght & to haue that that is
your owne | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.245

& your mynd is to haue all thyng w=t= you y=t= ye haue payd for | both
brokyn brede mete & other thynges y=t= is left :
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.246

& so it is reason that ye haue | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.247

& therfore because your seruant hath taken the brede & the mete & put it
i~ your male I haue therfore put in your male the podege y=t= be last
because ye haue well & truly payd for them MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,40.248

<P_41>

for yf I shuld kepe ony thyng from you y=t= ye haue payd for :
peraduenture ye wold troble me in the law an other tyme .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,41.250

Here ye may se y=t= he y=t= playth the nygarde to mych sometyme yt
torneth hym to hys owne losse . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,41.251

<P_114>

<heading>

LXVI . OF THE MAN THAT WOLD HAUE THE POT STAND THERE AS HE WOLD .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,114.254

<$$heading>

A yonge man late maryed to a wyfe thowght it was good polycy to get the
maystry of her in the begynnynge . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,114.256

Cam to her the pot sethynge ouer y=e= fyre MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,114.257

all_though the mete therin were not inough sodenly co~maundyd her to
take the pot from the fyre . whyche answeryd & sayde that y=e= mete was
not redy to ete . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,114.258

And he sayd agayne I wyll haue it taken of for my pleasure .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,114.259

This good woman loth yet to offend hym set y=e= pot besyde the fyre as
he bad . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,114.260

And anone after he co~mau~ded her to set the pot behynde the dore |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,114.261

& she sayd therto agayne ye be not wyse therin .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,114.262

But he precisely sayd it sholde be so as he bad .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,114.263

And she gentylly <P_115> agayne did his co~mau~dment .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.264

This man yet not satysfyed co~maunded her to set the pot a hygh vpon the
hen rost | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.265

what quod y=e= wyf agayne I trow ye be mad . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.266

And he fyersly than co~maunded her to set it there
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.267

or els he sayd she sholde repe~t MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.268

She somewhat aferde to moue his pacience toke a ladder
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.269

and set it to the roost | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.270

and we~t herself vp the ladder MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.271

and toke the pot in her hande prayeng her husbande than to holde the
ladder fast for slydynge | whiche so dyd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.272

And whenne the husbande lokyd vp and sawe the Potte stande there on
hyght he sayde thus . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.273

Lo now standyth the pot there as I wolde haue it
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.274

This wyfe herynge that sodenly pouryd the hote potage on his hed
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.275

& sayd thus . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.276

And now bene the potage there as I wolde haue them .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.277

By this tale men may se it is no wysedome for a man to attempte a meke
woma~s pacye~ce to far lest it torne to his owne hurte & damage .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,115.278

<P_118>

<heading>

LXIX . OF THE SKOLER OF OXFORD THAT PROUYD BY SOUPHESTRY .II. CHEKYNS
.III. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,118.281

<$$heading>

<P_119>

A rych frankelyn in y=e= contrey hauynge by his wyfe but one chyld and
no mo for the grete affeccyon that he had to his sayde chylde founde hym
at Oxford to scole by the space of .ii. or .iii. yere .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,119.284

This yonge scoller in a vocacyon tyme for his dysport came home to his
fader . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,119.285

It fortuned afterwarde in a nyght the fader y=e= moder & the sayde yonge
scoller syttynge at supper hauynge befor them no more mete but onely a
cople of chykyns the fader sayd this wyse . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,119.286

Sone so it is that I haue spent moch money vpon the to synde y=e= to
scole | wherfore I haue grete desyre to know what hast lernyd . To whom
y=e= sone answerde & sayde . Fader I haue studyed souestrye
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,119.287

& by that scyence I can proue y=t= these <P_120> .ii. chykyns in y=e=
dysh be thre chykyns . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.288

Mary sayd y=e= fader that wolde I fayne se . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.289

The scoller toke one of y=e= chykyns in his hand
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.290

& sayd . Lo here is one chykyn | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.291

and inco~tynent he toke both y=e= chykyns in his hand ioyntly
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.292

& sayd here is .ii. chykyns MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.293

and one & .ii. maketh .iii. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.294

Ergo here is .iii. chykyns . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.295

Then the fader toke one of the chykyns to hymselfe
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.296

and gaue another to his wyfe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.297

& sayd thus . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.298

Lo I wyll haue one of y=e= chykyns to my parte |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.299

& thy moder shall haue another MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.300

& bycause of thy good argument thou shalt haue y=e= thyrde to thy supper
| MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.301

for thou getteyst no more mete here at this tyme | whiche promyse the
fader kept MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.302

& so the scoller went without his supper . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.303

By this tale men may se that it is grete foly to put one to scole to
lerne any subtyll scyence whiche hath no naturall wytte .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,120.304

<P_126>

<heading>

LXXIV . OF THE COURTEAR THAT DYD CAST THE FRERE OUER THE BOTE .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,126.307

<$$heading>

A courtyer & a frere happenyd to mete togyder in a fery bote
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,126.309

& in co~munycacyon betwene them fell at wordys angry & dyspleasyd eche
with other | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,126.310

& fought & strogled togyder | so that at the last y=e= courtyer cast the
frere ouer the bote | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,126.311

so was y=e= frere drowned . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,126.312

The feryma~ whiche had ben a man of warre the most parte of his lyfe
before and seynge the frere was so drowned & gon sayd thus to the
courtyer | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,126.313

I beshrewe thy hart thou sholdest haue taryed & foughte with hym a lande
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,126.314

for nowe thou hast caused me to lese an halfpeny for my fare .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,126.315

<P_127>

By this tale a man may se that he y=t= is ac-costumed in vycyous & cruel
company shall lose that noble vertew to haue pyte & compassyon vpon his
neyghboure . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,127.317

<P_132>

<heading>

LXXIX . OF HYM THAT ADUENTURYD BODY & SOWLE FOR HYS PRYNCE .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.320

<$$heading>

Two knyghtes there were whiche went to a stondyng felde w=t= theyr
prynce . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.322

But one of them was co~fessyd before he went |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.323

but the other we~t into the felde w=t=out shryft or repe~tau~ce |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.324

afterward this pri~ce wa~ y=e= feld MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.325

& had y=e= vyctorye y=t= day | wherfore he y=t= was co~fessyd came to
y=e= pri~ce MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.326

& askyd an offyce MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.327

& sayd he had deseruyd it MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.328

for he had don good seruyce MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.329

& adue~tured that day as far as ony man in y=e= felde | to who~ the
other y=t= was vnco~fessyd answeryd and sayd nay by the mas I am more
worthy to haue a rewarde than he | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.330

for he ad-uenturyd but his body for your sake MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.331

for he durst not go to y=e= felde tyl he was co~fessyd |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,132.332

but as for <P_133> me I dyd iup~d both body lyfe & soule for your sake |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,133.333

for I went to the felde without co~fessyon or repentan~ce .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,133.334

<P_134>

By this ye may se that some curatys that loke full holyly be but
desemblers & ypocrytis . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,134.336

<heading>

LXXXII . OF THE FRERE THAT SAYD DYRIGE FOR THE HOGGYS SOWLE .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,134.338

<$$heading>

<P_135>

Upon a tyme certayn women in the countrey were appoynted to deryde and
mokke a frere a lymytour that vsyd moche to vysyth them . wherupon one
of them a lytyll before that the frere came kylled an hog
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.341

& for dysport leyd it vnder the borde after the maner of a corse
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.342

and tolde the frere it was her good ma~ MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.343

and desyred hym to say dirige for his soule wherfore the frere and his
felaw began Placebo and Dirige and so forth MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.344

sayd the seruyse full deuowtly which the wyues so heryng | coude not
refrayne them selfe from lawghynge MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.345

and wente in to a lytyll parler to lawgh more at theyr plesure .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.346

These frerys somwhat suspected the cause MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.347

and quykly or that y=e= women were ware lokyd vnder the borde
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.348

and spyed that it was an hog | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.349

sodenly toke it bytwene them MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.350

and bare it homeward as fast they myght . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.351

The women seyng that ran after the frere MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.352

and cryed come agayn mayster frere MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.353

come agayne MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.354

and let it allone | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.355

nay by my fayth quod y=e= frere he is a broder of oures
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.356

and therfore he must nedys be buryed in our cloyster |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.357

and so the frerys gate the hog . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,135.358

<P_136>

By thys ye may se that they that vse to deryde and mok other somtyme it
tornyth to theyr one losse and damage . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,136.360

<P_143>

<heading>

LXXXIX . OF MASTER WHYTTYNTONS DREME . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,143.363

<$$heading>

Sone after one mayster Whyttinto~ had bylded a colege on a nyght as he
slept he dremyd that he sad in his church & many folkys ther also |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,143.365

& further he dremyd y=t= he sawe our lady in the same chyrch w=t= a glas
of goodly oyntement in her hand goynge to one askyng hym what he had
done for her sake | whiche sayd that he had sayd our ladys sauter euery
day wherfore she gaue hym a lytyll of the oyle .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,143.366

And anon she went to another askyng hym what he had done for her sake
which sayd that he had sayd .ii. ladys sauters euery day | wherfore our
lady gaue hym more of y=e= oy~tement than she gaue y=e= other .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,143.367

This mayster whyttento~ <P_144> then thought that when our lady sholde
come to hym she wolde gyue hym all the hole glas bycause y=t= he had
bylded such a gret colege MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,144.368

& was very glad in his mynd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,144.369

But whe~ our lady cam to hym she asked hym what he had suffred for her
sake | which wordys made hym gretly abashyd bycause he had nothyng to
say for hym selfe | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,144.370

& so he dremyd that for all the gret dede of byldyng of y=e= sayd Colege
he had no parte of y=t= goodly oyntement . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,144.371

By this ye may se that to suffer for goddys sake is more merytoryous
than to gyue gret goodys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,144.372

<P_145>

<heading>

XCI . OF THE MALTMAN OF COLBROKE . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,145.375

<$$heading>

A certayne maltman of colbroke whiche was a very couetous wreche and had
no pleasure but onely to get money came to london to sell his malt
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,145.377

and broughte with hym .iiii. capons MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,145.378

& there re-seyuyd .iiii. or .v. li. for malte
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,145.379

and put it in a lytell purs tyed to his cote MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,145.380

and after wente aboute the strettys to sell his capons whom a pollyng
<P_146> felowe that was a dycer and an vnthryft had espyed and Imagyned
how he myght begyle the man other of his capons or of his money
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.381

and came to this maltman in the street berynge these capons in his hande
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.382

and askyd hym how he wolde sell his capons MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.383

and when he had shewyd hym the pryse of them he bad hym go with hym to
his mayster MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.384

and he wolde shew them to his mayster MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.385

and he wolde cause hym to haue money for them wherto he agreed .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.386

This Poller wente to the cardynalls hat in lomberdys strete
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.387

& when he came to the dore he toke the capons from the maltman
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.388

and bad hym tary at the dore tyll he had shewed his mayster
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.389

and he wolde come agayn to hym and brynge hym his money for them .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.390

This poller when he had goten the capons wente in to the house
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.391

and wente thorowe the other bak entre in to Cornhyll
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.392

and soo toke the capons with hym | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.393

and when this maltman had stond there a good season he askid one of the
tauerners where the man was that had the Capons to shewe to his mayster
| MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.394

mary quod the tauerner I can not tell the MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.395

here is nother mayster nor man in this house MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.396

for this entre here is a comen hye way MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.397

and gooth in to cornhyl | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.398

I am sure he is gone a_weye with thy capo~s .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.399

This maltman herynge that ran throwe the entre in to cornhyll
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,146.400

and askyd for a felowe in a tawny cote that had capons in his <P_147>
hand . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.401

But no man coude tell hym whiche waye he was gone
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.402

and soo the maltman loste his capons MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.403

and after wente in to his Inne all heuy and sade
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.404

and toke his horse to th@ @entent to ryde home .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.405

This poller by that tyme had chaungyd hys ray-ment and borowyd a furryd
gowne MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.406

and came to the maltman syttynge on horsbak MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.407

and sayd thus | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.408

good man me thought I harde the inquire euyn now for one in a tawny cote
that had stolyn from the .iiii. capo~s MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.409

yf thou wylt gyue me a quart of wyne go with me and I shall brynge y=e=
to a place where he syttyth drynkyng with other felowes & had y=e=
capons in his hande . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.410

This maltman beynge glad therof grau~tyd hym to gyue hym the wyne
bycause he semyd to be an honest man | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.411

and went w=t= hym vnto the dagger in chepe . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.412

This poller then sayd to hym go thy way streyght to th@ @end of y=t=
long entre & there thou shalt se whether it be he or no
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.413

& I wyl holde thy horse here tyll thou come agayn .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.414

This maltman thynkyng to fynde the felow with his capo~s we~t in
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.415

This maltman thynkyng to fynde the felow with his capo~s we~t in
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.416

& left his horse with the other at the dore .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.417

And as soone as he was gon in to the house this poller lad the horse
awaye in to his owne lodgynge . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.418

This maltman inqueryd in the house for his felowe with the capons
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.419

but no man coude tell hym no tydyngs of suche man | wher-fore he came
agayne to y=e= dore all sad MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,147.420

& lokyd <P_148> for hym y=t= had his hors to kepe |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.421

& bycause he sawe hym not he askyd dyuers there for hym |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.422

& some sayd they saw hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.423

& some sayde they saw hym not | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.424

but no man coude tell whiche waye he was gone wherfore he wente home to
his Inne more sad tha~ he was before | wherfore his host gaue hym
cou~cell to get hym home & be-ware how he trustyd any men in londo~ .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.425

This maltman seynge none other co~fort went hys hy way homewarde .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.426

This poller which lyngeryd alway there aboute the Inne hard tell that
the maltman was goyng homewarde a fote MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.427

apparelyd hym lyke a mannys prentyse MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.428

& gat a lytell boget stuffyd full of stones on his bake
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.429

& wente before hym to charynge crosse MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.430

& taryed tyll y=e= maltman came | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.431

& askyd hym whether he wente whiche sayd to Colbroke .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.432

Mary quod y=e= other I am glad therof MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.433

for I must goo to braynforde to my mayster to bere hym money which I
haue in my boget MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.434

& I wolde be glad of co~pany . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.435

This maltman bycause of his owne money was glad of his co~pany |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.436

& so they agreed MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.437

& wente togyder a whyle . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.438

At the last this poller went somwhat before to knyghtbryge
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.439

& sat vpon y=e= brydge MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.440

& restyd hym with his boget on his bak | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.441

& when he saw y=e= maltma~ almost at hym he let his boget fall ouer y=e=
brydge in to y=e= water . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.442

& incontynent start vp MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,148.443

& sayd to y=e= maltman alas <P_149> I haue let my boget fal in to y=e=
water MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.444

& there is .xl. li. of money therin | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.445

yf thou wylt wade in to y=e= water & go seke it & get it me agayne I
shall gyue y=e= .xii. pence for thy labour | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.446

this maltman hauynge pyte of his losse & also glad to get the .xii.
pence plukyd of his hose cote & shyrt MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.447

& wadyd into y=e= water to seke for the boget .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.448

And in y=e= mene whyle this poller gote his clothis & cote wher to the
purs of money was tyde MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.449

& lepte ouer the hedge MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.450

& wente to westmynster . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.451

This maltman within a whyle after with grete payne & depe wadynge founde
y=e= boget MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.452

& came out of the water MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.453

& sawe not his felowe there MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.454

& sawe that his clothys & money were not there as he left them
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.455

suspectyd y=e= mater MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.456

and openyd the boget MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.457

and than founde nothynge therin but stonys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.458

cryed out lyke a mad man MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.459

and ran all nakyd to london agayne MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.460

and sayde alas alas helpe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.461

or I shall be stolen . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.462

For my capons be stolen . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.463

My hors is stolen . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.464

My money and clothys be stolen MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.465

and I shall be stolen myself . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.466

And so ran aboute the stretys in london nakyd & mad cryenge alway I
shall be stole . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.467

I shall be stolen . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.468

And so contynuyd mad durynge his lyfe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.469

& so dyed lyke a wretche to the vtter destruccyon of hym self & shame to
all his kyn . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,149.470

By this tale ye may se that many a couet-ouse wrech y=t= louyd his good
better than god and <P_150> settyth his mynde inordynatly theron by the
ryghte iugment of god oftymes comyth to a myserable and shamfull ende .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-H,150.471

