<BEGIN_milton-1670-e3-h>

<P_X,141>

<heading>

THE HISTORY OF BRITAIN . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,141.4

THE FOURTH BOOK MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,141.5

<$$heading>

The <font> Saxons <$$font> grown up now to 7 absolute Kingdoms , and the
latest of them establish'd by succession , finding thir power arrive
well nigh at the utmost of what was to be gain'd upon the <font> Britans
<$$font> , and as little fearing to be displanted by them , had time now
to survey at leasure one anothers greatness . Which quickly bred among
them , either envy , or mutual jealousies ; till the West Kingdom at
length grown over_powerful , put an end to all the rest .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,141.7

Mean while , above others , <font> Ethelbert <$$font> of <font> Kent
<$$font> , who by this time had well rip'nd his young ambition , with
more ability of years and experience in War , what before he attempted
to his loss , now successfully attains ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,141.8

and by degrees brought all the other Monarchies between <font> Kent
<$$font> and <font> Humber <$$font> , to be at his devotion . To which
design the Kingdom of <font> West-Saxons <$$font> , being the firmest of
them all , at that time sore shak'n by thir overthrow at <font>
Wodens-beorth <$$font> , and the Death of <font> Keaulin <$$font> , gave
him no doubt a main advantage ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,141.9

the rest yeilded not subjection , but as he earn'd it by continual
Victories . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,141.10

And to win him the more regard abroad , he marries <font> Bertha
<$$font> the French Kings Daughter , though a Christian , and with this
condition , to have the free exercise of her Faith , under the care and
instruction of <font> Letardus <$$font> a Bishop , sent by her Parents
along with her ; the King notwithstanding and his people retaining thir
own Religion . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,141.11

<font> Beda <$$font> out of <font> Gildas <$$font> laies it sadly to the
<P_X,142> <font> Britans <$$font> charge , that they never would
voutsafe thir <font> Saxon <$$font> Neighbours the means of conversion :
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,142.12

but how far to blame they were , and what hope there was of converting
in the midst of so much hostility , at least falshood from thir first
arrival , is not now easie to determin . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,142.13

Howbeit not long after , they had the Christian Faith preach't to them
by a Nation more remote , and <paren> as a report went , accounted old
in <font> Bedas <$$font> time <$$paren> upon this occasion .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,142.14

The <font> Northumbrians <$$font> had a custom at that time , and many
hunder'd yeares after not abolish't , to sell thir Children for a small
value into any Foren Land . Of which number , two comly youths were
brought to <font> Rome <$$font> , whose fair and honest countnances
invited <font> Gregory <$$font> Arch-Deacon of that Citty , among others
that beheld them , pittying thir condition , to demand whence they were
; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,142.15

it was answer'd by som who stood by , that they were <font> Angli
<$$font> of the Province <font> Deira <$$font> , subjects to <font> Alla
<$$font> King of <font> Northumberland <$$font> , and by Religion Pagans
. Which last <font> Gregory <$$font> deploring , fram'd on a sudden
this allusion to the three names he heard ; that the <font> Angli
<$$font> so like to Angels should be snatch't de ira , that is , from
the wrath of God , to sing Hallelujah : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,142.16

and forthwith obtaining licence of <font> Benedict <$$font> the Pope ,
had come and preach't heer among them , had not the <font> Roman
<$$font> people , whose love endur'd not the absence of so vigilant a
Pastor over them , recall'd him then on his journey , though but
deferr'd his pious intention . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,142.17

For a while after , succeeding in the Papal Seat , and now in his fourth
year , admonisht , saith <font> Beda <$$font> , by divine instinct , he
sent <font> Augustine <$$font> whom he had design'd for Bishop of the
<P_X,143> <font> English <$$font> Nation , and other zealous Monks with
him , to preach to them the Gospel . Who being now on thir way ,
discouraged by some reports , or thir own carnal fear , sent back <font>
Austin <$$font> , in the name of all , to beseech <font> Gregory
<$$font> they might return home , and not be sent a journey so full of
hazard , to a fierce and infidel Nation , whose tongue they understood
not . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,143.18

<font> Gregory <$$font> with pious and Apostolic perswasions exhorts
them not to shrink back from so good a work , but cheerfully to go on in
the strength of divine assistance . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,143.19

The Letter it self yet extant among our Writers of Ecclesiastic story ,
I omit heer , as not professing to relate of those matters more then
what mixes aptly with civil affairs . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,143.20

The Abbot <font> Austin <$$font> , for so he was ordain'd over the rest
, reincourag'd by the exhortations of <font> Gregory <$$font> , and his
fellows by the Letter which he brought them , came safe to the Ile of
<font> Tanet <$$font> , in number about 40 , besides some of the French
Nation whom they took along as Interpreters . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,143.21

<font> Ethelbert <$$font> the King , to whom <font> Austin <$$font> at
his landing had sent a new and wondrous message , that he came from
<font> Rome <$$font> to proffer Heav'n and eternal happiness in the
knowledge of another God then the <font> Saxons <$$font> knew , appoints
them to remain where they landed , and necessaries to be provided them ,
consulting in the mean time what was to be done .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,143.22

And after certain days coming into the Iland , chose a place to meet
them under the open Sky , possest with an old perswasion , that all
Spells , if they should use any to deceive him , so it were not within
doors , would be unavailable . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,143.23

They on the other side call'd to his presence , advancing for thir
Standard , a silver cross , and the painted <P_X,144> image of our
Saviour , came slowly forward singing thir solemn Litanies : which
wrought in <font> Ethelbert <$$font> more suspition perhaps that they
us'd enchantments ; till sitting down as the King will'd them , they
there preach'd to him , and all in that assembly , the tidings of
Salvation . Whom having heard attentively , the King thus answer'd .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,144.24

Fair indeed and ample are the promises which ye bring , and such things
as have the appearance in them of much good ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,144.25

yet such as being new and uncertain , I can@ @not hastily assent to ,
quitting the Religion which from my Ancestors , with all the <font>
English <$$font> Nation , so many years I have retain'd .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,144.26

Nevertheless because ye are strangers , and have endur'd so long a
journey , to impart us the knowledge of things , which I perswade me you
believe to be the truest and the best , ye may be sure we shall not
recompence you with any molestation , but shall provide rather how we
may friendliest entertain ye ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,144.27

nor do we forbid whom ye can by preaching gain to your belief .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,144.28

And accordingly thir residence he allotted them in <font> Doroverne
<$$font> or <font> Canturbury <$$font> his chief Citty ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,144.29

and made provision for thir maintenance , with free leave to preach
their doctrine where they pleased . By which , and by the example of
thir holy life , spent in prayer , fasting , and continual labour in the
conversion of Souls , they won many ; on whose bounty and the Kings ,
receiving only what was necessary , they subsisted .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,144.30

There stood without the Citty , on the East-side , an ancient Church
built in honour of St. <font> Martin <$$font> , while yet the <font>
Romans <$$font> remain'd heer : in which <font> Bertha <$$font> the
Queen went out usually to pray : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,144.31

Heer they also began first to preach , baptize , and openly to exercise
<P_X,145> divine worship . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,145.32

But when the King himself convinc't by thir good life & miracles ,
became Christian , and was baptiz'd , which came to pass in the very
first year of thir arrival , then multitudes daily , conforming to thir
Prince , thought it honour to be reckon'd among those of his faith . To
whom <font> Ethelbert <$$font> indeed principally shewed his favour ,
but compell'd none . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,145.33

For so he had bin taught by them who were both the Instructors and the
Authors of his faith , that Christian Religion ought to be voluntary ,
not compell'd . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,145.34

About this time <font> Kelwulf <$$font> the Son of <font> Cutha Keaulins
<$$font> Brother reign'd over the <font> West-Saxons <$$font> , after
his Brother <font> Keola <$$font> or <font> Kelric <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,145.35

and had continual War either with <font> English , Welch , Picts
<$$font> , or <font> Scots <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,145.36

But <font> Austin <$$font> , whom with his fellows , <font> Ethelbert
<$$font> now had endow'd with a better place for thir abode in the Citty
, and other possessions necessary to livelihood , crossing into <font>
France <$$font> , was by the Archbishop of <font> Arles <$$font> , at
the appointment of Pope <font> Gregory <$$font> , ordain'd Archbishop of
the <font> English <$$font> : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,145.37

and returning , sent to <font> Rome Laurence <$$font> and <font> Peter
<$$font> , two of his associates , to acquaint the Pope of his good
success in <font> England <$$font> , and to be resolv'd of certain
Theological , or rather Levitical questions : with answers to which ,
not proper in this place , <font> Gregory <$$font> sends also to the
great work of converting , that went on so happily , a supply of
labourers , <font> Mellitus , Justus , Paulinus , Rufinian <$$font> ,
and many others ; who what they were , may be guess't by the stuff which
they brought with them , vessels and vestments for the Altar , Coaps ,
reliques , and for the Archbishop <font> Austin <$$font> a Pall to say
Mass in : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,145.38

to such a rank superstition that Age was grown , though some of them yet
<P_X,146> retaining an emulation of Apostolic zeal :
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,146.39

lastly , to <font> Ethelbert <$$font> they brought a letter with many
presents . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,146.40

<font> Austin <$$font> thus exalted to Archiepiscopal authority ,
recover'd from the ruins and other profane uses , a Christian Church in
<font> Canturbury <$$font> built of old by the <font> Romans <$$font> ;
which he dedicated by the name of Christs Church ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,146.41

and joyning to it built a seat for himself and his successors ; a
Monastery also neer the Citty Eastward , where <font> Ethelbert <$$font>
at his motion built St. <font> Peters <$$font> , and enrich't it with
great endowments , to be a place of burial for the Archbishops and Kings
of <font> Kent <$$font> : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,146.42

so quickly they step't up into fellowship of pomp with Kings .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,146.43

While thus <font> Ethelbert <$$font> and his people had thir minds
intent , <font> Ethelfrid <$$font> the <font> Northumbrian <$$font> King
, was not less busied in far different affairs :
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,146.44

for being altogether warlike , and covetous of fame , he more wasted the
<font> Britans <$$font> then any <font> Saxon <$$font> King before him ;
winning from them large Territories , which either he made tributary ,
or planted with his own Subjects . Whence <font> Edan <$$font> King of
those <font> Scots <$$font> that dwelt in <font> Britain <$$font> ,
jealous of his successes , came against him with a mighty Army , to a
place call'd <font> Degsastan <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,146.45

but in the fight loosing most of his men , himself with a few escap'd :
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,146.46

only <font> Theobald <$$font> the Kings brother , and the whole wing
which he commanded , unfortunately cut off , made the Victory to <font>
Ethelfrid <$$font> less intire . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,146.47

Yet from that time no King of <font> Scots <$$font> in hostile manner
durst pass into <font> Britain <$$font> for a_hunderd and more years
after : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,146.48

and what some years before , <font> Kelwulf <$$font> the <font>
West-Saxon <$$font> is annal'd to have done against the <font> Scots
<$$font> and <font> Picts <$$font> , passing through the Land of <font>
Ethelfrid <$$font> a King so potent , unless in his aid and alliance ,
is <P_X,147> not likely . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,147.49

<font> Buchanan <$$font> writes as if <font> Ethelfrid <$$font> ,
assisted by <font> Keaulin <$$font> whom he mistitles King of <font>
East-Saxons <$$font> , had before this time a battel with <font> Aidan
<$$font> , wherein <font> Cutha Keaulins <$$font> son was slain .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,147.50

But <font> Cutha <$$font> , as is above written from better authority ,
was slain in fight against the <font> Welch <$$font> 20 years before .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,147.51

The number of Christians began now to increase so fast , that <font>
Augustine <$$font> ordaining Bishops under him , two of his assistants
<font> Mellitus <$$font> and <font> Justus <$$font> , sent them out both
to the work of thir ministry . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,147.52

And <font> Mellitus <$$font> by preaching converted the <font>
East-Saxons <$$font> , over whom <font> Sebert <$$font> the son of
<font> Sleda <$$font> , by permission of <font> Ethelbert <$$font> ,
being born of his sister <font> Ricula <$$font> , then reign'd . Whose
conversion <font> Ethelbert <$$font> to gratulate , built them the great
Church of St. <font> Paul <$$font> in <font> London <$$font> to be
their Bishops Cathedral ; as <font> Justus <$$font> also had his built
at <font> Rochester <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,147.53

and both gifted by the same King with fair possessions .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,147.54

Hitherto <font> Austin <$$font> laboured well among Infidels , but not
with like commendation soon after among Christians .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,147.55

For by means of <font> Ethelbert <$$font> summoning the <font> Britan
<$$font> Bishops to a place on the edge of <font> Worcestershire
<$$font> , call'd from that time <font> Augustines <$$font> Oke , he
requires them to conform with him in the same day of celebrating <font>
Easter <$$font> , and many other points wherein they differ'd from the
rites of <font> Rome <$$font> : which when they refus'd to do , not
prevailing by dispute , he appeals to a miracle , restoring to sight a
blind man whom the <font> Britans <$$font> could not cure .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,147.56

At this something mov'd , though not minded to recede from thir own
opinions without furder consultation , they request a second meeting :
to which came seven <font> Britan <$$font> Bishops , with many other
lerned men , especially from the famous Monastery of <font> Bangor
<$$font> , in <P_X,148> which were said to be so many Monks , living all
by thir own labour , that being divided under seven Rectors , none had
fewer then 300 . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,148.57

One man there was who staid behind , a Hermit by the life he led , who
by his wisdom effected more then all the rest who went :
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,148.58

being demanded , for they held him as an Oracle , how they might know
<font> Austin <$$font> to be a man from God , that they might follow him
, he answer'd , that if they found him meek and humble , they should be
taught by him , for it was likeliest to be the yoke of Christ , both
what he bore himself , and would have them bear ; but if he bore himself
proudly , that they should not regard him , for he was then certainly
not of God . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,148.59

They took his advice , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,148.60

and hasted to the place of meeting . Whom <font> Austin <$$font> being
already there before them , neither arose to meet , nor receiv'd in any
brotherly sort , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,148.61

but sat all the while pontifically in his Chair . Whereat the <font>
Britans <$$font> , as they were counsel'd by the holy man , neglected
him , and neither hark'n'd to his proposals of conformity , nor would
acknowledge him for an Archbishop : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,148.62

And in name of the rest , <font> Dinothus <$$font> then Abbot of <font>
Bangor <$$font> , is said , thus sagely to have answer'd him .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,148.63

As to the subjection which you require , be thus perswaded of us , that
in the bond of love and charity we are all Subjects and Servants to the
Church of God , yea to the Pope of <font> Rome <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,148.64

and every good Christian to help them forward , both by word and deed ,
to be the Childern of God : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,148.65

other obedience then this we know not to be due to him whom you term the
Pope ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,148.66

and this obedience we are ready to give both to him and to every
Christian continually . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,148.67

Besides , we are govern'd under God by the <P_X,149> Bishop of <font>
Caerleon <$$font> , who is to oversee us in spiritual matters . To
which <font> Austin <$$font> thus presaging , some say menacing ,
replies , since ye refuse to accept of peace with your brethren , ye
shall have War from your enemies ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,149.68

and since ye will not with us preach the word of life , to whom ye ought
, from their hands ye shall receive death . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,149.69

This , though Writers agree not whether <font> Austin <$$font> spake it
as his prophecy , or as his plot against the <font> Britans <$$font> ,
fell out accordingly . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,149.70

For many years were not past , when <font> Ethelfrid <$$font> , whether
of his own accord , or at the request of <font> Ethelbert <$$font>
incens't by <font> Austin <$$font> , with a powerful host came to <font>
Westchester <$$font> , then <font> Caer-legion <$$font> . Where being
met by the <font> British <$$font> Forces , and both sides in readiness
to give the onset , he discernes a company of men , not habited for War
, standing together in a place of some safety ; and by them a Squadron
arm'd . Whom having lernt upon some enquiry to be Priests and Monks ,
assembl'd thither after three days fasting , to pray for the good
success of thir Forces against him , therefore they first , saith he ,
shall feel our Swords ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,149.71

for they who pray against us , fight heaviest against us by thir prayers
, MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,149.72

and are our dangerousest enemies . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,149.73

And with that turns his first charge upon the Monks :
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,149.74

<font> Brocmail <$$font> the Captain set to guard them , quickly turns
his back , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,149.75

and leaves above 1200 Monks to a sudden massacher , whereof scarse fifty
scap'd , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,149.76

but not so easie work found <font> Ethelfrid <$$font> against another
part of <font> Britans <$$font> that stood in arms , whom though at last
he overthrew , yet with slaughter nigh as great to his own souldiers .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,149.77

To excuse <font> Austin <$$font> of this bloodshed , lest some might
think it his revengeful policy , <font> Beda <$$font> writes that he was
dead long before , <P_X,150> although if the time of his sitting
Archbishop be right computed sixteen years , he must survive this action
. MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,150.78

Other just ground of charging him with this imputation appears not ,
save what evidently we have from <font> Geffry Monmouth <$$font> , whose
weight we know . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,150.79

<P_X,270>

<heading>

EDMUND IRONSIDE . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,270.82

<$$heading>

After the decease of <font> Ethelred <$$font> , they of the Nobility who
were then at <font> London <$$font> together with the Citizens , chose
<font> Edmund <$$font> his Son <paren> not by <font> Emma <$$font> , but
a former Wife the Daughter of Earl <font> Thored <$$font> <$$paren> in
his Fathers room ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,270.84

but the Archbishops , Abbots , and many of the Nobles assembling
together elected <font> Canute <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,270.85

and coming to <font> Southamton <$$font> where he then remain'd ,
renounc'd before him all the race of <font> Ethelred <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,270.86

and swore him fidelity : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,270.87

he also swore to them , in matters both religious and secular , to be
thir faithfull Lord . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,270.88

But <font> Edmund <$$font> with all speed going to the <font>
West-Saxons <$$font> , was joyfully receav'd of them as thir King , and
of many other Provinces by their example . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,270.89

Mean while <font> Canute <$$font> about mid <font> May <$$font> came
with his <P_X,271> whole Fleet up the River to <font> London <$$font> ;
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.90

then causing a great Dike to be made on <font> Surrey <$$font> side ,
turn'd the stream MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.91

and drew his Ships thether West of the Bridge ;
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.92

then begirting the City with a broad and deep trench , assail'd it on
every side ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.93

but repulst as before by the valorous Defendants , and in despair of
success at that time , leaving part of his Army for the defence of his
Ships , with the rest sped him to the <font> West-Saxons <$$font> , ere
<font> Edmund <$$font> could have time to assemble all his powers : who
yet with such as were at hand invoking divine aid , encounterd the
<font> Danes <$$font> at <font> Pen <$$font> by <font> Gillingham
<$$font> in <font> Dorsetshire <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.94

and put him to flight . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.95

After mid-summer , encreast with new Forces , he met with him again at a
place call'd <font> Sherastan <$$font> , now <font> Sharstan <$$font> ;
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.96

but <font> Edric , Almar <$$font> , and <font> Algar <$$font> , with the
<font> Hamshire <$$font> and <font> Wiltshire <$$font> men , then
sideing with the <font> Danes <$$font> , he only maintain'd the fight ,
obstinatly fought on both sides , till night and weariness parted them .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.97

Day light returning renu'd the conflict ; wherein the <font> Danes
<$$font> appearing inferiour , <font> Edric <$$font> to dishart'n the
English cuts off the Head of one <font> Osmer <$$font> , in countnance
and hair somewhat resembling the King , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.98

and holding it up , cries aloud to the English , that <font> Edmund
<$$font> being slain and this his head , it was time for them to flie ;
which falacy <font> Edmund <$$font> perceaving , and op'nly shewing
himself to his Souldiers , by a spear thrown at <font> Edric <$$font> ,
that missing him yet slew one next him , and through him another behinde
, they recoverd heart , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.99

and lay sore upon the <font> Danes <$$font> till night parted them as
before : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.100

for ere the third morn , <font> Canute <$$font> sensible of his loss ,
march'd away by stealth to his Ships at <font> London <$$font> , renuing
there his leagre . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,271.101

Some would have this Battell at <font> Sherastan <$$font> the same with
that at <font> Scorastan <$$font> <P_X,272> before mention'd ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.102

but the circumstance of time permits not that , having bin before the
landing of <font> Canute <$$font> , this a good while after , as by the
Process of things appears : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.103

from <font> Sherastan <$$font> or <font> Sharstan , Edmund <$$font>
return'd to the <font> West-Saxons <$$font> , whose valour <font> Edric
<$$font> fearing , least it might prevail against the <font> Danes
<$$font> , sought pardon of his revolt , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.104

and obtaining it swore loyalty to the King , who now the third time
coming with an Army from the <font> West-Saxons <$$font> to <font>
London <$$font> , rais'd the Seige , chaseing <font> Canute <$$font> and
his <font> Danes <$$font> to thir Ships . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.105

Then after two daies passing the <font> Thames <$$font> at <font>
Branford <$$font> , and so coming on thir backs , kept them so turn'd ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.106

and obtain'd the Victory : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.107

then returns again to his <font> West Saxons <$$font> , and <font>
Canute <$$font> to his Seige , but still in vain ;
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.108

riseing therfore thence , he enterd with his Ships a River then call'd
<font> Arenne <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.109

and from the Banks therof wasted {COM:preceding_word_"wasted"_emended}
{SIC:wafted} <font> Mercia <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.110

thence thir Horse by land , thir Foot by Ship came to <font> Medway
<$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.111

<font> Edmund <$$font> in the mean while with multipli'd Forces out of
many Shires , crossing again at <font> Branford <$$font> , came into
<font> Kent <$$font> , seeking <font> Canute <$$font> ;
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.112

encounterd him at <font> Otford <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.113

and so defeated , that of his Horse , they who escap'd fled to the Ile
of <font> Sheppey <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.114

and a full Victory he had gain'd , had not <font> Edric <$$font> still
the Traytor by some wile or other detain'd his persuit :
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.115

and <font> Edmund <$$font> who never wanted courage , heer wanted
prudence to be so misled , ever after forsak'n of his wonted Fortune .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.116

<font> Canute <$$font> crossing with his Army into <font> Essex <$$font>
, thence wasted <font> Mercia <$$font> worse then before ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.117

and with heavy prey return'd to his Ships : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.118

them <font> Edmund <$$font> with a collected Army persueing , overtook
at a place call'd <font> Assandune <$$font> , or <font> Asseshill
<$$font> , now <font> Ashdown <$$font> in <font> Essex <$$font> ;
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.119

the Battel on either side was fought with great vehemence ;
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,272.120

but <P_X,273> perfidious <font> Edric <$$font> perceaving the Victory to
incline towards <font> Edmund <$$font> , with that part of the Army
which was under him , fled , as he had promis'd <font> Canute <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,273.121

and left the King over-match't with numbers : by which desertion the
English were over-thrown , Duke <font> Alfric <$$font> , Duke <font>
Godwin <$$font> , and <font> Ulfketel <$$font> the valiant Duke of
<font> East-Angles <$$font> , with a great part of the Nobility slain ,
so as the English of a long time had not receav'd a greater blow .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,273.122

Yet after a while <font> Edmund <$$font> not absurdly call'd <font>
Ironside <$$font> , preparing to try again his Fortune in another feild
, was hinderd by <font> Edric <$$font> and others of his faction ,
adviseing him to make peace and divide the Kingdome with <font> Canute
<$$font> . To which <font> Edmund <$$font> over-rul'd , a treaty
appointed , and pledges mutually giv'n , both Kings met together at a
place call'd <font> Deorhirst <$$font> in <font> Glostershire ;
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,273.123

Edmund <$$font> on the West side of <font> Severn , Canute <$$font> on
the East with thir Armies , then both in person wafted into an Iland ,
at that time call'd <font> Olanege <$$font> , now <font> Alney <$$font>
in the midst of the River ; swearing amity and brotherhood , they parted
the Kingdome between them . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,273.124

Then interchanging Armes and the habit they wore , assessing also what
pay should be allotted to the Navy ; they departed each his way .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,273.125

Concerning this interveiw and the cause therof , others write otherwise
; <font> Malmsbury <$$font> , that <font> Edmund <$$font> greiving at
the loss of so much blood spilt for the ambition only of two men
striveing who should reign , of his own accord sent to <font> Canute
<$$font> , offering him single Combate , to prevent in thir own cause
the effusion of more blood then thir own ; that <font> Canute <$$font>
though of courage anough , yet not unwisely doubting to adventure his
body of small Timber , against a man of Iron sides , refus'd the Combate
, offring to <P_X,274> divide the Kingdome ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.126

this offer pleasing both Armies , <font> Edmund <$$font> was not
difficult to consent ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.127

and the decision was , that he as his hereditary Kingdome should rule
the <font> West-Saxons <$$font> , and all the <font> South , Canute
<$$font> the <font> Mercians <$$font> , and the <font> North <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.128

<font> Huntingdon <$$font> follow'd by <font> Mat. West. <$$font>
relates , that the Peers on every side wearied out with continuall
warfare , and not refraining to affirm op'nly , that they two who
expected to reign singly , had most reason to fight singly , the Kings
were content ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.129

the Iland was thir lists , the Combate Knightly ; till <font> Knute
<$$font> finding himself too weak , began to parle , which ended as is
said before . After which the <font> Londoners <$$font> bought thir
peace of the <font> Danes <$$font> , and permitted them to winter in the
City . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.130

But King <font> Edmund <$$font> about the Feast of St. <font> Andrew
<$$font> , unexpectedly deceas'd at <font> London <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.131

and was buried neer <font> Edgar <$$font> his Grandfather at <font>
Glaston <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.132

The cause of his so sudden death is uncertain ;
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.133

common fame , saith <font> Malmsbury <$$font> , laies the guilt therof
upon <font> Edric <$$font> , who to please <font> Canute <$$font> ,
allur'd with promise of reward two of the Kings Privy Chamber , though
at first abhorring the fact , to assassinate him at the stool , by
thrusting a sharp Iron into his hinder parts .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.134

<font> Huntingdon <$$font> , and <font> Mat. West. <$$font> relate it
done at <font> Oxford <$$font> by the Son of <font> Edric <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.135

and something vary in the manner , not worth recital .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.136

<font> Edmund <$$font> dead , <font> Canute <$$font> meaning to reign
sole King of <font> England <$$font> , calls to him all the Dukes ,
Barons , and Bishops of the Land , cunningly demanding of them who were
witnesses what agreement was made between him and <font> Edmund <$$font>
dividing the Kingdome , whether the Sons and Brothers of <font> Edmund
<$$font> were to govern the <font> West-Saxons <$$font> after him ,
<font> Canute <$$font> living ? MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,274.137

they who understood his <P_X,275> meaning , and fear'd to undergo his
anger , timorously answerd , that <font> Edmund <$$font> they knew had
left no part therof to his Sons or Brethren , living or dying ; but that
he intended <font> Canute <$$font> should be thir Guardian , till they
came to age of reigning . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,275.138

<font> Simeon <$$font> affirms , that for fear or hope of reward they
attested what was not true : notwithstanding which he put many of them
to death not long after . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,275.139

<heading>

CANUTE , OR KNUTE . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,275.141

<$$heading>

Canute having thus sounded the Nobility , and by them understood ,
receav'd thir Oath of fealty , they the pledge of his bare hand , and
Oath from the <font> Danish <$$font> Nobles ; whereupon the House of
<font> Edmund <$$font> was renounc't , and <font> Canute <$$font>
Crown'd . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,275.143

Then they enacted , that <font> Edwi <$$font> Brother of <font> Edmund
<$$font> , a Prince of great hope , should be banish't the Realm .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,275.144

But <font> Canute <$$font> not thinking himself secure while <font> Edwi
<$$font> liv'd , consulted with <font> Edric <$$font> how to make him
away ; who told him of one <font> Ethelward <$$font> a decay'd Nobleman
, likeliest to do the work . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,275.145

<font> Ethelward <$$font> sent for , and tempted by the King in privat ,
with largest rewards , but abhorring in his mind the deed , promisd to
do it when he saw his opportunity ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,275.146

and so still deferr'd it . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,275.147

But <font> Edwi <$$font> afterwards receav'd into favour as a snare ,
was by him or some other of his false freinds , <font> Canute <$$font>
contriving it , the same year slain . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,275.148

<font> Edric <$$font> also counsel'd him to dispatch <font> Edward
<$$font> and <font> Edmund <$$font> , the Sons of <font> Ironside
<$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,275.149

but the King doubting that the fact would seem too foul done in <font>
England <$$font> , sent them to the King of <font> Sweden <$$font> ,
with like intent ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,275.150

but he disdaining the Office , sent them for better safety to <font>
Solomon <$$font> King of <font> Hungary <$$font> ; where <font> Edmund
<$$font> at length dy'd , <P_X,276> but <font> Edward <$$font> married
<font> Agatha <$$font> Daughter to <font> Henry <$$font> the <font>
German <$$font> Emperour . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,276.151

A digression in the Laws of <font> Edward <$$font> Confessor under the
Title of Lex Noricorum saith , that this <font> Edward <$$font> for fear
of <font> Canute <$$font> , fled of his own accord to <font> Malesclot
<$$font> King of the <font> Rugians <$$font> , who receav'd him
honourably , and of that Country gave him a Wife .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,276.152

<font> Canute <$$font> settl'd in his Throne , divided the Government of
his Kingdom into fowr parts ; the <font> West-Saxons <$$font> to himself
, the <font> East-Angles <$$font> to Earl <font> Turkill <$$font> , the
<font> Mercians <$$font> to <font> Edric <$$font> , the <font>
Northumbrians <$$font> to <font> Eric <$$font> ;
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,276.153

then made peace with all Princes round about him ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,276.154

and his former Wife being dead , in <font> July <$$font> married <font>
Emma <$$font> the Widow of King <font> Ethelred <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,276.155

The <font> Christmas <$$font> following was an ill Feast to <font> Edric
<$$font> , of whose Treason , the King having now made use as much as
serv'd his turn , and fearing himself to be the next betray'd , caus'd
him to be slain at <font> London <$$font> in the Palace , thrown over
the City Wall , and there to lie unburied ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,276.156

the head of <font> Edric <$$font> fixt on a pole , he commanded to be
set on the highest Tower of <font> London <$$font> , as in a double
sence he had promis'd him , for the murder of King <font> Edmund
<$$font> to exalt him above all the Peers of <font> England <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,276.157

<font> Huntingdon , Malmsbury <$$font> , and <font> Mat. West.
<$$font> write , that suspecting the Kings intention to degrade him from
his <font> Mercian <$$font> Dukedome , and upbraiding him with his
merits , the King enrag'd , caus'd him to be strangl'd in the room , and
out at a Window thrown into the <font> Thames <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,276.158

Another writes , that <font> Eric <$$font> at the Kings command struck
off his head . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,276.159

Other great men though without fault , as Duke <font> Norman <$$font>
the Son of <font> Leofwin , Ethelward <$$font> Son of Duke <font>
Agelmar <$$font> , he put to death at the same time , jealous of thir
power of familiarity with <font> Edric <$$font> :
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,276.160

and <P_X,277> notwithstanding peace , kept still his Army ; to maintain
which , the next year he squees'd out of the English , though now his
subjects , not his Enemies , 72 , some say , 82_thousand pound , besides
15_thousand out of <font> London <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.161

Mean while great War arose at <font> Carr <$$font> , between <font>
Uthred <$$font> Son of <font> Waldef <$$font> , Earl of <font>
Northumberland <$$font> , and <font> Malcolm <$$font> Son of <font>
Kened <$$font> King of <font> Scots <$$font> , with whom held <font>
Eugenius <$$font> King of <font> Lothian <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.162

But heer <font> Simeon <$$font> the relater seems to have committed some
mistake , having slain <font> Uthred <$$font> by <font> Canute <$$font>
two years before , and set <font> Eric <$$font> in his place :
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.163

<font> Eric <$$font> therfore it must needs be , not <font> Uthred
<$$font> , who manag'd this War against the <font> Scots <$$font> .
About which time in a Convention of <font> Danes <$$font> at <font>
Oxford <$$font> , it was agreed on both parties to keep the Laws of
<font> Edgar ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.164

Mat. West. <$$font> saith , of <font> Edward <$$font> the Elder .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.165

The next year <font> Canute <$$font> sail'd into <font> Denmarke
<$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.166

and there abode all Winter . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.167

<font> Huntingdon <$$font> and <font> Mat. West. <$$font> say , he
went thether to repress the <font> Swedes <$$font> , and that the night
before a Battel to be fought with them . <font> Godwin <$$font>
stealing out of the Camp with his English , assaulted the <font> Swedes
<$$font> , and had got the victory ere <font> Canute <$$font> in the
morning knew of any fight . For which bold enterprise , though against
Discipline , he had the English in more esteem ever after .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.168

In the Spring at his return into <font> England <$$font> , he held in
the time of <font> Easter <$$font> a great assembly at <font>
Chirchester <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.169

and the same year was with <font> Turkill <$$font> the <font> Dane
<$$font> at the dedication of a Church by them built at <font> Assendune
<$$font> , in the place of that great Victory which won him the Crown .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.170

But suspecting his greatness , the year following banish'd him the Realm
, MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.171

and found occasion to do the like by <font> Eric <$$font> the <font>
Northumbrian <$$font> Earl upon the same jealousie .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,277.172

Nor yet content <P_X,278> with his Conquest of <font> England <$$font> ,
though now above ten years enjoy'd , he pass'd with 50 Ships into <font>
Norway <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,278.173

dispossess'd <font> Olave <$$font> thir King ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,278.174

and subdu'd the land , first with great summes of money sent the year
before to gain him a party , then coming with an Army to compell the
rest . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,278.175

Thence returning King of <font> England , Denmarke <$$font> , and <font>
Norway <$$font> , yet not secure in his mind , under colour of an
Embassey he sent into banishment <font> Hacun <$$font> a powerfull
<font> Dane <$$font> , who had married the Daughter of his Sister <font>
Gunildis <$$font> , having conceav'd some suspition of his practices
against him : MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,278.176

but such course was tak'n , that he never came back ; either perishing
at Sea , or slain by contrivance the next year in <font> Orkney <$$font>
. MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,278.177

<font> Canute <$$font> therefore having thus establish't himself by
bloodshed and oppression , to wash away , as he thought , the guilt
therof , sailing again into <font> Denmark <$$font> , went thence to
<font> Rome <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,278.178

and offerd there to St. <font> Peter <$$font> great guifts of Gold and
Silver , and other pretious things ; besides the usuall tribute of
<font> Romscot <$$font> , giving great Alms by the way , both thether
and back again , freeing many places of Custom and Toll with great
expence , where strangers were wont to pay , having vow'd great
amendment of life at the Sepulchre of <font> Peter <$$font> and <font>
Paul <$$font> , and to his whole people in a large letter writt'n from
<font> Rome <$$font> yet extant . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,278.179

At his return therfore he built and dedicated a Church to St. <font>
Edmund <$$font> at <font> Bury <$$font> , whom his Ancestors had slain ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,278.180

threw out the secular Preists who had intruded there ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,278.181

and plac'd Monks in thir stead ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,278.182

then going into <font> Scotland <$$font> , subdu'd and receav'd homage
of <font> Malcolm <$$font> , and two other Kings there , <font> Melbeath
<$$font> , and <font> Jermare <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,278.183

Three years after having made <font> Swane <$$font> his suppos'd Son by
<font> Algiva <$$font> of <P_X,279> <font> Northamton <$$font> , Duke
<font> Alfhelms <$$font> Daughter <paren> for others say the Son of a
Preist whom <font> Algiva <$$font> barren had got ready at the time of
her feign'd labour <$$paren> King of <font> Norway <$$font> , and <font>
Hardecnute <$$font> his Son by <font> Emma <$$font> King of <font>
Denmark <$$font> , and design'd <font> Harold <$$font> his Son by <font>
Algiva <$$font> of <font> Northamton <$$font> King of <font> England
<$$font> , dy'd at <font> Shaftsbury <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,279.184

and was buried at <font> Winchester <$$font> in the old Monastery .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,279.185

This King , as appears , ended better then he began ,
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,279.186

for though he seems to have had no hand in the Death of <font> Ironside
<$$font> , but detested the fact , and bringing the murderers , who came
to him in hope of great reward , forth among his Courtiers , as it were
to receave thanks , after they had op'nly related the manner of thir
killing him , deliver'd them to deserved punishment , yet he spar'd
<font> Edric <$$font> whom he knew to be the prime Authour of that
detestable fact ; till willing to be rid of him , grown importune upon
the confidence of his merits , and upbraided by him that he had first
relinquisht , then extinguisht <font> Edmund <$$font> for his sake ;
angry to be so upbraided , therfore said he with a chang'd countnance ,
Traytor to God and to me , thou shalt die ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,279.187

thine own mouth accuses thee to have slain thy Master my confederate
Brother , and the Lords Anointed . Whereupon although present and
privat Execution was in rage done upon <font> Edric <$$font> , yet he
himself in cool blood scrupl'd not to make away the Brother and Childern
of <font> Edmund <$$font> , who had better right to be the Lords
Anointed heer then himself . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,279.188

When he had obtain'd in <font> England <$$font> what he desir'd , no
wonder if he sought the love of his conquerd Subjects for the love of
his own quiet , the maintainers of his wealth and state , for his own
profit . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,279.189

For the like reason he is thought to have married <P_X,280> <font> Emma
<$$font> , and that <font> Richard <$$font> Duke of <font> Normandy
<$$font> her Brother might the less care what became of <font> Elfred
<$$font> and <font> Edward <$$font> , her Sons by King <font> Ethelred
<$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,280.190

He commanded to be observ'd the antient <font> Saxon <$$font> Laws ,
call'd afterwards the Laws of <font> Edward <$$font> the Confessor , not
that hee made them , but strictly observ'd them .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,280.191

His Letter from <font> Rome <$$font> professes , if he had done aught
amiss in his youth , through negligence or want of due temper , full
resolution with the help of God to make amends , by governing justly and
piously for the future ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,280.192

charges and adjures all his Officers and Vicounts , that neither for
fear of him , or favour of any person , or to enrich the King , they
suffer injustice to be done in the land ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,280.193

commands his treasurers to pay all his Debts ere his return home , which
was by <font> Denmarke <$$font> , to compose matters there ;
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,280.194

and what his Letter profess'd , he perform'd all his life after .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,280.195

But it is a fond conceit in many great ones , and pernicious in the end
, to cease from no violence till they have attain'd the utmost of thir
ambitions and desires ; then to think God appeas'd by thir seeking to
bribe him with a share however large of thir ill-gott'n spoils , and
then lastly to grow zealous of doing right , when they have no longer
need to do wrong . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,280.196

Howbeit <font> Canute <$$font> was famous through <font> Europe <$$font>
, and much honour'd of <font> Conrade <$$font> the Emperour , then at
<font> Rome <$$font> , with rich guifts and many grants of what he there
demanded for the freeing of passages from Toll and Custome .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,280.197

I must not omit one remarkable action done by him , as <font> Huntingdon
<$$font> reports it , with great Scene of circumstance , and emphatical
expression , to shew the small power of Kings in respect of God ; which
, unless to Court-Parasites , needed no <P_X,281> such laborious
demonstration . MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,281.198

He caus'd his Royal Seat to be set on the shoar , while the Tide was
coming in ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,281.199

and with all the state that Royalty could put into his countnance , said
thus to the Sea : Thou Sea belongst to me , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,281.200

and the Land wheron I sit is mine ; MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,281.201

nor hath any one unpunish't resisted my commands :
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,281.202

I charge thee come no furder upon my Land , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,281.203

neither presume to wet the Feet of thy Sovran Lord .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,281.204

But the Sea , as before , came rowling on , MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,281.205

and without reverence both wet and dash'd him . Whereat the King
quickly riseing , wish'd all about him to behold and consider the weak
and frivolous power of a King , and that none indeed deserv'd the name
of a King , but he whose Eternal Laws both Heav'n , Earth , and Sea obey
. MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,281.206

A truth so evident of it self , as I said before , that unless to shame
his Court Flatterers who would not else be convinc't , <font> Canute
<$$font> needed not to have gone wet-shod home :
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,281.207

The best is , from that time forth he never would wear a Crown ,
esteeming Earthly Royalty contemptible and vain .
MILTON-1670-E3-H,X,281.208

