<BEGIN_morelet1-1529-e1-h>

<P_422>

<heading:edcomment:174_TO_LADY_MORE>

Maystres Alyce , in my moste hartie wyse I recommende me to you
{COM:preceding_word_"you"_emended} . MORELET1-1529-E1-H,422.4

And where as I am enformed by my sone Heron of the losse of our barns
and our neighbours also with all the corne that was therin , albeit
<paren> savyng Goddis pleasuer <$$paren> it wer greate pytie of so myche
{COM:preceding_word_"myche"_emended} good corne loste yet sythe it hathe
lyked hym to sende vs suche a chaunce , we muste and ar bounden not
onely to be content but also to be glade of his visitacion .
MORELET1-1529-E1-H,422.5

He sent vs all that we haue loste MORELET1-1529-E1-H,422.6

and sythe he hathe by syche a chaunce taken yt away ageyne his pleasuer
be fulfylled ; MORELET1-1529-E1-H,422.7

let vs never gruge therat but take in good worth and hartely thanke hym
as well for aduersytie as for prosperytie MORELET1-1529-E1-H,422.8

and peraduenture <P_423> we haue more cause to thanke hym for our losse
then for our wynnyng , MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.9

for his wysedome better seethe what ys good for vs then we do ourselves
. MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.10

Therfore I pray you be of good chere MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.11

and take all the howshold with you to chyrche MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.12

and ther thanke God bothe for that he hathe geven vs and for that he
hathe taken from vs and for that he hathe lefte vs , which yf yt please
hym he can increase {COM:preceding_word_"increase"_emended} when he wyll
MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.13

and yf it please hym to leve vs yet lesse , at his pleasuer be yt .
MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.14

I pray you to make some good enserche what my poore neyghebors haue
loste and byd them take no thought therfore , MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.15

for and I shuld not leve my selff a spone there shall no poore neghebore
of myne berre no losse by eny chaunce hapned in my howse .
MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.16

I pray you be wyth my children and your howsholde mery in God
MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.17

and devyse somewhat wythe your frendys what way were best to take for
provysyon to be {COM:preceding_word_"be"_emended} made for corne for our
houshold and for seede thys yere commyng , yff
{COM:preceding_word_"yff"_emended} ye {COM:preceding_word_"ye"_emended}
thyncke yt good that we kepe the grounde stylle in
{COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended} our {COM:preceding_word_"our"_emended}
handys {COM:preceding_word_"handys"_emended} , and whether ye thyncke yt
good that we so shall {COM:preceding_word_"shall"_emended} do or not ,
MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.18

yet I thyncke it were not best sodenly thus
{COM:preceding_word_"thus"_emended} to leve yt all vp and to put away
our folke of our ferm , till {COM:preceding_word_"till"_emended} we haue
somewhat aduysed vs theron , how_be_it yff we haue more now then ye
shall nede and which can gett them other maysters ye may then dyscharge
vs of them MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.19

but I wolde not that eny man were sodenly sent away he wote nere whyther
. MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.20

At my commyng hether I perceved none other but that I shulde tary styll
with the Kyngis Grace MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.21

but now I shall , I thynke , by cause of thys chaunce gete leve this
next weke to come home and se you , MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.22

an then shall we ferther devyse together vpon all thyngis what order
shall be best to take . MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.23

And thus as hartely fare you well wythe all our chyldren as ye can wyshe
, at Woodestokke the iii=de= daye of September by the hand of Your
lovyng husbond , Thomas More Kg . MORELET1-1529-E1-H,423.24

