<BEGIN_morelet2-1534-e1-h>

<P_501>

<heading:edcomment:200_TO_MARGARET_ROPER>

When I was before the Lordes at Lambeth , I was the first that was
called in , all_beit , Maister Doctour the Vicar of <P_502> Croydon was
come before me , and diuers other . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,502.4

After the cause of my sendinge for , declared vnto me <paren> wherof I
some what merueyled in my minde , consideringe that they sent for no mo
temporall men but me <$$paren> I desired the sight of the othe , which
they shewed me vnder the great seale . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,502.5

Than desired I the sight of the Acte of the Succession , which was
deliuered me in a printed roll . After which redde secretely by my self
, and the othe considered with the acte , I shewed vnto them , that my
purpose was not to put any faulte eyther in the acte or any man that
made it , or in the othe or any man that sware it , nor to condempne the
conscience of any other man . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,502.6

But as for my self in good faith my conscience so moued me in the matter
, that though I wolde not denie to swere to the succession , yet vnto
the othe that there was offred me I coulde not sware , without the
iubardinge of my soule to perpetuall dampnacion .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,502.7

And that if they doubted whither I did refuse the othe only for the
grudge of my conscience , or for <P_503> any other fantasy , I was ready
therin to satisfie them by mine othe . Which if they trusted not , what
shoulde they be the better to giue me any other ?
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.8

And if they trusted that I wolde therin swere true , than trusted I that
of their goodnes they woulde not moue me to swere the oth that they
offred me , perceiuing that for to swere it was against my conscience .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.9

Vnto this my Lorde Chauncellor said , that thei all were sorie to here
me say thus , and see me thus refuse the oth .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.10

And they saide all that on their faith I was the very first that euer
refused it ; which wolde cause the Kynges Highnes to conceiue great
suspicion of me and great indignacion towarde me .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.11

And therwith they shewed me the roll , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.12

and let me se the names of the lordes and the comons which had sworne ,
and subscribed their names allredy . Which notwithstanding when they
saw that I refused to swere the same my self , not blaming any other man
that had sworne , I was in conclusion commanded to goe downe in to the
gardein , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.13

and there vpon I taried in the olde burned chamber , that loketh in to
the gardein MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.14

and wolde not go downe because of the heate . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.15

In that time saw I Maister Doctour Lattemer come in to the gardein ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.16

and ther walked he with diuers other doctours and chapleins of my Lorde
of Caunterbury , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.17

and very mery I saw hym , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.18

for he laughed , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.19

and toke one or tweyne aboute the necke so handsomely , that if they had
been women , I wolde haue went he had ben waxen wanton .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.20

After that came Master Doctour Wilson forth from the lordes
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,503.21

and was with two gentilmen brought <P_504> by me , and gentilmanly sent
straight vnto the Towre . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,504.22

What time my Lorde of Rochester was called in before them , that can not
I tell . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,504.23

But at night I herd that he had ben before them ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,504.24

but where he remayned that night , and so forth till he was sent hither
, I neuer harde . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,504.25

I hard also that Maister Vicare of Croydon , and all the remenaunt of
the priestes of London that were sent for , wer sworne , and that they
had such fauour at the counsels hande , that they wer not lingered nor
made to daunce any longe attendaunce to their trauaile and cost , as
sutours were somtime wont to be , but were spedde apace to their great
comforte , so farre forth that Maister Vicare of Croydon , either for
gladnes or for drines , or els that it might be sene <paren> quod ille
notus erat pontifici <$$paren> went to my Lordes buttry barre , and
called for drinke , and dranke <paren> valde familiariter <$$paren> .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,504.26

Whan they had played their pageant and were gone out of the place , than
was I called in again . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,504.27

And than was it declared vnto me , what a nomber had sworne , euen since
I went aside , gladly , without any styckinge . Wherin I laid no blame
in no man , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,504.28

but for mine owne self answered as before . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,504.29

Now as well before as than , they somewhat laide vnto me for obstinacye
, that where as before , sith I refused to swere , I wolde not declare
any speciall parte of that othe {HELSINKI:other} that grudged my
conscience , and open the cause wherfore . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,504.30

For therunto I had said to them , that I ferid lest the Kinges Highnes
wolde as they saide take displeasure inough towarde me for the only
refusal of the othe {HELSINKI:other} . And that if I should open and
disclose the causes why , I shoulde therwith but further exasperate his
<P_505> Highnes , which I wolde in no wise do ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,505.31

but rather wolde I abide al the daunger and harme that might come
towarde me , than giue his Highnes any occasion of further displeasure ,
than the offringe of the oth vnto me of pure necessite constrained me .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,505.32

Howbeit when they diuers times imputed this to me for stubbernes and
obstinacie that I wolde neither swere the oth , nor yet declare the
causes why , I declined thus farre toward them , that rather than I
wolde be accompted for obstinate , I wolde vpon the Kynges gracious
licence or rather his such commaundement had , as might be my sufficient
warraunt , that my declaracion shoulde not offend his Highnes , nor put
me in the daunger of any of his statutes , I wolde be content to declare
the causes in writing ; and ouer that to giue an oth in ye beginninge ,
that if I might find those causes by any man in such wyse answered , as
I might thinke mine owne conscience satisfied , I wolde after that with
all mine hart swere the principall oth , to . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,505.33

To this I was answered , that though the Kynge wolde giue me licence
vnder his letters patent , yet wolde it not serue against the statute .
Wherto I said , that yet if I had them , I wolde stande vnto the trust
of his honour at my parell for the remenaunt .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,505.34

But yet it thinketh me , loe , that if I may not declare the causes
without perill , than to leaue them vndeclared is no obstinacy .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,505.35

My Lord of Canterbury takinge hold vpon that that I saide , that I
condempned not the conscience of them that sware , saide vnto me that it
apered well , that I did not take it for a very sure thinge and a
certaine , that I might not lawfully swere it , but rather as a thinge
vncertain and doubtfull . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,505.36

But than <paren> said my Lord <$$paren> you knowe for a certenty and a
thinge without doubt , that you be bownden to obey your souerain lorde
your Kyng . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,505.37

And therfore are ye bounden to leaue of the doute of your vnsure
conscience in refusinge the othe {HELSINKI:other} , and take the sure
way in obeying of your prince , and swere it .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,505.38

Now al was it so , that in mine owne minde me thought my self not
concluded , yet this argument semed me sodenly so suttle and namely with
such authorite comminge out of so noble a prelate's mouth , that I
coulde againe answere nothinge therto but only that I thought my self I
might not well do so , because that in my conscience this was one of the
cases , in which I was bounden that I shoulde not obey my prince , sith
that what so euer other folke thought in the matter , <paren> whose
conscience and learninge I wolde not condempe nor take vpon me to iudge
<$$paren> yet in my conscience the trouth semed on the t@ @other side .
Wherin I <P_506> had not enformed my conscience neither sodeinly nor
sleightley , but by longe laysure and diligent serche for the matter .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,506.39

And of trouth if that reason may conclude , than haue we a redy way to
avoyde all perplexities . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,506.40

For in what so euer matters the doctours stande in great doubt , the
Kynges commaundement giuen vpon whither side he list soyleth all the
doutes . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,506.41

Than said my Lorde of Westminster to me , that how so euer the matter
semed vnto mine owne minde , I had cause to feare that mine owne minde
was erronious , when I see the great counsail of the realme determine of
my mynde the contrary , and that therfore I ought to chaunge my
conscience . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,506.42

To that I answered , that if there were no mo but my self vpon my side ,
and the whole Parlement vpon the t@ @other , I wolde be sore afraide to
lene to mine owne mynde only against so many .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,506.43

But on the other side , if it so be , that in some thinges for which I
refuse the oth , I haue <paren> as I thinke I haue <$$paren> vpon my
parte as great a counsail and a greater to , I am not than bounden to
change my conscience , and conferme it to the counsail of one realme ,
against the generall counsail of Christendome .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,506.44

Vpon this Maister Secretary <paren> as he that tenderly fauoreth me
<$$paren> , saide and sware a gret oth , that he had leuer that his owne
only sonne <paren> which is of trouth a goodly yonge gentilman , and
shall I trust come to much worship <$$paren> had lost his hedde , than
{he_would} that I shoulde thus haue refused the oth .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,506.45

For surely the Kynges Highnes wolde now conceiue a great suspicion
against me , and thinke that the matter of the nonne of Canterbury was
all contriued by my drift . To which I saide that the contrary was true
and well knowen , and what so euer shoulde mishap me , it laye not in my
powre to helpe it without perill of my soule .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,506.46

Than did my Lorde Chaunceller repete before me my refusell vnto Mister
Secretary , as to hym that was going vnto the Kynges Grace .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,506.47

And in the rehearsing , his Lordship repeted again , that I denied not
but was content to sware to the succession . Wherunto I said , that as
for that poynt , I wolde be content , so that I might se my oth in that
poynt so framed in such a maner as might stande with my conscience .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,506.48

Than said my Lorde : ' Mary , Maister Secretary marke that to , that he
will not sware that neither , but vnder some certaine maner . '
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,506.49

' Verily no , my Lorde , ' quoth I , ' but that I will see it made in
such <P_507> wise first , as I shall my self se , that I shall neither
be forsworne nor swere against my conscience .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,507.50

Surely as to swere to the succession I see no perill ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,507.51

but I thought and thinke it reason , that to mine owne othe I loke well
my self , and be of counsaile also in the fashion , and neuer entended
to swere for a pece , and set my hande to the whole othe
{HELSINKI:other} . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,507.52

How_be_it <paren> as helpe me God <$$paren> , as touchinge the whole
othe {HELSINKI:other} , I neuer withdrewe any man from it ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,507.53

nor neuer aduised any to refuse it , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,507.54

nor neuer put , nor will , any scruple in any mannes hedde ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,507.55

but leaue euery man to his owne conscience . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,507.56

And me thinketh in good faith , that so were it good reason that euery
man shoulde leaue me to myne . ' MORELET2-1534-E1-H,507.57

<P_508>

<heading:edcomment:202_TO_MARGARET_ROPER>

Our Lord blisse you all . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,508.60

If I had not ben , my derely beloued doughter , at a firme and fast
point , <paren> I trust in God's great mercie <$$paren> this good great
while before , your lamentable letter had not a litle abashed me ,
surely farre aboue all other thynges , of which I here diuers times not
a fewe terrible towarde me . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,508.61

But surely they all towched me neuer so nere , nor were so greuous vnto
me , as to se you , my welbeloued childe , in such vehement piteous
maner labour to perswade vnto me , that thinge wherin I haue of pure
necessite for respect vnto myne owne soule , so often gyuen you so
precise answere before . Wherin as towchinge the pointes of your letter
, I can make none answere , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,508.62

for I doubt not but you well remembre , that the matters which moue my
conscience <paren> without declaracion wherof I can nothinge touche the
poyntes <$$paren> I haue sondry tymes <P_509> shewed you that I will
disclose them to no man . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,509.63

And therfore doughter Margaret , I can in this thynge no further ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,509.64

but lyke as you labour me againe to folowe your minde to desire and
praye you both againe to leaue of such labour , and with my former
answeres to holde your self content . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,509.65

A deadly grief vnto me , and moch more deadly than to here of mine owne
death , <paren> for the feare therof , I thanke our Lorde , the feare of
hel , the hope of heauen and the passion of Christ daily more and more
aswage <$$paren> , is that I perceiue my good sonne your husband , and
you my good doughter , and my good wife , and mine other good children
and innocent frendes , in great displeasure and daunger of great harme
therby . The let wherof , while it lieth not in my hand , I can no
further but commit all vnto God . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,509.66

<paren> Nam in manu Dei <$$paren> saith the scripture <paren> cor regis
est , et sicut diuisiones aquarum quocunque voluerit , impellit illud
<$$paren> whose highe goodnes I most humbly besech to encline the noble
harte of the Kynges Highnes to the tender fauor of you all , and to
fauour me no better than God and my self knowe that my faithfull hart
toward hym and my dayly prayour for hym , do deserue .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,509.67

For surely if his Highnes might inwardlie see my true minde such as God
knoweth it is , it wolde <paren> I trust <$$paren> sone aswage his high
displeasure . Which while I can in this worlde neuer in such wise shewe
, but that his Grace may be perswaded to beleue the contrary of me , I
can no further go , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,509.68

but put all in the handes of hym , for feare of whose displeasure for
the saue garde of my soule stirred by mine owne conscience <paren>
without insectacion or reproch laieng to any other mans <$$paren> I
suffre and endure this trouble . Out of which I besech hym to bringe me
, when his will shall be , in to his endelesse blisse of heauen , and in
the meane while , gyue me grace and you both in all our agonies and
troubles , deuoutly to resort prostrate vnto the remembraunce of that
bitter agony , which our Sauiour suffred before his passion at the Mount
. MORELET2-1534-E1-H,509.69

And if we diligently so do , I verily trust we shall find therin great
comfort and consolacion . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,509.70

And thus my deare doughter the blessed spiritt of Christ for his tender
mercy gouerne and guide you all , to his pleasure and your weale and
comfortes both body and soule . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,509.71

Your tender louynge father , Thomas More , Knight .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,509.72

<P_544>

<heading:edcomment:211_TO_MARGARET_ROPER>

The Holy Spirite of God be with you . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,544.75

Your doughterly louyng letter , my derely beloued childe was and is , I
faithfully assure you , much more inward comfort vnto me , then my penne
can wel expresse you , for diuers thinges that I marked therin but of
all thinges most especially , for that God of his high goodnes geueth
you the grace to consider the incomparable difference , betwene the
wretched estate of this present lyfe , and the welthy state of the lyfe
to come , for them that dye in God , and to praye God in such a good
Christen fashion , that it may please hym <paren> it doth me good here
to rehearse your owne wordes <$$paren> ' of his tender pitie so firmely
to rest our loue in hym , with litle regard of this worlde , and so to
fle sinne and embrace vertue , that we may say with S. Paule , Mihi
viuere Christus est et mori luchrum . Et illud , Cupio dissolui et esse
cum Christo . ' MORELET2-1534-E1-H,544.76

<P_545>

I besech our Lord , my dearly beloued daughter , that holesome prayer
that he hath put in your mynde , it may like hym to giue your father the
grace , daylie to remember and praye , and your self as you haue written
it , euen so dayly deuoutly to knele and praye it .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.78

For surely if God geue vs that , he geueth vs and will geue vs therwith
, all that euer we can well wishe . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.79

And therfore good Marget , when you praye it , praye it for vs both :
and I shall on my parte the lyke , in such maner as it shall lyke our
Lorde to geue me poore wretch the grace , that lykewise as in this
wretched worlde I haue been very gladde of your company and you of mine
, and yet wolde if it might be <paren> as naturall charitie bindeth the
father and the childe <$$paren> so we may reioyce and enioy ech others
company , with our other kynsefolke , alies and frendes euerlastingly in
the glorious blysse of heauen : and in the menetyme , with good
counsaile and prayer ech help other thitherwarde .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.80

And where you write these wordes of your selfe , ' But good father , I
wretch am farre , farre , farthest of all other from such poynt of
perfection , our Lorde send me the grace to amende my lyfe , and
continually to haue an eie to mine ende , without grudge of death ,
which to them that dye in God , is the gate of a welthy lyfe to which
God of his infinite mercie bringe vs all . Amen . Good Father strenght
my frayltie with your deuoute prayers . ' The father of heauen mote
strenght thy frailtie , my good daughter and the frayltie of thy fraile
father too . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.81

And let vs not doute but he so will , if we wyll not be slacke in
calling vpon hym therfor . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.82

Of my poore prayers such as they be ye may be bold to reken .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.83

For Christen charitie and naturall loue and your verie doughterly
dealing <paren> funiculo triplici , <paren> vt ait scriptura <$$paren>
difficile rumpitur <$$paren> both binde me and straine me therto .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.84

And of yours I put as litle doubte . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.85

That you feare your owne frailtie Marget , nothinge mislyketh me .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.86

God geue vs both twaine the grace , to dispayre of our owne self , and
whole to depende and hange vpon the hope and strenght of God .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.87

The blessed apostle S. Paule founde such lacke of strength in himself ,
that in his owne temptacion he was fain thrise to call and cry out vnto
God , to take that temptacion from hym . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.88

And yet sped he not of his prayer , in the maner that he required .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,545.89

For God of his high wisdome , seing that it was <paren> as him self
saith <$$paren> <P_546> necessarie for hym to kepe hym from pryde , that
els he might peraduenture haue fallen in , wolde not at his thrise
praying , by and by take it from hym , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,546.90

but suffred hym to be panged in the payne and feare therof , geuing hym
yet at the last this comfort against his feare of falling <paren>
Sufficit tibi gratia mea <$$paren> . By which wordes it well semeth ,
that the temptacion was so stronge <paren> what so euer kind of
temptacion it was <$$paren> that he was very fearde of falling , throwgh
the feblenesse of resisting that he began to feele in hym self .
Wherfore for his comfort God answered <paren> Sufficit tibi gratia mea
<$$paren> puttinge hym in suretie , that were he of hym selfe neuer so
feble and faint , nor neuer so lykely to fall , yet the grace of God was
sufficient to kepe hym vp and make him stand .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,546.91

And our Lord sayd ferther , <paren> Virtus in infirmitate proficitur
<$$paren> . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,546.92

The more weke that man is , the more is the strenght of God in his
saueguard declared . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,546.93

And so S. Paule saith <paren> Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat
<$$paren> . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,546.94

Surely Megge a fainter hearte than thy fraile father hath , canst you
not haue . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,546.95

And yet I verely trust in the great mercye of God , that he shall of his
goodnesse so staye me with his holy hand , that he shall not finally
suffer me to fall wretchedlie from his fauour .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,546.96

And the lyke trust <paren> deare doughter <$$paren> in his high goodnes
I verely conceue of you . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,546.97

And so much the more , in that there is neither of vs both , but that if
we call his benefites to minde , and geue hym oft thankes for them , we
may finde tokens many , to geue vs good hope for all our manifold
offences toward hym , that his great mercye , when we wyll hartely call
therfore , shall not be withdrawen from vs . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,546.98

And verely , my deare daughter , in this is my great comfort , that
albeit , I am of nature so shrinking from paine , that I am allmost
afeard of a philip , yet in all the agonies that I haue had , wherof
before my coming hether <paren> as I haue shewed you ere this <$$paren>
I haue had neither small nor few , with heauy fearfull heart ,
forecasting all such peryls and paynfull deathes , as by any maner of
possibilitie might after fall vnto me , and in such thought lyen longe
restles and wakyng , while my wyfe had went I had slept , yet in anye
such feare and heauy pensifenes <paren> I thanke the mightie mercie of
God <$$paren> I neuer in my minde entended to consent , that I woulde
for the enduring of the <P_547> vttermost , doe any such thinge as I
shoulde in mine owne conscience <paren> for with other mens I am not a
man mete to take vpon me to medle <$$paren> thinke to be to my self ,
such as shoulde dampnably cast me in the displeasure of God .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,547.99

And this is the lest poynt that any man may with his saluacion come to ,
as farre as I can see , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,547.100

and is bounden if he see peryll to examine his conscience surely by
learning and by good counsaile and be sure that his conscience be such
as it may stande with his saluacion , or els reforme it .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,547.101

And if the matter be such , as both the parties may stande with
saluacyon , then on whither side his conscience fall , he is safe ynough
before God . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,547.102

But that mine owne may stand with my own saluacion , therof I thanke our
Lorde I am very sure . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,547.103

I besech our Lord bring all partes to his blisse .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,547.104

It is now , my good doughter , late . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,547.105

And therfore thus I commend you to the holy Trinitie , to gyde you ,
coumfort you and direct you with his Holy Spirite , and all yours and my
wyfe with all my children and all our other frendes .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,547.106

Thomas More , Knyght . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,547.107

<P_563>

<heading:edcomment:218_TO_MARGARET_ROPER>

Owr Lorde blisse you goode dowghter and your goode husbande and your
litle boye and all yours and all my children and all my godchildren and
all owr freindis . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,563.110

Recommende me <P_564> whan you maye to my goode doughter Cecilye , whom
I beseche owr Lorde to comforte , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.111

and I sende her my blessinge and to all her children
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.112

and pray her to praye for me . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.113

I sende her an handekercher MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.114

and God comforte my goode sonne her husbande .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.115

My goode dowghter Daunce hath the picture in parchemente that yow
deliuered me from my Ladie Coniars , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.116

her name is on the backe side . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.117

Shewe her that I hertely pray her that you maye sende it in my name to
her agayne for a token from me to praye for me .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.118

I like speciall well Dorithe Coly , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.119

I praye you be good vnto her . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.120

I woulde wytte whether this be she that yow wrote me of .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.121

If not I praye yow be goode to the t@ @other , as yow maye in her
affliction and to my good doughter Jone Aleyne to giue her I pray yow
some kynde aunswere , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.122

for she sued hither to me this daye to pray you be goode to her .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.123

I cumber you goode Margaret muche , MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.124

but I woulde be sorye , if it shoulde be any lenger than to_morrowe ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.125

for it is S. Thomas evin , and the vtas of Sainte Peter
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.126

and therefore to morowe longe I to goe to God ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.127

it were a daye very meete and conveniente for me .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.128

I neuer liked your maner towarde me better then when you kissed me laste
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.129

for I loue when doughterly loue and deere charitie hathe no laisor to
looke to worldely curtesye . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.130

Fare well my deere childe MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.131

and praye for me , and I shall for you and all your freindes that we
maie merily meete in heauen . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.132

I thanke you for your greate coaste . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.133

I sende nowe vnto my goode dowghter Clemente her algorisme stone
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.134

and I sende her and my goode sonne and all hers Goddes blissinge and
myne . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.135

I praye yow at tyme conveniente recommende me to my goode sonne Johan
More . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.136

I liked well his naturall fashion . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,564.137

Owr Lorde blisse him and his goode wife my louinge doughter , to whom I
<P_565> praye him be goode , as he hathe greate cause ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,565.138

and that if the lande of myne come to his hande , he breake not my will
concerninge his sister Daunce . MORELET2-1534-E1-H,565.139

And our Lorde blisse Thomas and Austen and all that thei shall haue .
MORELET2-1534-E1-H,565.140

