<BEGIN_moreric-1513-e1-h>

<P_15>

With these wordes and writynges and suche other , the Duke of Gloucester
sone set a fyre , them that were of themself ethe to kindle , and in
especiall twayne , Edward Duke of Buckingham , and Richarde Lorde
Hastinges and chaumberlayn , both men of honour and of great power .
The tone by longe succession from his ancestrie , the tother by his
office and the kinges fauor . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,15.3

These two not bearing eche to other so muche loue , as hatred bothe vnto
the Quenes parte : <P_16> in this poynte accorded together wyth the Duke
of Gloucester , that they wolde vtterlye amoue fro the kynges companye ,
all his mothers frendes , vnder the name of their enemyes .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,16.4

Vpon this concluded , the Duke of Gloucester vnderstandyng , that the
Lordes whiche at that tyme were aboute the kyng , entended to bryng him
vppe to his Coronacion , accoumpanied with suche power of theyr frendes
, that it shoulde bee harde for him to brynge his purpose to passe ,
without the gathering and great assemble of people and in maner of open
warre , wherof the ende he wiste was doubtuous , and in which the kyng
being on their side , his part should haue the face and name of a
rebellion : he secretly therefore by diuers meanes , caused the Quene to
be perswaded and brought in the mynd , that it neither wer nede , & also
shold be ieopardous , the king to come vp strong .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,16.5

For where as nowe euery lorde loued other , and none other thing studyed
vppon , but aboute the Coronacion and honoure of the king : if the
lordes of her kinred shold assemble in the kinges name muche people ,
thei should geue the lordes atwixte whome and them hadde bene sommetyme
debate , to feare and suspecte , leste they shoulde gather thys people ,
not for the kynges sauegarde whome no manne enpugned , but for theyr
destruccion , hauyng more regarde to their olde variaunce , then their
newe attonement . For whiche cause thei shoulde assemble on the other
partie muche people agayne for their defence , whose power she wyste wel
farre stretched . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,16.6

And thus should all the realme fall on a rore . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,16.7

And of al the hurte that therof should ensue , which was likely not to
be litle , and the most harme there like to fal wher she lest would ,
all the worlde woulde put her and her kinred in the wyght , and say that
thei had vnwyselye and vntrewlye also , broken the amitie and peace that
the kyng her husband so prudentelye made , betwene hys kinne and hers in
his death bed , and whiche the other party faithfully obserued .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,16.8

<P_17>

The Quene being in this wise perswaded , suche woorde sente vnto her
sonne , and vnto her brother being aboute the kynge ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,17.10

and ouer that the Duke of Gloucester hymselfe and other Lordes the
chiefe of hys bende , wrote vnto the kynge soo reuerentelye , and to the
Queenes frendes , there soo louyngelye , that they nothynge Earthelye
mystrustynge , broughte the Kynge vppe in greate haste , not in good
speede , with a sober coumpanye . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,17.11

Nowe was the king in his waye to London gone , from Northampton , when
these Dukes of Gloucester and Buckyngham came thither . Where remained
behynd , the Lorde Ryuers the Kynges vncle , entendyng on the morowe to
folow the Kynge , and bee with hym at Stonye Stratford eleuen miles
thence , earely or hee departed . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,17.12

So was there made that nyghte muche frendely chere betwene these Dukes
and the Lorde Riuers a greate while . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,17.13

But incontinente after that they were oppenlye with greate courtesye
departed , and the Lorde Riuers lodged , the Dukes secretelye with a
fewe of their moste priuye frendes , sette them downe in counsayle ,
wherin they spent a great parte of the nyght . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,17.14

And at their risinge in the dawnyng of the day , thei sent about priuily
to their seruantes in their Innes and lodgynges about , geuinge them
commaundemente to make them selfe shortely readye ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,17.15

for their Lordes wer to horsebackward . Vppon whiche messages , manye
of their folke were attendaunt , when manye of the lorde Riuers
seruantes were vnreadye . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,17.16

Nowe hadde these Dukes taken also into their custodye the kayes of the
Inne , y=t= none shoulde passe foorth without theyr licence .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,17.17

And ouer this in the hyghe waye <P_18> towarde Stonye Stratforde where
the Kynge laye , they hadde beestowed certayne of theyr folke , that
shoulde sende backe agayne , and compell to retourne , anye manne that
were gotten oute of Northampton toward Stonye Stratforde , tyll they
should geue other lycence . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,18.18

For_as_muche as the Dukes themselfe entended for the shewe of theire
dylygence , to bee the fyrste that shoulde that daye attende vppon the
Kynges highnesse oute of that towne : thus bare they folke in hande .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,18.19

But when the Lorde Ryuers vnderstode the gates closed , and the wayes on
euerye side besette , neyther hys seruantes nor hymself suffered to gone
oute , parceiuyng well so greate a thyng without his knowledge not begun
for noughte , comparyng this maner present with this last nightes chere
, in so few houres so gret a chaunge marueylouslye misliked .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,18.20

How_be_it sithe hee coulde not geat awaye , and keepe him selfe close ,
hee woulde not , leste hee shoulde seeme to hyde him selfe for some
secret feare of hys owne faulte , whereof he saw no such cause in hym
self : MORERIC-1513-E1-H,18.21

he determined vppon the suretie of his own conscience , to goe boldelye
to them , and inquire what thys matter myghte meane . Whome as soone as
they sawe , they beganne to quarell with hym , and saye , that hee
intended to sette distaunce beetwene the Kynge and them , and to brynge
them to confusion , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,18.22

but it shoulde not lye in hys power . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,18.23

And when hee beganne <paren> as hee was a very well_spoken manne ,
<$$paren> in goodly wise to excuse himself , they taryed not the ende of
his aunswere , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,18.24

but shortely tooke him MORERIC-1513-E1-H,18.25

and putte him in warde , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,18.26

and that done , foorthwyth wente to horsebacke , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,18.27

and tooke the waye to stonye Stratforde . Where they founde the kinge
with his companie readye to leape on horsebacke , and departe forwarde ,
to leaue that lodging for them , because it was to streighte for bothe
coumpanies . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,18.28

<P_40>

The lord Cardinall perceiuing that the quene waxed euer the lenger the
farder of , and also that she began to kindle and chafe , and speke sore
biting wordes against the protectour , and such as he neither beleued ,
and was also loth to here , he said vnto her for a finall conclusion ,
that he woulde no lenger dispute the matter . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,40.30

But if she were content to deliuer y=e= duke to him & to y=e= other
lordes there present , he durst lay his owne body & soule both in pledge
, not onely for his suerty but also for hys estate .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,40.31

And if she woulde giue them a resolute aunswere to y=e= contrary , he
would forthw=t= depart there with all , and shyfte whoso would with thys
busynes afterwarde : MORERIC-1513-E1-H,40.32

for he neuer entended more to moue her in that matter , in which she
thought y=t= he and all other also saue herselfe , lacked either wit or
trouth . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,40.33

Wit if they were so dul , that they coulde nothing perceiue what the
protectour entended : MORERIC-1513-E1-H,40.34

trouthe if they should procure her sonne to be delyuered into his handes
, in whom thei shold perceyue toward the childe any euil intended .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,40.35

The quene with these wordes stode a good while in a great study .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,40.36

And for_asmuch her semed the Cardinall more redy to depart , then some
of the remnant , & the protectour himself redy at hand , so y=t= she
verely thought she coulde not kepe him there , but that hee shoulde
incontinent be taken thence : & to conuay him els where , neyther had
shee time to serue her , nor place determined , nor parsons appointed ,
all thinge vnredy thys message came on her so sodaynely , <P_41> nothing
lesse loking for then to haue him fet out of sentuary , which she
thought to be now beset in such places about , y=t= he coulde not be
conuaied out vntaken , & partly as she thought it might fortune her fere
to bee false , so will she waste it was either nedeles or boteles :
wherfore if she shold nedes go from him , she dempte it beste to deliuer
him . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.37

And ouer y=t= of y=e= Cardinals faith she nothing doubted , nor of some
other lordes neither , whom she there saw . Which as she fered lest
they might bee deceiuid : so was she well assured they would not be
corupted : MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.38

Then thought she it should yet make them y=e= more warely to loke to him
, & the more sircumspectly to se to his surety , if she with her owne
handes betoke him to them of trust . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.39

And at the last she toke the yong duke by the hande ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.40

and said vnto the lordes : my lord <paren> quod she <$$paren> & all my
lordes , I neither am so vnwise to mistrust your wittes , nor so
suspicious to mistruste your trouthes . Of which thing I purpose to
make you such a proofe , as if either of both lacked in you , might
tourne both me to great sorowe , the realme to much harme , and you to
gret reproche . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.41

For loe here is <paren> quod she <$$paren> this gentilman , whom I doubt
not but I could here kepe safe if I woulde , whatsoeuer any man say .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.42

And I doubt not also but ther be some abrode so deadly enemies vnto my
blood , that if thei wist where any of it lay in their owne body , they
would let it out . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.43

We haue also had experience y=t= the desire of a kingdome knoweth no
kinred . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.44

The brother hath bene the brothers bane . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.45

And may the nepheus be sure of their vncle ? MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.46

Eche of these children is others defence while they be a sunder ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.47

and eche of their liues lieth in the others body .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.48

Kepe one safe & both be sure , and nothing for them both more perilouse
, then to be both in one place . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.49

For what wise merchaunt aduentureth all his good in one ship ?
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,41.50

All this notwithstanding , here I deliuer him and hys brother in him ,
to kepe into your handes , of whome I shall aske <P_42> them both afore
god and the world . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.51

Faithfull ye be MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.52

that wot I wel MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.53

and I know wel you be wise . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.54

Power & strenght to kepe him if ye list neither lacke ye of your self ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.55

nor can lack helpe in this cause . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.56

And if ye can@ @not els where , then may you leue him here .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.57

But only one thing I beseche you for y=e= trust that his father put in
you euer , and for the trust that I put in you now , that as farre as ye
thinke that I fere to muche , be you wel ware y=t= you fere not as farre
to little . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.58

And therewithall she said vnto the child : farewel my own swete sonne ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.59

god send you good keping , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.60

let me kis you ones yet ere you goe , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.61

for God knoweth when we shal kis togither agayne .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.62

And therewith she kissed him , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.63

& blessed him , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.64

turned her back MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.65

and wept MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.66

and went her way , leauing the childe weping as fast .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.67

When the lord Cardinal & these other lordes with him , had receiued this
yong duke , thei brought him into the sterrechamber where the protectour
toke him in his armes & kissed him with these wordes : Now welcome my
lord euen w=t= al my very hart . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.68

And he sayd in that of likelihod as he thought .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.69

Thereupon forthwith they brought him to y=e= kynge his brother into the
bishoppes palice at powles , & from thence through the citie honorably
into the tower , out of which after y=t= day they neuer came abrode .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,42.70

<P_46>

And of trouth the protectour and the Duke of Buckingham made very good
semblaunce vnto the Lord Hastinges , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,46.72

and kept him much in company . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,46.73

And vndoubtedly the protectour loued him wel , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,46.74

& loth was to haue loste him , sauing for fere lest his life shoulde
haue quailed their purpose . For which cause he moued Catesby to proue
wyth some words cast out a_farre of , whither he could thinke it
possible to winne the lord Hasting into their parte .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,46.75

But Catesby whither he assayed him or assaied him not , reported vnto
them , that he founde him so fast , and hard him speke so terrible
woordes , that he durst no further breke . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,46.76

And of trouth the lord Chamberlen of very trust shewed vnto Catesbye ,
the mistrust that other began to haue in the mater .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,46.77

And therfore he fering lest their mocions might with y=e= lord Hastinges
minishe his credence , wherunto onely al the matter lenid , procured the
protectour hastely to ridde him . And much the rather , for that he
trusted by his deth to obtaine much of the rule that the lorde Hastinges
bare in his countrey : the only desire whereof , was y=e= allectiue y=t=
induced him to be partener and one specyall contriuer of al this
horrible treson . Whereupon sone after that is to wit , on the friday
the thirtene day of Iune many Lordes assembled in the tower , and there
sat in counsaile , deuising the honorable solempnite of the kinges
coronacion , of which the time appointed then so nere approched , that
the pageauntes and suttelties were in making day and night at
westminster , and much <P_47> vitaile killed therfore , that afterward
was cast away . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.78

These lordes so sytting togyther comoning of thys matter , the
protectour came in among them , fyrst aboute ix. of the clock ,
saluting them curtesly , & excusyng hymself that he had ben from them so
long , saieng merely that he had bene a slepe that day .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.79

And after a little talking w=t= them , he sayd vnto y=e= Bishop of Elye
: my lord you haue very good strawberies at your gardayne in Holberne ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.80

I require you let vs haue a messe of them . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.81

Gladly my lord , quod he , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.82

woulde god I had some better thing as redy to your pleasure as that .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.83

And therwith in al the hast he sent hys seruant for a messe of
strauberies . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.84

The protectour sette the lordes fast in comoning ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.85

and therupon prayeng them to spare hym for a little while , departed
thence . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.86

And sone after one hower betwene .x. & .xi. he returned into y=e=
chamber among them , al changed with a wonderful soure angrye
countenaunce , knitting the browes , frowning and fretting
{TEXT:froting} and gnawing {TEXT:knawing} on hys lippes ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.87

and so sat him downe , in hys place : al the lordes much dismaied & sore
merueiling of this maner of sodain chaunge , and what thing should him
aile . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.88

Then when he had sitten still a while , thus he began :
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.89

what were they worthy to haue , that compasse & ymagine the distruccion
of me , being so nere of blood vnto y=e= king and protectour of his
riall person & his realme . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.90

At this question , al y=e= lordes sat sore astonied , musyng much by
whome thys question should be ment , of which euery man wyst himselfe
clere . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,47.91

<P_52>

Now flew y=e= fame of this lordes death , swiftly through the citie , &
so forth farder about like a winde in euery mans ere .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,52.93

But the protector immediatelye after diner , entending to set some
colour vpon y=e= matter , sent in al y=e= hast for many substauncial men
out of the city into the Tower . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,52.94

And at their comming , himself w=t= the Duke of Bukingham , stode
harnesed in old il_faring briginders , such as no man shold wene y=t=
thei wold vouchsafe to haue put vpon their backes , except that some
sodaine necessitie had constrained them . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,52.95

And then the protectour shewed them , y=t= the lord chamberlain , &
other of <P_53> his conspiracy , had contriued to haue sodeinly
destroide him & the duke , ther y=e= same day in y=e= counsel .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,53.96

And what thei intended further , was as yet not well knowen . Of whiche
their treson he neuer had knowlage before x. of y=e= clock y=e= same
fore_none . Whiche sodain fere draue them to put on for ther defence
such harneis as came next to hande . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,53.97

And so had god holpen them , y=t= y=e= mischief turned vpon them y=t=
wold haue done it . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,53.98

And this he required them to report . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,53.99

Eueri man answered him fair , as though no man mistrusted y=e= mater
which of trouth no man beleued . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,53.100

Yet for y=e= further appesing of y=e= peoples mind , he sent immediatli
after diner in al y=e= hast , one herode of armes , w=t= a proclamacion
to be made through y=e= city in y=e= kinges name , conteyning y=t= the
lord Hastinges w=t= diuers other of his traytorous purpose , had before
conspired y=e= same day , to haue slaine y=e= lord protector & y=e= duke
of Buckingham sitting in y=e= counsel , & after to haue taken vpon them
to rule y=e= king & y=e= realm at their pleasure , & therbi to pil &
spoil whom thei list vncontroled . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,53.101

And much mater was ther in y=e= proclamacion deuised , to y=e= slaunder
of y=e= lord chamberlain , as y=t= he was an euil counseller to y=e=
kinges father , intising him to many thinges highlye redounding to y=e=
minishing of his honor , & to y=e= vniuersal hurt of his realm , by his
euyl company , sinister procuring , & vngracious ensample , as wel in
many other thinges as in y=e= vicious liuing & inordinate abusion of his
body , both w=t= many other , & also specialli w=t= shores wife , which
was one also of his most secret counsel of this heynous treson , w=t=
whom he lay nightli , & nameli y=e= night last passed next before his
death , so that it was y=e= less meruel , if vngracious liuyng brought
him to an vnhappy ending : which he was now put vnto , by y=e= most
drede commaundement of y=e= kinges highnes & of his honorable & faithful
counsel , bothe for his demerites , being so openli taken in his falsli
conceiued treson , & also lest y=e= delaying of his execucion , might
haue encoraged other mischiuous persons partners of his conspiracy , to
gather & assemble themself together in makyng some <P_54> gret commocion
for his deliueraunce , whose hope now being by his wel deserued deth
politikely repressed , al y=e= realm shold bi gods grace rest in good
quiete and peace . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,54.102

Now was this proclamacion made w=t=in .ii. houres after y=t= he was
beheded , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,54.103

& it was curiously indited , & so fair writen in parchment in so wel a
set hande , & therwith of it self so long a processe , y=t= eueri child
might wel perceiue , that it was prepared before .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,54.104

For al y=e= time betwene his death & the proclaming could scant haue
suffised vnto y=e= bare wryting alone , all had it bene but in paper &
scribled forth in hast at aduenture . So y=t= vpon y=e= proclaming
therof , one y=t= was scole master of Poules of chaunce standing by , &
comparing y=e= shortnes of y=e= time w=t= the length of y=e= matter ,
said vnto them y=t= stode about him here is a gay goodly cast , foule
cast awai for hast . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,54.105

And a merchant answered hym , y=t= it was writen by profecy .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,54.106

Now then by & bi , as it wer for anger not for couetise , y=e= protector
sent into y=e= house of shores wife <paren> for her husband dwelled not
w=t= her <$$paren> MORERIC-1513-E1-H,54.107

& spoiled her of al y=t= euer she had , aboue y=e= value of .ii. or
.iii._M. marks , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,54.108

& sent her body to prison . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,54.109

And when he had a while laide vnto her for the maner sake , y=t= she
went about to bewitch him , & y=t= she was of counsel w=t= the lord
chamberlein to destroy him : in conclusion when y=t= no colour could
fasten vpon these matters , then he layd heinously to her charge , y=e=
thing y=t= her self could not deny , that al y=e= world wist was true ,
& that natheles euery man laughed at to here it then so sodainly so
highly taken , y=t= she was nought of her body .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,54.110

And for thys cause <paren> as a goodly continent prince clene & fautles
of himself , sent oute of heauen into this vicious world for the
amendement of mens maners <$$paren> he caused the bishop of London to
put her to open penance , going before the crosse in procession vpon a
sonday with a taper in her hand . In which she went in countenance &
pace demure so womanly , & albeit she were out of al array saue her
kyrtle only : yet went she so fair & louely , namelye while the
wondering of the people caste a comly rud in her chekes <paren> of
<P_55> which she before had most misse <$$paren> that her great shame
wan her much praise , among those y=t= were more amorous of her body
then curious of her soule . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,55.111

And many good folke also y=t= hated her liuing , & glad wer to se sin
corrected : yet pitied thei more her penance , then reioyced therin ,
when thei considred that y=e= protector procured it , more of a corrupt
intent then ani vertuous affeccion . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,55.112

This woman was born in London , worshipfully frended , honestly brought
vp , & very wel maryed , sauing somewhat to sone , her husbande an
honest citezen , yonge & goodly & of good substance .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,55.113

But forasmuche as they were coupled ere she wer wel ripe , she not very
feruently loued , for whom she neuer longed . Which was happely the
thinge , that the more easily made her encline vnto y=e= kings appetite
when he required her . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,55.114

Howbeit y=e= respect of his royaltie , y=e= hope of gay apparel , ease ,
plesure & other wanton welth , was hable soone to perse a softe tender
hearte . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,55.115

But when the king had abused her , anon her husband <paren> as he was an
honest man & one that could his good , not presuming to touch a kinges
concubine <$$paren> left her vp to him al togither .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,55.116

When the king died , the lord Chamberlen toke her . Which in the kinges
daies , albeit he was sore ennamored vpon her , yet he forbare her ,
either for reuerence , or for a certain frendly faithfulnes .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,55.117

Proper she was & faire : MORERIC-1513-E1-H,55.118

nothing in her body y=t= you wold haue changed , but if you would haue
wished her somewhat higher . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,55.119

Thus say thei y=t= knew her in her youthe . Albeit some that now se her
<paren> for yet she liueth <$$paren> deme her neuer to haue ben
wel_visaged . Whose iugement semeth me somwhat like , as though men
should gesse y=e= bewty of one longe before departed , by her scalpe
taken out of the charnel house : MORERIC-1513-E1-H,55.120

for now is she old lene , withered & dried vp , nothing left but ryuilde
skin & hard bone . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,55.121

And yet being euen such : whoso wel aduise her visage , might gesse &
deuise which partes how <P_56> filled , wold make it a faire face .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.122

Yet delited not men so much in her bewty , as in her plesant behauior .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.123

For a proper wit had she , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.124

& could both rede wel & write , mery in company , redy & quick of
aunswer , neither mute nor ful of bable , sometime taunting w=t=out
displesure & not w=t=out disport . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.125

The king would say that he had .iii. concubines , which in three diuers
properties diuersly exceled . One the meriest , an other the wiliest ,
the thirde the holiest harlot in his realme , as one whom no man could
get out of y=e= church lightly to any place , but it wer to his bed .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.126

The other two were somwhat greter parsonages , & Natheles of their
humilite content to be nameles , & to forbere the praise of those
properties . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.127

But the meriest was this Shoris wife , in whom the king therfore toke
speciall pleasure . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.128

For many he had , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.129

but her he loued , whose fauour to say the {SIC:saithe} trouth <paren>
for sinne it wer to belie y=e= deuil <$$paren> she neuer abused to any
mans hurt , but to many a mans comfort & relief :
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.130

where the king toke displeasure , she would mitigate & appease his mind
: MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.131

where men were out of fauour , she wold bring them in his grace .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.132

For many that had highly offended , shee obtained pardon .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.133

Of great forfetures she gate men remission . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.134

And finally in many weighty sutes , she stode many men in gret stede ,
either for none , or very smal rewardes , & those rather gay then rich :
either for that she was content w=t= the dede selfe well done , or for
y=t= she delited to be suid vnto , & to show what she was able to do
wyth the king , or for y=t= wanton women and welthy be not alway
couetouse . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,56.135

<P_76>

At these wordes y=e= people began to whisper among themselfe secretely ,
that the voyce was neyther loude nor distincke , but as it were the
sounde of a swarme of bees , tyl at the last in the nether ende of the
hal , a bushement of the dukes seruantes and Nashefeldes and other
longing to the protectour , with some prentises and laddes that thrust
into the hal amonge the prese , began sodainelye at mennes backes to
crye owte as lowde as their throtes would gyue : king Rycharde kinge
Rycharde , and threwe vp their cappes in token of ioye .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,76.137

And they that stode before , cast back theyr heddes meruailing thereof ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,76.138

but nothing they sayd . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,76.139

And when the duke and the Maier saw thys maner , they wysely turned it
to theyr purpose . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,76.140

And said it was a goodly cry and a ioyfull to here , euery man with one
voice no manne sayeng nay . Wherfore frendes , quod the duke , sins
that we parceiue it is al your hole mindes to haue this noble man for
your king whereof we shall make his grace so effectuall reporte , that
we doubte not but it shall redounde vnto your great weal and commoditye
: we require ye that ye to morow go with vs and wee with you vnto his
noble grace , to make our humble request vnto him in maner <P_77> before
remembred . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,77.141

And therewith the lordes came downe , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,77.142

and the company dissolued and departed , the more part al sad , som with
glad semblaunce that wer not very mery , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,77.143

and some of those that came thyther with the duke , not able to
dissemble theyr sorow , were faine at his backe to turne their face to
the wall , while the doloure of their heart braste oute at theyr eyen .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,77.144

Then on the morowe after , the mayre with all the alderman and chiefe
comeners of the citie in their beste maner apparailed , assembling
themself together resorted vnto Baynardes castell where the protector
lay . To which place repaired also according to theyr appointmente the
duke of Buckingham , with dyuers noble menne with him , beside manye
knightes and other gentlemen . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,77.145

And thereupon the duke sent worde vnto the lord protectour , of the
being there of a great and honourable coumpanye , to moue a great matter
vnto his grace . Whereupon the protectour made difficultie to come oute
vnto them , but if he first knewe some part of theyr errande , as though
he doubted and partelye dystrusted the commyng of suche noumber vnto him
so sodainlye , withoute anye warnyng or knowledge , whyther they came
for good or harme , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,77.146

then the Duke when he had shewed this vnto the maire and other , that
they mighte thereby see howe lytle the protectour loked for this matter
, thei sent vnto him by the messenger suche louyng message againe , and
therewith so humblye besought hym to vouchesafe that thei might resort
to hys presence , to purpose their intent , of which they would vnto
none other parson any part disclose , that at the laste hee came foorth
of his chamber , and yet not down vnto them , but stode aboue in a
galarye ouer them , where they mighte see hym & speake to him , as
though he woulde not yet come to nere them tyll he wist what they mente
. MORERIC-1513-E1-H,77.147

And thereuppon the Duke of Buckingham fyrste made humble peticion vnto
him , on the behalfe of them all , that his grace woulde pardon them and
lycence them to purpose vnto hys grace the intent of their commyng
with_oute his <P_78> displeasure , withoute whiche pardon obtayned ,
they dyrst not be bold to moue him of that matter . In whiche albeit
thei ment as muche honor to hys grace as wealthe to al the realm beside
, yet were they not sure howe hys grace woulde take it , whom they would
in no wyse offende . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,78.148

Then the protector as hee was very gentle of hymselfe , and also longed
sore to wit what they mente , gaue hym leaue to purpose what hym lyked ,
verely trustyng for the good minde that he bare them al , none of them
ani thing would intende vnto hym warde , where with he ought to be
greued . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,78.149

When the duke had this leaue & pardon to speake , then waxed he bolde to
shewe hym theyr intent and purpose , with all the causes mouing them
thereunto as ye before haue harde , and finally to beseche hys grace ,
that it wold lyke him of his accustomed goodnes and zeale vnto the realm
, now with his eye of pitie , to beholde the long continued distres and
decay of the same and to sette his gracious handes to the redresse and
amendement therof , by taking vppon him the crowne and gouernaunce of
this realme , according to his right and tytle lawfully descended vnto
hym , and to the laude of god , profyte of the land , and vnto his grace
so muche the more honour and lesse paine , in that that neuer prince
raigned vpon any people , that were so glad to liue vnder hys obeysaunce
as the people of this realme vnder his . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,78.150

When the protector had hard the proposicion , he loked very strangely
therat , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,78.151

and answered : That all were it that he partli knew the thinges by them
alledged to be true : yet such entier loue he bare vnto king Edward and
his children , that so muche more regarded hys honour in other realmes
about , then the crowne of any one , of which he was neuer desyrous ,
that he could not fynde in his hearte in this poynte to enclyne to theyr
desyre . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,78.152

For in all other nacyons where the trueth wer not wel knowen , it shold
paraduenture be thought , that it were his owne ambicious minde and
deuise , to depose the prince & take himself the crown . With which
infami he wold not haue his honoure stayned for anye crowne . In whiche
he had euer parceyued muche more labour and payn , then pleasure to
<P_79> hym that so woulde so vse it , as he that woulde not were not
worthy to haue it . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,79.153

Notwithstanding he not only pardoned them the mocion that they made him
, MORERIC-1513-E1-H,79.154

but also thanked them for the loue and hearty fauoure they bare him ,
prayinge them for his sake to geue and beare the same to the prynce ,
vnder whom he was and would be content to lyue ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,79.155

& with his labour and counsel as farre as should like the kyng to vse
him , he woold doe his vttermost deuor to set the realm in good state .
Whiche was alreadye in this litle while of his protectorship <paren> the
prayse geuen to god <$$paren> wel begon , in that the malice of such as
wer before occasion of the contrary and of new intended to bee were nowe
partelye by good policye , partly more by goddes special prouidence then
mans prouision repressed . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,79.156

Vpon this answer geuen , the Duke by the protectours lycence , a lytle
rouned , as@ @well with other noble men about him as with the mayre and
recorder of London . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,79.157

And after that vpon lyke pardone desyred and obtayned , he shewed aloude
vnto the protectour , that for a fynal conclusion , y=t= the realm was
appointed king Edwardes lyne shoulde not any longer reigne vpon them ,
both for that thei had so farre gone , that it was now no surety to
retreate , as for that they thought it for the weale vniuersal to take
that wai although they had not yet begonne it . Wherfore yf it would
lyke hys grace to take the crowne vpon him , they woulde humblye beseche
hym thereunto . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,79.158

If he woulde geue them a resolute aunswere to the contrarye , whyche
they woulde bee lothe to heare , than muste they needes seke and shold
not faile to fynd some other noble manne that woulde .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,79.159

These wordes muche moued the protectoure , whiche els as euery manne may
witte , would neuer of likelyhoode haue inclyned therunto .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,79.160

But when he saw ther was none other way , but that eyther he must take
it or els he and his bothe goe fro it , he saide vnto the lordes and
commons : Sith we parceiue wel that al the realm is so set , whereof we
be very sorye that they wil not suffer in any wise king Edwardes line to
gouerne them , whom no manne earthly can gouerne again their willes ,
and we wel also perceue , that no manne is there , to whom the crown can
by so iust tytle appertayn as to our self , as <P_80> verye ryghte heyre
lawfullye begotten of the bodye of oure moste deere father Rycharde late
Duke of Yorke , to whiche tytle is nowe ioyned your elleccion , the
nobles & comons of this realm , whiche wee of all titles possible take
for most effectual : we be content MORERIC-1513-E1-H,80.161

& agre fauourably to incline to your peticion and request ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,80.162

and accordyng to the same , here we take vppon vs the royall estate ,
preeminence and kyngdome of the twoo noble realmes , England and Fraunce
, the tone fro this day forward by vs and our heires to rule , gouerne
and defend , the tother by goddes grace & youre good helpe to geat again
and subdewe , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,80.163

and established for euer in due obedyence vnto this realme of Englande ,
th@ @aduancement whereof we neuer aske of god longer to lyue then we
entende to procure . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,80.164

With this there was a great shout , crying kyng Richarde king Rychard .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,80.165

And then the lordes went vp to the kyng <paren> for so was he from that
time called <$$paren> MORERIC-1513-E1-H,80.166

and the people departed , talkyng diuersly of the matter euery man as
his fantasye gaue hym . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,80.167

But muche they talked and marueiled of the maner of this dealing , that
the matter was on both partes made so straunge , as though neither had
euer communed with other thereof before , when that themself wel wist
there was no man so dul that heard them , but he perceieud wel inough ,
y=t= all the matter was made betwene them . MORERIC-1513-E1-H,80.168

Howbeit somme excused that agayne , MORERIC-1513-E1-H,80.169

and sayde all must be done in good order though .
MORERIC-1513-E1-H,80.170

