<BEGIN_osborne-1676-e3-h>

<P_21>

<heading:edcomment:XIX_THE_EARL_OF_DANBY_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

London OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,21.4

1st June 1675 OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,21.5

My Lord . I acknowledge ye great honour and favour of yr Excellency's
letter by Mr Godolphin , OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,21.6

and concurre with you yt itt would be of <P_22> great use to have yr
Excellency here to conferr with his Ma=tie= upon those important matters
mentioned therein . OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.7

I have nothing to object agt itt , if yr Excellency have not ;
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.8

but on ye contrary as I believe his Ma=tie= will receive advantage by
itt , so I should take itt for an happy occasion to give yr Excellency a
confirmation of my readinesse to pay you all manner of service and
respect . OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.9

Yr Excellency is so well knowing to ye present Constitution of our Court
, that no body can give you better measures of itt than yr Excellency is
able to give yr selfe , OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.10

and though itt bee very difficult to steere amongst so many rocks of
faction , without striking upon some ; I doubt not but yr Excellency by
yr great prudence may bee soe happy as to do itt .
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.11

The news of yr Excellencie's intentions to come for England arrived here
two or three days before Mr Godolphin , OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.12

and I have heard that some who hope in time to bee yr successors were
glad of itt , OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.13

but I conceave yr Excellency is so well assured of all our services to
you , how little so ever wee afford of good ones to one another , that
you can bee in no danger of that kind , although in a matter so nice as
this yr Excellency must needs bee ye best Judge .
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.14

I believe ye Parliament is like to sitt longer than was expected
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.15

for ye differences between ye houses are so widened , and yett itt is so
necessary they should come to some composure before they part that itt
looks as if their sitting would yett bee of a month's continuance at
least . OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.16

The King has directed me to attend him tomorrow about the matters of yr
Excellencie's last letter OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.17

and I shall not bee wanting to acquainte you with his Ma=ties= pleasure
so soon as I know itt , OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.18

and in ye meane time I desire yr Excellency will continue to mee ye
happinesse of being esteemed My Lord Your Excellencie's most faithfull
and most humble servant Danby . OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,22.19

<P_45>

<heading:edcomment:XXXVII_THE_EARL_OF_DANBY_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

Wallingford House OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,45.22

March ye 25=th= 1676 OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,45.23

My Lord Perhaps your Excellency may think it unnecessary to trouble you
with an answer to yours of ye 14=th= instant because I have since
<paren> viz ye 19=th= <$$paren> communicated it to his Ma=tie= in ye
presence of his Royall Hignesse , Yourself and my Lord Ranelagh , and
your excellency did then receive his Ma=ties= Pleasure as to all ye
matters contained in itt , saving that part wch relates to ye 90000@
@=lbs= , for which my Lord Ranelagh desires his discharge ;
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,45.24

and I hope your Excellency will receive your orders in that also before
your departure , it being by no means proper for mee to determine till
your Excellency have received satisfaction of ye equity of his Demand in
that particular . OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,45.25

But because your excellency will remember I then told you I differd in
somethings your letter charged my memory withall it may bee convenient
for avoiding future mistakes to acquaint your excellency that I remember
no greater summe out of ye advance-money for arms than 10,000@ @=lbs=
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,45.26

and I very well remember yt ye 20000@ @=lbs= for ye Repairs of Windsor
was never intended out of ye advance-money , but out of ye 20000 yearly
reserved during ye <P_46> whole Farme to his Ma=ties= private dispose
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,46.27

and for yt reason it was yt neither my Lord Ossory@ @'s nor my Lord
Duras@ @'s Grants were to take place upon itt ye first Year .
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,46.28

I told your Excellency then also yt I rememberd nothing of your desire
to have ye first 30000@ @=lbs= remitted in specie into Ireland till a
good while after ye old Farmers' Privy Seale was pass'd for itt , but
that <paren> as it was long before agreed they should have their 20000@
@=lbs= Defalcations , and 10000@ @=lbs= for ye Kings use payd out of ye
first of ye Advance-money <$$paren> Your Excellency agreed ye same ,
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,46.29

and it was my motion y=t= for ye quickening their payments to ye Army in
Ireland , ye money might remain deposited in ye hands of ye Treasurer of
ye Navy though it could bee apply'd to no other use then Privy Seale
directs ; so that although both ye old Farmers and my Lord Ranelagh
insisted upon having ye Kings Engagement made good of being payd yt summ
out of ye first of the advance , yet there was nothing done in itt , but
with your Excellency's consent and approbation .
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,46.30

For ye September and Christmas Pay of ye Army , I know what posture Your
Excellency hath said it to bee in OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,46.31

and your Excellency has shewd mee Letters to ye same effect out of
Ireland , OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,46.32

and finding 15,000@ @=lbs= of ye Michas Pay unpaid about a month or six
weeks ago , I remember Your Excellency would then fain have remitted
that sum into Ireland out of ye deposited money here ,
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,46.33

and I would have been as glad of it if it could have been done ;
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,46.34

but as that was not practicable so your Excellency and my Lord Ranelagh
has always differd in ye quantum of what was in arrear for ye Michas Pay
, as well as for ye severall Pays due to ye Army before that time
OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,46.35

and my Ld Ranelagh did then undertake before his Ma=tie= to give him a
particular account in a short time of what hee agreed to be a true state
of ye Present Debt to each troop and Company . OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,46.36

As your Excellency has been very prudent in laying before his Ma=tie= ye
condition and state of Ireland and <paren> since you were pleased <P_47>
to do it through my hands <$$paren> I hope you will pardon my endeavour
to rectify any mistake which might remaine concerning myself in that
Representation , who am Your Excellency's most faithfull humble servant
Danby . OSBORNE-1676-E3-H,47.37

