<BEGIN_pepys-1667-e3-h>

<P_7,409>

<heading:edcomment:15-16_DECEMBER_1666>

16 . <font> Lords day . <$$font> PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.4

Lay long , talking with my wife in bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.5

Then up with great content , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.6

and to my chamber to set right a picture or two - Lovett having sent me
yesterday Santa Clara's head varnished , which is very fine .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.7

And now my closet is so full stored and so fine , as I would never
desire to have it better . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.8

Dined without any strangers with me - which I do not like on Sundays .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.9

Then after dinner by water to Westminster to see Mrs. Martin , whom I
found up in her chamber and ready to go abroad .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.10

I sat there with her and her husband and others a pretty while ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.11

and then away to White-hall PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.12

and there walked up and down to the Queen's side ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.13

and there saw my dear Lady Castlemayne , who continues admirable me@
@thinks - PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.14

and I do not hear but that the King is the same to her still as ever .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.15

Anon to chapel , by the King's closet , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.16

and heard a very good Anthemne . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.17

Then with Lord Brouncker to Sir W. Coventry's chamber ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.18

and there we sat with him PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.19

and talked . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.20

He is weary of anything to do , he says , in the Navy .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.21

He tells us this Committee of Accounts will enquire sharply into our
office ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.22

and <paren> speaking of Sir J. Mennes <$$paren> he says he will not
bear anybody's faults but his own . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.23

He discoursed as bad of Sir W. Batten almost .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.24

And cries out upon the discipline of the fleet , which is lost .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.25

And that there is not , in any of the fourth-rates and under , scarce
left one Sea-Comander , but all young gentlemen .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.26

And which troubles him , he hears that the gentlemen do give out that in
two or three years a Tarpawlin shall not dare to look after being better
then a Boatswain - which he is troubled at , and with good reason .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,409.27

And at this day Sir Robt. Holmes is mightily troubled that his brother
doth not command in chief , but is commanded <P_7,410> by Captain Hannum
- who , Sir W. Coventry says he believes to be at least of as good
blood - is a longer bred seaman - an elder officer , and an elder
commander . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.28

But such is Sir R. Holmes's pride , as never to be stopped - he being
greatly troubled at my Lord Brouncker@ @'s late discharging all his men
and officers but the standing-officers at Chatham ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.29

and so are all other Commanders , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.30

and a very great cry hath been to the King from them all in my Lord's
absence . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.31

But Sir W. Coventry doth undertake to defend it ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.32

and my Lord Brouncker got ground by it I believe - who is angry at Sir
W. Batten and W. Penn@ @'s bad words concerning it .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.33

And I have made it worse by telling him that they refuse to sign to a
paper which he and I signed on Saturday to declare the reason of his
actions - which Sir W. Coventry likes , and would have it sent him
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.34

and he will sign it - which pleases me well . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.35

So we parted , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.36

and I with Lord Brouncker to Sir P. Neale's chamber ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.37

and there sat and talked awhile - Sir Edwd. Walker being there , and
telling us how he hath lost many fine Rowles of antiquity in Heraldry by
the late fire , but hath saved the most of his papers .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.38

Here was also Dr. Wallis , the famous scholar and mathematician ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.39

but he promises little . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,410.40

<P_7,411>

Left them , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.42

and in the dark and cold home by water ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.43

and so to supper and to read , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.44

and so to bed - my eyes being better today - PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.45

and I can@ @not impute it to anything but by my being much in the dark
tonight , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.46

for I plainly find that it is only excess of light that makes my eyes
sore . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.47

This afternoon I walked with Lord Brouncker into the park ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.48

and there talked of the times . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.49

And he doth think that the King sees that he can@ @not never have much
more money or good from this Parliament , and that therefore he may
hereafter dissolve them . That as soon as he hath the money settled ,
he believes a peace will be clapped up ; and that there are overtures of
a peace - which , if such as the Lord Chancellor can excuse , he will
take . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.50

For it is the Chancellors interest , he says , to bring peace again ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.51

for in peace he can do all and command all ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.52

but in war he can@ @not , because he understands not the nature of the
war - as to the management thereof . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.53

He tells me he doth not believe that the Duke of York will go to sea
again , though there are a great many about the King that would be glad
of any occasion to take him out of the world - he standing in their ways
; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.54

and seemed to mean the Duke of Monmouth - who spends his time the most
viciously and idly of any man , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.55

nor will be fit for anything - PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.56

yet he speaks as if it were not impossible but the King would own him
for his son , and that there was a marriage between his mother and him -
which God forbid should be , if it be not true ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.57

nor will the Duke of York easily be gulled in it .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.58

But this , put to our other distractions , makes things appear very sad
, and likely to be the occasion of much confusion in a little time .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.59

And my Lord Brouncker seems to say that nothing can help us but the
King's making a peace as soon as he hath this money ; and thereby
putting himself out of debt , and so becoming a good husband ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.60

and then he will neither need this , nor any other Parliament till he
can have one to his mind . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.61

For no Parliament can , as he says , be kept long good -
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.62

but they will spoil one another . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,411.63

And that therefore it hath been the practice of kings <P_7,412> to tell
Parliaments what he hath for them to do , and give them so long time to
do it in , and no longer . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.64

Harry Kembe , one of our messengers , is lately dead .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.65

17 . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.66

Up , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.67

and several people to speak with me . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.68

Then comes Mr. Caesar , and then Goodgroome , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.69

and what with one and the other , nothing but Musique with me this
morning , to my great content ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.70

and the more to see that God Almighty hath put me into condition to bear
the charge of all this . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.71

So out to the Change I , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.72

and did a little business ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.73

and then home , where they two musicians and Mr. Cooke came to see me -
and Mercer , to go along with my wife this afternoon to a play .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.74

To dinner , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.75

and then our company all broke up , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.76

and I to my chamber to do several things - among other things , to write
a letter to my Lord Sandwich , it being one of the burdens upon my mind
that I have not writ to him since he went into Spain .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.77

But now I do intend to give him a brief account of our whole year's
action since he went , which will make amends .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.78

My wife well home in the evening from the play ; which I was glad of ,
it being cold and dark , and she having her necklace of pearl on , and
none but Mercer with her . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.79

Spent the evening in fitting my books , to have the number set upon each
in order to my having an Alphabet of my whole , which will be of great
ease to me . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.80

This day Captain Batters came from sea in his Fireshipp ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.81

and came to see me , poor man , as his patron - PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.82

and a poor painful wretch he is as can be . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.83

After supper , to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,412.84

<P_7,413>

18 . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.86

Up PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.87

and to the office , where I hear the ill news that poor Batters , that
hath been born and bred a seaman , and brought up his ship from sea but
yesterday , was , going down from me to his ship , drownded in the
Thames - which is a sad fortune , and doth make me afeared , and will do
, more then ever I was . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.88

At noon dined at home ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.89

and then by coach to my Lord Bellasses , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.90

but not at home ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.91

so to Westminster hall , where the Lords are sitting still .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.92

I to see Mrs. Martin , who is very well , and intends to go abroad
tomorrow after her childbed . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.93

She doth tell me that this child did come la me`me jour that it ought to
hazer after my avoir e`te` con elle before her marido did venir home .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.94

And she would now have done anything cum ego ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.95

and did endeavour , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.96

but su cosa stava mala , which did empescar . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.97

Thence to the Swan , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.98

and there I sent for Sarah PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.99

and mighty merry we were , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.100

but contra my will were very far from hazer algo .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.101

So to Sir Rob. Viner's about my plate , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.102

and carried home another dozen of plates , which makes my stock of
plates up 2_1$$2_dozen . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.103

And at home find Mr. Tho. Andrews , with whom I stayed and talked a
little , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.104

and invited him to dine with me at Christmas ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.105

and then I to the office , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.106

and there late doing business , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.107

and so home and to bed - sorry for poor Batters .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.108

19 . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.109

Up PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.110

and by water to White-hall , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.111

and there with the Duke of York did our usual business .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.112

But nothing but complaints of want of money , without
{COM:preceding_word_"without"_emended} success ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.113

and Sir W. Coventry's complaint of the defects of our office <paren>
endeed Sir J. Mennes's <$$paren> , without any amendment .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.114

And he tells us so plainly of the committee of Parliament@ @'s
resolution to enquire home into all our managements , that it makes me
resolve to be wary and to do all things betimes to be ready for them .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,413.115

Thence , going away , <P_7,414> met Mr. Hingston the Organist <paren>
my old acquaintance <$$paren> in the Court , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.116

and I took him to the Dogg tavern PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.117

and got him to set me a bass to my <font> It is decreed <$$font> , which
I think will go well ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.118

but he commends the song , not knowing the words ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.119

but says the ayre is good , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.120

and believes the words are plainly expressed .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.121

He is of my mind , against having of eighths unnecessarily in
composition . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.122

This did all please me mightily . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.123

Then to talk of the King's family : PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.124

he says many of the Musique are ready to starve , they being five years
behindhand for their wages . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.125

Nay , Evens , the famous man upon the Harp , having not his equal in the
world , did the other day die for mere want , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.126

and was fain to be buried at the almes of the parish - and carried to
his grave in the dark at night , without one Linke , but that Mr
Hingston met it by chance and did give 12@ @d to buy two or three links
. PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.127

He says all must come to ruin at this rate , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.128

and I believe him . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.129

Thence I up to the Lords' House to enquire for Lord Bellasses ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.130

and there hear how at a conference this morning between the two Houses ,
about the business of the Canary Company - my Lord Buckingham leaning
rudely over my Lord Marquis of Dorchester , my Lord Dorchester removed
his elbow . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.131

Duke of Buckingham asked whether he was uneasy .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.132

Dorchester replied , " Yes " , and that he durst not
{COM:preceding_word_"not"_emended} do this , were he anywhere else .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.133

Buckingham replied , yes he would , and that he was a better man then
himself . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.134

Dorchester answered that he lyed . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.135

With this , Buckingham struck off his hat , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.136

and took him by his periwigg PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.137

and pulled it a-@ t'@ @other-@ @side , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.138

and held him . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.139

My Lord Chamberlain and others interposed . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,414.140

And upon coming into the House , <P_7,415> the Lords did order them both
to the Tower , whither they are to go this afternoon .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.141

I down into the Hall , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.142

and there the Lieutenant of the Tower took me with him
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.143

and would have me to the Tower to dinner ; where I dined - at the head
of his table next his lady - who is comely , and seeming sober and
stately , but very proud and very cunning , or I am mistaken - and
wanton too . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.144

This day's work will bring the Lieutenant of the Tower 350@ @l .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.145

But a strange conceited , vain man he is , that ever I met withal , in
his own praise - as I have heretofore observed of him .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.146

Thence home , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.147

and upon Tower hill saw about 3 or 400 seamen get together ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.148

and one , standing upon a pile of bricks , made his sign with his
handkercher upon his stick , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.149

and called all the rest to him , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.150

and several shouts they gave . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.151

This made me afeared , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.152

so I got home as fast as I could - PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.153

and hearing of no present hurt , did go to Sir Robt. Viners about my
plate again ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.154

and coming home , do hear of 1000 seamen said in the streets to be in
armes . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.155

So in great fear home , expecting to find a tumult about our house ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.156

and was doubtful of my riches there - PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.157

but I thank God , I found all well . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,415.158

But by and by Sir W. Batten and Sir R Ford do tell me that the seamen
have been at some prisons to release some seamen , <P_7,416> and that
the Duke of Albemarle is in armes , and all the Guards at the other end
of the town ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.159

and the Duke of Albemarle is gone with some forces to Wapping to quell
the seamen - which is a thing of infinite disgrace to us .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.160

I sat long , talking with them . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.161

And among other things , Sir R. Ford did make me understand how the
House of Commons is a beast not to be understood - it being impossible
to know beforehand the success almost of any small plain thing - there
being so many to think and speak to any business , and they of so
uncertain minds and interests and passions . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.162

He did tell me , and so did Sir W. Batten , how Sir Allen Brodericke
and Sir Allen Apsly did come drunk the other day into the House , and
did both speak for half an hour together , and could not be either
laughed or pulled or bid to sit down and hold their peace - to the great
contempt of the King's servants and cause - which I am aggrieved at with
all my heart . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.163

We were full in discourse of the sad state of our times . And the
horrid shame brought on the King's service by the just clamours of the
poor seamen . And that we must be undone in a little time .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.164

Home , full of trouble on these considerations .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.165

And among other things , I to my chamber PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.166

and there to ticket a good part of my books , in order to the Numbring
of them - for my easy finding them to read , as I have occasion .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.167

So to supper and to bed - with my heart full of trouble .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.168

20 . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.169

Up PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.170

and to the office , where we sat all the morning .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.171

And here , among other things , came Captain Cocke ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,416.172

and I did get him to sign me a note for the 100@ @l , to pay for the
plate he <P_7,417> doth present me with , which I am very glad of .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,417.173

At noon home to dinner , where was Balty come ; who is well again , and
the most recovered in his countenance that ever I did see .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,417.174

Here dined with me also Mrs. Batters , poor woman , now left a sad
widow by the drowning of her husband the other day .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,417.175

I pity her , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,417.176

and will do her what kindness I can ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,417.177

yet I observe something of ill-nature in myself , more then should be :
that I am colder towards her in my charity then I should be to one so
painful as he and she have been , and full of kindness to their power to
my wife and I . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,417.178

After dinner out with Balty , setting him down at the Maypole in the
Strand ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,417.179

and then I to my Lord Bellasses , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,417.180

and there spoke with Mr. Moone about some business ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,417.181

and so away home to my business at the office ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,417.182

and then home to supper and to bed , after having finished the putting
of little papers upon my books , to be numbered hereafter .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,7,417.183

<P_8,313>

<heading:edcomment:JULY_1667>

1 . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.186

Up betimes about 4 a-clock , waked by a damned noise between a sow
gelder and a cow and a dog , nobody after we were up being able to tell
us what it was . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.187

After being ready , we took coach ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.188

and being very sleepy , drouzed most part of the way to gravesend ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.189

and there light PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.190

and down to the new Battery which are like to be very fine ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.191

and there did hear a plain fellow cry out upon the folly of the King's
officers above , to spend so much money in works at Woolwich and
Deptford and sinking of good ships loaden with goods , when if half the
charge had been laid out here , it would have secured all that , and
this place too , before now - PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.192

and I think it is not only true in this , but that the best of the
actions of us all are so silly , that the meanest people do begin to see
through them and contemn them . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.193

" Besides , " says he , " they spoil the river by it . "
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.194

Then informed ourselfs where we might have some Creame ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.195

and they guided us to one Goody Best's , a little out of the town
towards London-road ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.196

and thither we went with the Coach PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.197

and find it a mighty clean , plain house , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.198

and had a dish of very good cream to our liking ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.199

and so away presently , very merry , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.200

and fell to reading of the several <font> Advices to a Painter <$$font>
, which made us good sport ; and endeed , are very witty ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.201

and Creed did also repeat to me some of the substance of letters of old
Burleigh in Queen Elizabeth's time which he hath of late read in the
printed <font> Cabbala <$$font> , which is a very fine style at this day
and fit to be imitated . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,313.202

With this , and talking and laughing <P_8,314> at the folly of our
maisters in the management of things at this day , we got home by noon ,
where all well . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.203

And then to dinner , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.204

and after dinner both of us laid down upon the Couch and chairs and to
sleep ; which I did for an hour or two , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.205

and then to the office , where I am sorry to hear that Sir J. Mennes is
likely to die this night or tomorrow . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.206

I forgot to set down that we met this morning upon the road with Mrs.
Williams , going down to my Lord Brouncker ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.207

we bowed without speaking one to another , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.208

but I am ashamed at the folly of the man , to have her down at this
serious busy time , when the town and country is full of people and full
of censure , and against him perticularly . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.209

At Sir W. Batten's my Lady tells me that she hears for certain that my
Lord's maid of his lodgings here doth give out that Mrs. Williams hath
been fain of late to sell her best clothes and Jewells to get a little
money upon - which is a sad condition . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.210

Thence to the office PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.211

and did write to my Lord Brouncker to give me a little satisfaction
about the certainty of the Chaines being broke , which I begin to doubt
, and the more from Sir W Pen's discourse ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.212

it is worth while to read my letter to him entered in my letter book .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.213

Home in the evening to supper ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.214

and so pretty betimes , about 10 a-clock , to bed ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.215

and slept well . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.216

This day letters are come that my sister is very ill .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.217

2 . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.218

Up , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.219

and put on my new silk Camelott suit , made of my cloak ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.220

and suit now made into a vest . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.221

So to the office , where W. Penn and myself and Sir T. Harvy met , the
first time we have had a meeting since the coming of the Dutch upon the
coast . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,314.222

Our only business <paren> for we have little else to do , nobody being
willing to trust us for anything <$$paren> was to speak with the owners
of <P_8,315> six merchantmen which we have been taking up this fortnight
, and are yet in no readiness , they not fitting their ships without
money advanced to them , we owing them for what their ships have earned
the last year . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.223

So everything stands still for money , while we want money to pay for
some of the most necessary things that we promised ready money for in
the heighth of our wants - as grapnells , &c. ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.224

at noon home to dinner ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.225

and after dinner , my wife and Jane <paren> mighty fine the girle
<$$paren> to go to see Jane's old mistress , who was to see her ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.226

and did see my wife the other day . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.227

And it is pleasant to hear with what kindness her old mistress speaks of
this girl , and how she would still have her , and how the wench cried
when she told her that she must come to her old mistress , my wife .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.228

They gone , I to my chamber , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.229

and there dallied a little with my maid Nell to touch her thing , but
nothing more . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.230

And so to the office , where busy till night ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.231

and then comes Mrs. Turner PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.232

and walks with me in the garden , to talk with me about her husband's
business and to tell me how she hears at the other end of the town how
bad our office is spoken of by the King and Prince and Duke of Albemarle
; and that there is not a good word said of any of us but of me ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.233

and me they do all speak mightily of - which , whether {COM:it_is} true
or no , I am mighty glad to hear . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.234

But from all put together that I hear from other people , I am likely to
pass as well as anybody . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.235

So she gone , comes my wife and to walk in the garden , Sir J. Mennes
being still ill and so keeping us from singing ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.236

and by and by Sir W Pen came PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.237

and walked with us , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.238

and gave us a bottle of cider ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.239

and so we home to supper , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.240

and I to read myself asleep PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.241

and so to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.242

<paren> This day I am told that poor Tooker is dead , a very painful
poor man as ever I knew . <$$paren> PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.243

3 . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.244

Up , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.245

and within most of the morning , my tailor's boy coming to alter
something in my new suit I put on yesterday . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,315.246

<P_8,316>

Then to the office PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.248

and did business , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.249

and then <paren> my wife being a little ill of those in the bed
<$$paren> I to Sir W. Batten's PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.250

and dined , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.251

and there comes in Sir Rd. Ford PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.252

and tells us how he hath been at the Session's-house ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.253

and there it is plain that there is a combination of rogues in the town
that do make it their business to set houses on fire , and that one
house they did set on fire in Aldersgate-street last Easter , and that
this is proved by two young men , whom one of them debauched by degrees
to steal their father's plate and clothes , and at last to be of their
company , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.254

and they had their places to take up what goods were flung into the
streets out of the windows when the houses were on fire ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.255

and this is like to be proved to a great number of rogues , whereof five
are already found , and some found guilty this day .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.256

One of these boys is the son of a Mountagu , of my Lord Manchester@ @'s
family ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.257

but whose son , he could not tell me . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.258

This is a strange thing me@ @thinks , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.259

but I am glad that it is proved so true and discovered .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.260

So home , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.261

and to enter my Journall of my late journy to this hour ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.262

and then to the office - where to do a little business ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.263

and then by water to White-hall <paren> calling at Michells in my way ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.264

but the rogue would not invite me in , I having a mind para ver his wife
<$$paren> ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.265

and there to the Council-chamber to deliver a letter to their Lordships
about the state of the six merchantmen which we have been so long
fitting out . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.266

When I came , the King and the whole tableful of Lords were hearing of a
pitiful cause of a complaint of an old man , with a great gray beard ,
against his son , for not allowing himself something to live on ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.267

and at last came to the ordering the son to allow his father 10@ @l a
year . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,316.268

This cause lasted them near two hours ; which me@ @thinks , at this time
to be the work of the Council-board of England , is a <P_8,317>
scandalous thing , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.269

and me@ @thought Sir W. Coventry to me did own as much .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.270

Here I find all the news is the enemy's landing 3000 men near Harwich ,
and attacquing Langnerfort and being beat off thence with our great guns
, killing some of their men and they leaving their lathers behind them ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.271

but we had no Horse in the way on Suffolke side ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.272

otherwise we might have galled their Foot . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.273

The Duke of York is gone down thither this day , while the Generall sat
sleeping this afternoon at the Counciltable . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.274

The news so much talked of this Exchange , of a peace , I find by Sir
Rd. Browne arises from a letter the Swedes agent hath received from
Bredah , and showed at Court today , that they are come very near it ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.275

but I do not find anybody here relying on it .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.276

This cause being over , the Trinity-house men , whom I did not expect to
meet , were called in ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.277

and there Sir W Pen made a formal speech in answer to a Question of the
King's , whether the lying of the sunk ships in the River would spoil
the River ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.278

but Lord , how gingerly he answered it , and with a deal of do , that he
did not know whether it would be safe as to the enemy to have them taken
up , but that doubtless it would be better for the River to have them
taken up . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.279

Me@ @thought the Council found them answer like fools ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.280

and it ended in bidding them think more of it and bring their answer in
writing . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.281

Thence I to Westminster-hall PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,317.282

and there hear how they talk against the present management of things ,
and against Sir W. Coventry for <P_8,318> his bringing in of new
commanders and casting out the old seamen ; which I did endeavour to
rectify Mr. Michell and them in , letting them know that he hath
opposed it all his life , the most of any man in England .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.283

After a deal of this bibble_babble , I to Mrs. Martins
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.284

and there she was gone in before ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.285

but when I came , contrary to my expectation , I find her all in trouble
, PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.286

and what was it for but that I have got her with child ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.287

for those do not venir upon her as they should have done ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.288

and is in exceeding grief , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.289

and swears that the child is mine ; which I do not believe ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.290

but yet do comfort her that either it can@ @not be so ; or if it be ,
that I will take care to send for her husband , though I do hardly see
how I can be sure of that , the ship being at sea and as far as Scotland
; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.291

but however , I must do it , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.292

and shall find some way or other of doing it , though it doth trouble me
not a little . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.293

Thence , not pleased , away to White-hall to Mr. Williamson and by and
by my Lord Arlington about Mr. Lanyon's business ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.294

and it is pretty to see how Mr. Williamson did altogether excuse
himself that my business was not done , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.295

and when I came to my Lord and told him my business , - " Why , " says
my Lord , " it hath been {COM:preceding_word_"been"_emended} done ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.296

and the King signed it several days ago ; " PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.297

and so it was , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.298

and was in Mr. Williamson's hand , which made us both laugh ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.299

and I in innocent mirth , I remember , said , " It is pretty to see in
what a condition we are , that all our matters nowadays are undone we
know not how , and done we know not when . " PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.300

He laughed at it , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.301

but I have since reflected on it PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.302

and find it a severe speech , as it might be taken by a chief minister
of state , as endeed Mr. Williamson is , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.303

for he is endeed the Secretary . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.304

But we fell to other pleasant talk , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.305

and a fine gentleman he is ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.306

and so gave him 5@ @l for his fee , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.307

and away home PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.308

and to Sir W. Batten's to talk a little ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.309

and then to the office to do a little business ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.310

and so home to supper and to read myself asleep ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.311

and then to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,318.312

<P_8,319>

4 . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.314

Up ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.315

and in vain expecting Sir Rd. Ford's calling on me , I took coach
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.316

and to the Sessions-house , where I have a mind to hear Bazill
Fielding's case tried ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.317

and so got up to the Bench , my Lord Chief Justice Keeling being Judge .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.318

Here I stood bare , not challenging , though I might well enough , to be
covered . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.319

But here was several fine trials . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.320

Among others , several brought in for making it their trade to set
houses on fire , merely to get plunder , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.321

and all proved by the two little boys spoken of yesterday by Sir R.
Ford , who did give so good account of perticulars that I never heard
children in my life ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.322

and I confess , though I was unsatisfied with the force given to such
little boys to take away men's lives , yet when I was told that my Lord
Chief-Justice did declare that there was no law against taking the oath
of children above twelve years old , and then heard from Sir R. Ford
the good account which the boys had given of their understanding the
nature and consequence of an oath , and now my own observation of the
sobriety and readiness of their answers , further then of any man of any
rank that came to give witness this day , though some men of years and
learning , I was a little amazed , and fully satisfied that they ought
to have as much credit as the rest . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.323

They proved against several , their consulting several times at a
bawdy-house in Moore-Fields called the Russia House , among many other
rogueries , of setting houses on fire , that they might gather the goods
that were flung into the streets ; PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.324

and it is worth considering how unsafe it is to have children play up
and down this lewd town , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.325

for these two boys , one is my Lady Mountagu@ @s <paren> I know not what
Lady Mountagu <$$paren> son and the other of good condition , were
playing in Moore-Fields , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.326

and one rogue , Gabr. Holmes , did come to them and teach them to drink
, and then to bring him plate and clothes from their fathers' houses and
carry him into their houses , and leaving open the doors for him ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.327

and at last were made of their conspiracy , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,319.328

and were at the very burning <P_8,320> of this house
{COM:preceding_word_"house"_emended} in Aldersgate-street on Easter
Sunday at night last , PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,320.329

and did gather up goods as they had resolved before .
PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,320.330

And this Gabriel Holmes did advise to have had two houses set on fire ,
one after another , that while they were quenching of one , they might
be burning another . PEPYS-1667-E3-H,8,320.331

