<BEGIN_perrott-1598-e2-h>

<P_31>

Shortly , after Sir <font> John Perrot <$$font> returned from <font>
France <$$font> , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,31.3

and came to the Court of <font> England <$$font> , where he lived at
great Charge , and at soe high a Rate , as he grew into great Debt , and
ranne so farre into Arrearages , that he began to mortgage some of his
Lands , and yet did owe some seven or eight_Thowsand Pounds , being like
to <font> Allexander the Great <$$font> in this , who agaynst his
Expedition into <font> Persia <$$font> did put most Part of his
Possessions <paren> belonging to the Crowne of <font> Macedon <$$font>
<$$paren> in Pawne . And being asked by <font> Perdica <$$font> , his
chiefe Commander , what he left behynd hym , answered , <font> Hope
<$$font> . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,31.4

So this Knight spending his Patrimony <paren> as many of his Yeres and
Calling do <P_32> now-a-dayes , wastfully , and above their Habiliitie
<$$paren> had lefte but a bare Hope to recover his Estate .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,32.5

Yet he at Length did begin to bethink hymself , and to look back into
his decaying Fortune , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,32.6

and soe grew much agrieved at his owne Prodigality . Insomuch that on a
Time he walked out of the Court , into a Place where commonly the Kinge
did use to come about that Howre ; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,32.7

and there he began <paren> either as knowing that the Kinge would come
that Way , or else by Chaunce , <$$paren> to complayne as it were
agaynst hymself , unto hymself : How unfortunate and unwise he was , soe
to consume his Livinge , having wasted a great Part of that in few
Yeares , which his Auncestors had gotten and enjoyed for many Yeres ?
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,32.8

And must I <paren> quoth he <$$paren> be the Man that shall overthrow my
Howse , which hath continued soe longe ? PERROTT-1598-E2-H,32.9

It had byn better I had never byn born . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,32.10

And what shall I doe <paren> sayd he <$$paren> to recover my Estate ?
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,32.11

So entered as it were into a Disputation with hymself , whether he were
best to follow the Court , or to leave the Court and <P_33> follow the
Warres ; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,33.12

for he feared that should he continew at Court , the King being yonge ,
and under Government , if upon his good Deserts the King should be
pleased to graunt him any Thing in Recompence of his Service , yet his
Governors , as the Lord-Protector , and the Privey-Counsell , might
gaynsay it , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,33.13

and soe he should rather runne into farther Arrearages , than recover
his decayed Fortunes ; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,33.14

but if he did retier hymselfe into the Contrie , where he might live at
lesse Charge , or betake hymselfe unto the Warres , where he might get
hymselfe some Place of Commaund , it might be a Meanes to save his
Revenewes , and to pay his Debtes . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,33.15

As he was thus sadly debating the Matter unto hymselfe , the Kinge came
behynd hym , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,33.16

and overheard most of that which he sayd , who at length stepped before
him , and asked him , How now <font> Perrott <$$font> <paren> quoth the
Kinge <$$paren> what is the Matter that you make this great Moane ? To
whom Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> answered , And it lyke your
Majestie , I did not thinck that your <P_34> Highness had byn there :
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,34.17

Yes , sayd the King , we heard you well inough : PERROTT-1598-E2-H,34.18

And have you spent your Livinge in our Service , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,34.19

and is the King so yonge , and under Government , that he can@ @not give
you any Thinge in Recompence of your Service ? PERROTT-1598-E2-H,34.20

Spie out sumwhat , and you shall see whether the Kinge hath not Power to
bestow it on you . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,34.21

Than he most humbly thanked his Majestie , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,34.22

and shortly after founde out a Concealment , which as soone as he sought
, the King bestowed it on hym , wherewith he paid the most part of his
Debtes ; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,34.23

and so always after he became a better Husband .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,34.24

This Storie Sir <font> John Perrot <$$font> would sometimes recounte
unto his Frends , acknowledging it a greate Blessinge of God , that had
given him Grace in Time to look into his decaying Estate , and such
Means to recover the same by the Healpe and Bountie of so merciful and
rare a yonge Prince as this noble Kinge <font> Edward <$$font> was , the
like of whom , for Learninge , Witt , and Princely Pietie , hath seldom
byn seene in soe yonge Yeres . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,34.25

This <P_35> Example allso of Sir <font> John Perrott's <$$font>
Prodigality and Recovery may serve for the yonge Men of this Age , and
of Time to come , to teach them <paren> with the Prodigall Sonne spoken
of in the Gospell , and with this Knight , whose Life is here discribed
<$$paren> to return Home in Time , and with the Eie of Consideration to
look into theyr Estates before all be spent , least that Sentence be
sayd of them , as <font> Cato <$$font> sayd of one <font> Albidius
<$$font> , that he did proterviam facere ; which was an Adage ,
alludinge to the Fashion of the Sacrifices , that whatsoeyer remayned
should be burnt . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,35.26

And so in this foolish Oblation of Prodigalitie , and wastfull
mispending , without Providence or Foresight , whatsoever the Belly
consumeth not , they sett upon theyr Backs , whereby all is spent and
consumed . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,35.27

After the Death of this towardlie and noble young Prince , King <font>
Edward <$$font> , Queene <font> Mary <$$font> his Sister cominge to the
Crown , Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> continewed likewise at the
Court , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,35.28

and was well accepted of amongst the best and greatest Nobilitie .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,35.29

<P_36>

The Queene also did favour hym very well , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,36.31

and would say , That she did lyke exceeding well of him , and had a Hope
he would prove a worthy Subject , but that <paren> as his Words were
<$$paren> he did smell of the Smoake , meaninge thereby his Religion ,
for which he was called in Question by meanes of one - <font> Gaderne
<$$font> , the Queenes Servant , and his Contrieman , who accused Sir
<font> John Perrott <$$font> , That he kept certain Protestants , then
called Hereticks , at his Howse in <font> Wales <$$font> , as one Mr.
<font> Alexander Nowell <$$font> , who was afterwards Dean of <font>
Litchfield <$$font> . Mr. - <font> Perrott <$$font> his <font> Unckle
<$$font> <paren> who had byn Reader to Kinge <font> Edward <$$font> in
the <font> Greek <$$font> Tongue <$$paren> and one Mr. <font> Banister
<$$font> , with others , upon which Accusation he did not denie his own
Religion , but was committed to the Fleete , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,36.32

yet being well frended , and the Queene favoring hym well , he was
allowed to have his learned Counsell to come unto hym ; and namely , one
Mr. <font> Nowell <$$font> , Brother to the forenamed Dean ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,36.33

and soe by such Meanes as he made unto the Queene , he was released .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,36.34

Within a while he went to St. <font> Quintin <$$font> , where he had a
Commaund under <P_37> the noble Erle of <font> Pembrock <$$font> , who
did speciall Love and Favor to him so farre that there was never any
Unkyndness betwixt them but once , which happened in this Sorte .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,37.35

Queene <font> Mary <$$font> did once give speciall Charge unto the Erle
of <font> Pembrock <$$font> to see that no Hereticks <paren> meaning
Protesttants <$$paren> should remayne in <font> Wales <$$font> .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,37.36

When the Erle had receved this Command , coming Home to his Lodging ,
where Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> lay with his Sonne , Sir <font>
Edward Herbert <$$font> , the Erle acquaynted hym what the Queen had
given him in Charge , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,37.37

and told him , that inasmuch as the Queen had laid this generall Burden
on his Back , I must <paren> sayd he <$$paren> Cossen <font> Perrott
<$$font> ease my selfe , and lay part of my Burden on you for those
Partes as the three Shiers whereabouts you dwell and have Living .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,37.38

I know there is noe Man can doe more than your selfe ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,37.39

and therefor that Charge which the Queene hath given me for <font> Wales
<$$font> in generall , the same I must give you in particular for that
Syrcuite . To which Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> answered , Good my
Lord <paren> sayd he <$$paren> I hope you know you may Command my Life
and my Livinge , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,37.40

yet lay not that Burden <P_38> on me , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.41

but leave me to enjoy my Conscience , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.42

and I will not willingly meddle with other Mens Consciences . To whom
the Erle replied sumwhat angrily , What , Sir <font> John Perrott
<$$font> , will you be an Heretick with the reste ?
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.43

Not so my Lord , sayd he , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.44

for I hope my Religion is as sound as yours or any Man's else ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.45

and so with some other cholericke Speaches that Conference ended .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.46

In the Morning Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> arose very early ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.47

and went abroad about his private Business , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.48

and returned back agayn by that Time the Erle was making hym readie
<paren> thinking that all Unkyndness had been past <$$paren>
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.49

but the Erle , as soon as he espied hym , asked , What ! Sir <font>
John Perrott <$$font> , Who sent for you ? PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.50

He answered , Why , my Lord , I did not think you would have ask'd me
that Question ; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.51

and if I had imagined soe@ @much , you should have sent for me twise
before I would have come once , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.52

and shall doe soe before I come hither agayn . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.53

As he was turning about to goe out of Doores , the Erle called upon hym
to stay , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,38.54

for he would <P_39> speake with hym ; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,39.55

and so they coming somewhat neere , fell into sharpe Words , and from
fowle Wordes to fowle Play , that if they had not byn parted , much Hurt
might have byn done . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,39.56

And soe Sir <font> John Perrot <$$font> was fayne to depart , not being
able to make his Party good in that Place . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,39.57

This was not so privatly done , or so secretly kept , but that it was
published , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,39.58

and Newes thereof came speedily to the Court , That the Earl of <font>
Pembrock <$$font> and Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> were fallen out ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,39.59

and the Cause thereof was known to be for matters of Religion ; which
beinge brought unto the Queen's Eares <paren> as Princes shall be
sometimes inform'd of meaner Matters than this <$$paren> she grew
greatly displeased therewith ; insomuch , that Sir <font> John Perrot
<$$font> , having at that Time a Suite unto the Queen , for the Castle
and Lordship of <font> Carew <$$font> <paren> and a Promise thereof
being made unto hym <$$paren> when he came next unto the Queen to renew
his Suite , the Queene would scarce look on hym , much less give hym any
good Answer ; which he percevinge , determyned not to be sett <P_40>
from his Suite with austeere Lookes , and so pressed so neere to the
Queene , that he fell upon some Part of her Trayne , and besought her
Majestie , to remember hir Princely Promise made unto hym for <font>
Carew <$$font> , wherewith she seemed highly offended ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,40.60

and in angry sorte ask'd , What ! <font> Perrot <$$font> , sayd she ,
Will you offer Violence to our Person ? PERROTT-1598-E2-H,40.61

Then he besought her of Pardon for his Boldness ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,40.62

but she departed with much Indignation . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,40.63

At that Time , there was in <font> London <$$font> one Sir <font> Thomas
Jones <$$font> , a Knight of good Judgement and Wisdom <paren> who had
married Sir <font> John Perrott's <$$font> Mother <$$paren>
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,40.64

he hearing what had happen'd , advised Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font>
to reconcyle hymselfe unto the Erle of <font> Pembrock <$$font> , and to
make hym a Meanes to pacifie the Queene , telling hym there was noe
other way to recover hir Favor , and to avoyd present Perill .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,40.65

Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> answered , that sithence the Erle had
offer'd hym such Unkindness , he could not seeke his Favour , although
it cost hym his Life . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,40.66

But within short Time , Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> found such
Frends about the Queene , that she was content to remitte what was past
, in Hope <P_41> he would be reformed in Religion , and to referre his
Suite unto the Lords of her Privey Counsell . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,41.67

When he came before the Lords of the Counsell to know theyr Pleasures ,
whether it were convenient that he should have <font> Carew <$$font> ,
according to the Queenes Promise , there was amongst them one who bare
greate Sway , the Buyshop of <font> Winchester <$$font> :
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,41.68

He had understanding of Sir <font> John Perrotts <$$font> Disposition in
Religion , and of the Difference that had byn betwixt the Erle of <font>
Pembrock <$$font> and hym ; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,41.69

therefore he began vere sharpely to censure hym , and to tell hym ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,41.70

Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> , sayd the Buyshop , Do you come to
seek Suites of the Queene ? PERROTT-1598-E2-H,41.71

I tell you , except you alter your Hereticall Religion , it were more
fitt that the Queene should bestow Fagotts , than any Livinge on you ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,41.72

and so he pass'd on with a very severe Sentence against hym .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,41.73

But when it came to the Erle of <font> Pembrock <$$font> to deliver his
Opinion , he spoke thus <paren> as Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font>
hymself hath related it <$$paren> PERROTT-1598-E2-H,41.74

My Lords <paren> quoth the Erle <$$paren> I must tell you my Opinion of
this Man , and of this Matter , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,41.75

for the Man , I thincke he would at this Time , if he <P_42> could , eat
my Herte with Salte ; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,42.76

but yet , notwithstanding his Stomacke towards me , I will give hym his
dew , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,42.77

I hold hym to be a Man of good Worth , and one who hath deserved of hir
Majesty in hir Service , as good a Matter as this which he seaketh , and
will noe doubt deserve better , if he reforme his Religion ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,42.78

therfor since the Queene has past her Gracious Promise , I see noe
Reason but he should have that which he seaketh .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,42.79

When they heard the Erle of <font> Pembrock <$$font> speak soe favorably
for hym , who they thought would have been most vehement agaynst hym ;
then all the rest of the Counsell were content that he should have his
Suite , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,42.80

and soe made favorable Report thereof unto her Majestie , who shortly
after graunted hym the same . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,42.81

And he did ever after <paren> as he had Cause <$$paren> acknowledge
hymself much beholding unto the Erle of <font> Pembrock <$$font> , who
in this , as in all things else , shewed hymself most honorable .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,42.82

For what better Testimony could be given of a worthy heroicall Mynd ,
then not only to forgett an Unkindness , but to shew hymself most kynd ,
when he had both Cause and <P_43> Meanes to be revenged ; farre
differing from the Disposition of divers Noblemen now_a_dayes , who
would be glad to finde such an Opportunitie <paren> as was then offered
unto this Noble Erle <$$paren> to work any of their Adversaries
Overthrow , who should so deepely offend them . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,43.83

But this Nobleman bare a more heroicall Spirite , knowing that to be
trew which the Poet testifieth . - Quippe minuti Semper & infirmi est
animi exiguiq; voluptas Ultio , continuo sic collige , quod vindicta
Nemo magis gaudet quam faemina . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,43.84

He saith , that Desier of Revenge is a Signe of a meane , weak , and an
abject Mynd ; for that none do rejoyce in Revenge more than Women :
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,43.85

And soe on the other Side , we see many Times that forgetting and
forgeving of Injuries <paren> especially , where there is Power to
revenge <$$paren> doth gayne more good Will , than the geving of greate
Rewards . Which is manifest in this Nobleman's worthy Cariage , who was
truly valiant and magnanimous ; but not soe revengefull as those , whom
Fear <P_44> and Malice doth move to worke other Mens Overthrow .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,44.86

And this Example is here sett downe , as well to give this Noble
Personage his due Prayse , as to leave it for a Patterne of Imitation
unto others . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,44.87

After this Passage , Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> did always honor
the Erle of <font> Pembrock <$$font> , as there was great Cause he
should , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,44.88

and the Erle did lykewise extraordinarily respect hym , as many others
did in regard of his Personage , Witte , Valour , and Expertnes in Armes
, which he did much exercise , although the Particulars be not here sett
down . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,44.89

<P_106>

Now when Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> had reposed hymselfe for a
while in the Countrie , and sometimes repayred to the Court <paren> as
his Occasions served <$$paren> for some few Yeres after he cam from
being President of <font> Mounster <$$font> in <font> Ireland <$$font> ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,106.91

he was sodaynly sent for <font> out of that Contrie <$$font> unto the
Court , to take Charge of some of the Queene's Shipps , which were to be
sent unto Sea <paren> agaynst the Invasion of the <font> Spaniards
<$$font> <$$paren> upon Intelligence receved , That <font> James
Fitz-Moris <$$font> <paren> who before submitted hymselfe to Sir <font>
John Perrott <$$font> when he was Lord President of <font> Mounster
<$$font> <$$paren> had synce byn in <font> Spayne <$$font> , and
procured the Promise of certayn Shippes and Men to be sent into <font>
Ireland <$$font> , to invade and disquiett the State of <font> Ireland
<$$font> , especially the Province of <font> Mounster <$$font> .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,106.92

This beinge knowen to the Queene and hir Privy Counsell , they sent for
Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> to take the Commaund of such Shippes
and Pinacesse as should be <P_107> made redie to intercept , or interupt
the King of <font> Spayne <$$font> his Navie and Forces which were
designed for <font> Ireland <$$font> . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,107.93

He being sent for by Post , mad such Speede in coming to the Court ,
that he came from <font> Pembrockshier <$$font> to <font> Grenwich
<$$font> in lesse then three Dayes ; there being about 200 Myles
Distance betwixt both the Places . Insoemuch that when he came unto the
Queene's Presence , she marvelled at his soe speedy repayer thither ;
and told hym , she thought he had not herde from hir soe soone :
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,107.94

Yes Madam , quoth he , and have made as much Hast as I might to come
unto your Majestie . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,107.95

Soe me@ @thinckes , sayd the Queene , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,107.96

but how have you don to settle your State in the Contrie ?
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,107.97

And it lyke your Majestie , sayd Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> , I
have taken this Care for all ; that setting all privat Busines aside ,
in respect of your Majesties Service , I have in the Contrie appoynted
the white Sheepe to keepe the blacke : PERROTT-1598-E2-H,107.98

For I may well inoughe adventure them , when I ame willing to adventure
my Life in your Majesties Service . With which Answer the Queene was
well pleased , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,107.99

<P_108>

and soe tooke hym asyde , with whom she conferred privatly for a Time ;
then dissmissing hym and appoynting hym to receve farther Directions for
that Service from the Lords of hir Privy Counsell .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,108.101

Then did Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> prepare for that Voiage with
all convenient Speede . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,108.102

He had with hym fiftie Men in Orange tawny Cloakes , wherof divers were
Gentlemen of good Birth and Qualitie . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,108.103

Allso he had a Noyce of Musicions with hym , beinge his owne Servants .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,108.104

He was served all in Silver Plate , with all Things else sutable :
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,108.105

And soe being royally furnished in all Respects , he departed from
<font> London <$$font> abouts <font> August <$$font> ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,108.106

and goeing from thence by Barge , he had with hym divers Noblemen and
Gentlemen who did accompany hym unto the Shipps .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,108.107

As they lay in their Barge agaynst <font> Grenwich <$$font> where the
Queene kept hir Court , Sir <font> John Perrot <$$font> sent one of his
Gentlemen ashore with a Diamond in a Token , unto Mistris <font> Blanch
Parry <$$font> , willing hym to tell hir , that a Diamond coming
unlooked_for , did allways bring good Looke with it : Which the Queene
hearing of , sent Sir <P_109> <font> John Perrott <$$font> a fair Jewell
hanged by a white Cypresse ; synifying withall , that as longe as he
wore that for hir Sake , she did beleve , with God's Healpe , he should
have noe Harme . Which Message and Jewell Sir <font> John Perrot
<$$font> receved joyfully , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,109.108

and he returned Answer unto the Queene , That he would weare that for
his Soveraigne's Sake , and doubted not with God's Favor to retorne hir
Shipps in Saffetie , and either to bringe the <font> Spaniards <$$font>
<paren> if they came in his Way <$$paren> as Prisoners , or else to
sinck them in the Seas . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,109.109

Soe as Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> passed by in his Barge , the
Queene looking out at the Window shaked hir Fanne ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,109.110

and put out hir Hand tawards him ; who making a low Obeysance , put the
Scarffe and Jewell about his Necke , which the Queene sent hym :
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,109.111

Beinge arrived at <font> Gyllingham <$$font> , where the Queene's Shipps
rode , Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> feasted on Shippboard , such
Noblemen and Gentlemen as came with hym thither .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,109.112

<P_110>

The Names of the Queene's Shipps and Pinasses , which Sir <font> John
Perrott <$$font> commaunded were these , The <font> Benenge <$$font> ,
wherof Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> was Admirall ; the <font>
Dread-Naught <$$font> , wherof Mr. <font> William Gorge <$$font> was
Vice-Admiral ; the <font> Foresight <$$font> , in which Mr. <font>
Nicholas Gorge <$$font> was Reare-Admirall ; the <font> Catis <$$font> ,
of which Captayn <font> Yorke <$$font> was Captayne ; the <font>
Swiftsuer <$$font> , in which Captayne <font> Peirce <$$font> commaunded
; the <font> Seabright <$$font> , wherof Captayn <font> Ward <$$font>
was Captayn . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,110.114

With theise Shipps Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> sett out from <font>
Gyllingham <$$font> to the <font> Downes <$$font> ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,110.115

and there rode at Ankor one Night ; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,110.116

from thence they sett forwards to <font> Falmouth <$$font> , where they
remayned for a Sevenight , and sent to the Court in Post , from whence
Answer was returned in convenient Time . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,110.117

And during the Time of theyr Aboad at <font> Falmouth <$$font> , some of
the Gentlemen and Seamen went to Shoare , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,110.118

and soe did Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> hymselfe , whom Sir <font>
John Kyllegrew <$$font> enterteyned <P_111> very kyndly , passing the
Time in Wrestling , Hurling , and such-lyke Exercises , betwixt the
Seamen , Servingmen , and that Countreymen . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,111.119

At lengthe {SIC:legthe} they departed from thence ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,111.120

but were put into <font> Plimoth <$$font> by Stormes and contrary Windes
; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,111.121

yet they loosed soone from thence , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,111.122

and soe sett to Sea for <font> Ierland <$$font> , where they arived at
<font> Baltimore <$$font> . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,111.123

At Sir <font> John Perrott's <$$font> landing there came unto hym the
Lord <font> Finey <$$font> , with his Lady , Children and Followers ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,111.124

allso allmost all the Countrey thereabouts flocked about hym ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,111.125

and by reason of his former Goverment in that Country , they bare such
Affection towards hym , that the People came in greate Numbers as neere
unto hym as they might , some of them imbracing his Legges and coveting
to touche any Part of his Body : Which the Vice-Admirall beinge a
Shippebord did perceve , and thincking that they came to doe hym some
Hurt did determyn to turne the Broad-Side of his Ship towards them , and
to discharge the full Ordinance upon them ; but being informed that they
came in Love to see and salute Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> , then
he altered <P_112> his Purpose , and landed to accompany hym , where
they were all enterteyned as well as the Fashion of that Contry could
afford . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,112.126

From <font> Baltimore <$$font> , after some Dayes Stay there , they
sayled to <font> Corke <$$font> , where they stayed as longe .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,112.127

And from <font> Corke <$$font> they costed to <font> Waterford <$$font>
, PERROTT-1598-E2-H,112.128

and in theyr Way about <font> Kynsale <$$font> they mett with the <font>
Seabright <$$font> , which had byn sent to the Coast of <font> Spayne
<$$font> to discover . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,112.129

On Sir <font> John Perrott's <$$font> Arivall at <font> Waterford
<$$font> he mett there with the Lord Cheife Justice , that worthy
Gentleman Sir <font> William Drewry <$$font> , who was newly come off of
a Journey and was fallen Sicke ; soe that being very feeble in his Bedd
, he did Knight Sir <font> William Pelham <$$font> , who succeeded hym
in Goverment , Sir <font> Tho. Perrott <$$font> the Sonne of Sir <font>
John Perrott <$$font> , with Sir <font> William Gorges <$$font> and one
other ; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,112.130

and within fower or five Dayes after Sir <font> William Drury <$$font>
died . At which Time Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> being redie to
depart thence with the Queene's Shippes ; the Counsell and Nobilitie of
<font> Ireland <$$font> were very desirous that he should take the Sword
to be Lord <P_113> Cheife Justice , untill farther Directions were
receved from <font> England <$$font> , for the Discharge of that Place .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,113.131

But he refused soe to doe ; saying , That he had allredy taken the
Charge of the Queenes Shippes , which Service he must discharge , and
accounte for , befor he might undertake any other ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,113.132

and that being don , he wou'd be redy to be imployed , as he should be
commaunded by the Queenes Majestie . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,113.133

Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> remayned a while at <font> Waterford
<$$font> , and thereabouts upon the <font> Irish <$$font> Coste , to
give Impediment unto the <font> Spaniards <$$font> Landing if they came
that Way : PERROTT-1598-E2-H,113.134

At length when he saw the Season of the Yere was past for them , without
great Perill , to attempt any thing agaynst <font> Ierland <$$font> ,
and understanding by other Intelligence that they had given over theyr
Enterprise for that Yere ; Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> determyned
to returne for <font> England <$$font> , and to deliver up the Queenes
Shippes without spending more Victuell Money and Time in vayne .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,113.135

Soe they sayled <P_114> homewards untill they came neere the <font>
Kentish Downs <$$font> , harde by which Place they espied a Pirat , one
<font> Deryfold <$$font> , unto whom the Admirall Sir <font> John
Perrott <$$font> gave Chase , and followed hym to the Coste of <font>
Flaunders <$$font> : PERROTT-1598-E2-H,114.136

After the taking of hym , coming back to fetch the <font> Downes
<$$font> agayn , the Ship strake Ground on the <font> Kentish Kneeks
<$$font> ; where the Queenes Ship , with all the Persons that were in
hir , stood in greate Perill to be cast away ; what betwixt the Danger
of the Place and Violence of the Weather . At the which Time they made
all noe other Accounte , but that a speedie Death should end all theyr
Accounts . Insoemuch that all Sir <font> John Perrott's <$$font>
neerest Frends and Followers came to take theyr last Farewell of hym ,
<paren> as they then thought ; <$$paren> PERROTT-1598-E2-H,114.137

amongst the rest his Sonne Sir <font> Thomas Perrott <$$font> was one :
To whom he sayd , Well Boy , God blesse thee , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,114.138

and I give thee my Blessing . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,114.139

I would to God thou wert a shore , and the Queenes Ship saffe ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,114.140

then I <P_115> should care the lesse for my selfe .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,115.141

With that Wish and Resolution Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> committed
hymselfe to the Mercie of God , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,115.142

and comforted them that were about hym ; they All continuing that Night
hopeles of Life , or of Deliverance from Danger : Untill at length by
God's good Favor they were driven to Sea , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,115.143

and soe did remayne in Stormes and Tempestes for fower Dayes and a halfe
, not knowing where they were : PERROTT-1598-E2-H,115.144

For the Master of the Queenes Ship , called <font> Gray <$$font> , had
lost cleane all the Knowledge of his Course ; beinge taken with Tempest
in the midest of the Night , and soe continuing in Myste and fowell
Weather , as the Violence of the Waves and Windes would carie them :
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,115.145

Neither had they easily come to any better Knowledge of theyr Being ,
but that they were directed by one <font> Deryfold <$$font> , the Pirat
whom they had taken <paren> and the following of whom was the Cause of
all theyr Danger , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,115.146

soe the Callinge of hym was the Cause of theyr Secondary Deliverance .
<$$paren> PERROTT-1598-E2-H,115.147

He was drawen out of the Bilbows , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,115.148

and his direction was more <P_116> certayn then the Master's of the
Queenes Ship ; PERROTT-1598-E2-H,116.149

for he had usually haunted that Coste as a Rover .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,116.150

When <font> Deryfold <$$font> was called upon for his Opinion ,
whereabouts they were ; he demaunded where they first lost theyr Course
? What Windes they had sithence , and how long they sayled by eche
Winde ? Which being signified , he presently conjectured whereabouts
they should be , PERROTT-1598-E2-H,116.151

and aymed at it very neerely , appoynting what Course they should take .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,116.152

In the Midest of the Weeke the Ship lost hir Mayn-sayle , being stripped
off from the Yard and from hir Tackes and Suites ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,116.153

and was never found agayne : Soe that they were constrayned of two
Bunnetts to make a mayne Course , without which the Ship could have made
noe Way , but would have byn swallowed in the Sea .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,116.154

At the length they were driven neere <font> Harewich <$$font> , where
they mett with two Hoyes who tolde them first the certayne Place where
they were . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,116.155

From thence they came to <font> Harewich <$$font> ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,116.156

and stayed there two Dayes : PERROTT-1598-E2-H,116.157

Soe they sayled into the <font> Thames <$$font> .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,116.158

<P_117>

At Sir <font> John Perrott's <$$font> first Coming to the Court ,
Objections were layed agaynst hym , <paren> as Envie did ever accompany
his greatest Actions <$$paren> that he had mispent much Time , and put
the Queene to unnecessary Charges , besyds the Perill of hir Ship .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,117.160

And this was suggested by <font> Gray <$$font> , the Master of the Ship
, sett on <paren> as it was sayd <$$paren> by greater Men then hymselfe
. PERROTT-1598-E2-H,117.161

And he envying that <font> Deryfold <$$font> should have the Prayse from
hym , <paren> for whose Pardon Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> made
Suite <$$paren> or that it should be knowen , that the Master of the
Ship should not know his Course soe neere his owne Home , who dwelt at
<font> Harwich <$$font> ; therfor <font> Gray <$$font> did as much as he
could excuse hymselfe , and lay the Faulte on Sir <font> John Perrott
<$$font> . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,117.162

But as it fell out there was one <font> Cesar <$$font> , then Sir <font>
John Perrott's <$$font> Page , who , thoe he were soe yonge that few
supposed he had taken any Heede what had byn don in that Voyage , yet he
did every Night carefully lay downe in Writting , what had byn don that
Day , what Windes they had , and what Courses they took , <P_118> with
all the Circumstances belonging to that Voiage , from the begyning to
the endinge : which being founde out , and the same appering to
{HELSINKI:so} accord with the Relation of Sir <font> John Perrott
<$$font> in every Poynte ; and the Queene being satisfied , as allso hir
Counsell , that Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> did performe as much as
was possible for hym to doe : The Accusation was answered , and the
Accuser did gayne noe Credit thereby , but rather Reproch .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,118.163

Yet , nevertheles , Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> wanted noe
Adversarys , whatsoever he attempted or performed :
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,118.164

For presently , upon his Returne from Sea , one <font> Thomas Wyriott
<$$font> , a Justice , and a headie Man , did preferre a Petition , with
Artickles , agaynst Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> unto the Queene ;
which Petition was referred by the Queene unto the Master of the
Requests , to be examined and reported . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,118.165

The Master of the Requests tooke Paynes to heare the Cause ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,118.166

and in Conclusion certified the Queene , that there was noe Cause of
<font> Wyriott's <$$font> Complaynts <P_119> agaynst Sir <font> John
Perrott <$$font> . PERROTT-1598-E2-H,119.167

<font> Wyriott <$$font> was not soe satisfied ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,119.168

but complayned to the Queene of the Master of the Requests , that he had
made a partiall Report for Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> . Whereupon
the Queenes Majestie referred the Examynation of his Cause unto the
Lords of hir Privey Counsell ; who did lykewise heare the Matter , and
found that it was Malice , and noe juste Cause which <font> Wyriott
<$$font> had to preferre agaynst Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> ;
which they did in lyke maner make knowen to hir Majestie .
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,119.169

<font> Wyriott <$$font> continuing his Malice , or rather his Madnes in
this , made the lyke Complaynt unto the Queene agaynst hir Privey
Counsell , as he did before agaynst the Master of the Requests :
Wherupon he was committed first by the Captayn of the Guard , under
whose Band he served , unto the <font> Marshialsie <$$font> ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-H,119.170

and Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> lefte hym there , at what Time he
had purged hymselfe of all Complayntes mad agaynst hym by his
Adversaries , and had Lisence to depart into the Contrie , for his
Health , and for the Disposing of his Affayeirs , <P_120> which he lefte
in evill Order at his sodayne Departure from thence unto his Sea Voiage
. PERROTT-1598-E2-H,120.171

