<BEGIN_pettit-1625-e2-h>

<P_13>

<heading:edcomment:VIII_VALENTINE_PETTIT_TO_HENRY_PETTIT>

Matt Henneker beeing unable and unfitt to serve your tourne , and my
wife beeing unwillinge that shee should com home , eyther hither or to
her fathers , <paren> allthough wishing that shee had beene fitt for
your service , and that shee might have continued with you for some
yeares <$$paren> , hath provided for her with M=ris= Eppes , who haveing
now but one mayede and servant , and desireth to have her as soone as
possible may bee , to the end that shee should not lose that service and
be unprovided , purposeth to sende for her abowte Satterdaye next , or
Mondaye at the furthest ; PETTIT-1625-E2-H,13.4

and beecause shee would not have my daughter your wife to bee destitute
of one to serve her tourne , shee purposeth to send Matt Samsonn to bee
in her steade for 3 weekes or a month , if your other mayde com not in
the meane time , which I thought fitt heereby to geive you notice of ,
least if you had no knowledge heereof , it might bee thought to bee
oversodden {COM:preceding_word_"oversodden"_emended} -
PETTIT-1625-E2-H,13.5

Thus praying god to bless you and all yours , and to remember mee and my
wife to my Layde , your brother and Sister Oxenden , your wife and the
rest of our freindes , I commende you to God . PETTIT-1625-E2-H,13.6

Your loving father Val: Pettit <font> Daundelion PETTIT-1625-E2-H,13.7

the 26th of Aprill 1624 <$$font> PETTIT-1625-E2-H,13.8

<P_14>

<heading:edcomment:IX_SAME_TO_SAME>

<font> To his loveing Sonne , M=r= Henry Pettit , at Denton , geve
theise wi=th= speede . <$$font> PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.11

Sonne , I thanke you for your Care and paines abowt enquireing and
provideing Sheepe for mee , PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.12

I prey you continue your purpose intended and see the butcher's Sheepe
one Tuesdaye next , PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.13

and if you and your freinde do like of them and the Peniworth , then I
pray you buy them for mee , PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.14

and the money shall bee readye and bee paid for them when and wheare you
shall appoint , PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.15

and spare your Journey if I may be assured how to do it .
PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.16

I wish it might bee at Sandwich for the more ease , if hee like so of it
. PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.17

My daughter Henneker and her husband are now heere
PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.18

and I thinke will sende for their Daughter tomorrow
PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.19

and so my wife will sende to Goodenston for her , being somwhat neere us
then Denton , and the rather beecause there is no neede of sendeing anie
other to you from hence to bee in her stead , as it seemeth .
PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.20

So with my harty salutations remembred and my wives to your sellfe ,
your wife and the rest of our freindes , I commende you to God
PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.21

and rest Your loveing father Val: Pettit PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.22

<font> Daundelion PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.23

this last of Aprill 1624 <$$font> PETTIT-1625-E2-H,14.24

