<BEGIN_peyton-1632-e2-h>

<P_87>

<heading:edcomment:LXXI_MARY,_LADY_PEYTON_TO_MRS._ANNE_OXINDEN>

Doughter Oxinden , Which title I must now give you , your brother hath
so weall satisfied me in your match that I wish you much joy and hapines
, PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.4

and withall be carful that , whatsoever you doe , to love honer and obey
your housband in all things that is fitting for a resonable creture .
PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.5

I {COM:preceding_word_"I"_emended} will desir nothing that is
unresonable , PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.6

you know what I have sufferd PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.7

yet God hath delivered {COM:preceding_word_"delivered"_emended} mee out
of it , though with infinit afliction for the time .
PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.8

I have had so much {COM:preceding_word_"much"_emended} spech with your
brother conserning your father's wille and your portion , which he would
not beleeve till I showed him the will , PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.9

he is now confirmed in it PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.10

and says you shall have your dewe as soune as he can ;
PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.11

be sur of this you shall have it , though you stay som tim for it ,
PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.12

in the meantime let no respect be wanting to your housband and his
mother , with the rest of his frends , in this you shall gain yourself a
good reput and shew yourself a vertuous wife whoes pris is not to be
valued ; PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.13

as for the bisines you writ to me about , I am ashamed I can@ @not doe
it for you , PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.14

my housband siems to give me pour though I have no pour ,
PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.15

he hath been so ill a housband of lat that I never was so put to it to
bring the wourld about as now I am , PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.16

besids he is to pay a gret deale of mony this next terme ,
PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.17

wher he will have it I know not ; PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.18

only this I am sur he will suffer ; PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.19

his father delt most unworthylie with us , which inforces
{COM:preceding_word_"inforces"_emended} me to doe what I would not .
PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.20

I think to be at London this next terme , wher I shal@ @be glad to meete
you , PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.21

if not I desier to see you hier . PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.22

Your brother houmfery remembers his service to you .
PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.23

So with my prayers to God to bless you , I rest as ever Your asured
loving mother Mary Peyton PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.24

<font> February the 19th 1632 <$$font> PEYTON-1632-E2-H,87.25

