<BEGIN_record-1551-e1-h>

<P_1.B1R>

<font> A touche lyne <$$font> , is a line that runneth a_long by the
edge of a circle , onely touching it , but doth not crosse the
circumference of it , as in this exaumple you maie see .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1R.3

And when that a line doth crosse the edg of the circle , the~ is it
called <font> a cord <$$font> , as you shall see anon in the speakynge
of circles . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1R.4

In the meane season must I not omit to declare what angles bee called
<font> matche corners <$$font> , that is to saie , suche as stande
directly one against the other , when twoo lines be drawen acrosse , as
here appereth . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1R.5

Where A. and B. are matche corners , so are C. and D. but not A.
and C. nother D. and A . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1R.6

Nowe will I beginne to speak of figures , that be properly so called ,
of whiche all be made of diuerse lines , except onely a circle , an egge
forme , and a tunne forme , which .iij. haue no angle and haue but one
line for their bounde , and an eye fourme whiche is made of one lyne ,
and hath an angle onely . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1R.7

<font> A circle <$$font> is a figure made and enclosed with one line ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1R.8

and hath in the middell of it a pricke or centre , from whiche all the
lines that be drawen to the circumfernece are equall all in length , as
here you see . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1R.9

And the line that encloseth the whole compasse , is called the <font>
circumference <$$font> . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1R.10

And all the lines that bee drawen crosse the circle , and goe by the
centre , are named <font> diameters <$$font> , whose halfe , I meane
from the center to the circumference <P_1.B1V> any waie , is called the
<font> semidiameter <$$font> , or <font> halfe diameter <$$font> .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1V.11

But and if the line goe crosse the circle , and passe beside the centre
, then is it called <font> a corde <$$font> , or <font> a stryng line
<$$font> , as I said before , and as this exaumple sheweth : where A.
is the corde . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1V.12

And the compassed line that aunswereth to it , is called <font> an arche
lyne <$$font> , or <font> a bowe lyne <$$font> , whiche here is marked
with B. and the diameter with C . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1V.13

But and if that part be separate from the rest of the circle <paren> as
in this exa~ple you see <$$paren> then ar both partes called ca~telles ,
the one the <font> greatter cantle <$$font> , as E. and the other the
<font> lesser cantle <$$font> , as D . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1V.14

And if it be parted iuste by the centre <paren> as you see in F.
<$$paren> then is it called a <font> semicircle <$$font> , or <font>
halfe compasse <$$font> . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1V.15

Sometimes it happeneth that a cantle is cutte out with two lynes drawen
from the centre to the circumference <paren> as G. is <$$paren>
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1V.16

and then maie it be called a <font> nooke cantle <$$font> ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1V.17

and if it be not parted from the reste of the circle <paren> as you see
in H. <$$paren> then is it called a <font> nooke <$$font> plainely
without any addicion . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1V.18

And the compassed lyne in it is called an <font> arche lyne <$$font> ,
as the exaumple here doeth shewe . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B1V.19

<P_1.B2R>

Nowe haue you heard as touchyng circles , meetely sufficient instruction
, so that it should seme nedeles to speake any more of figures in that
kynde , saue that there doeth yet remaine ij. formes of an imperfecte
circle , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2R.21

for it is lyke a circle that were brused , and thereby did runne out
endelong one waie , whiche forme Geometricians dooe call an <font> egge
forme <$$font> , because it doeth represent the figure and shape of an
egge duely proportioned <paren> as this figure sheweth <$$paren> hauyng
the one ende greater then the other . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2R.22

For if it be lyke the figure of a circle pressed in length , and bothe
endes lyke bygge , then is it called a <font> tunne forme <$$font> , or
<font> barrell forme <$$font> , the right makyng of whiche figures , I
wyll declare hereafter in the thirde booke . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2R.23

An other forme there is , whiche you maie call a nutte forme ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2R.24

and is made of one lyne muche lyke an egge forme , saue that it hath a
sharpe angle . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2R.25

And it chaunceth sometyme that there is a right line drawen crosse these
figures , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2R.26

and that is called an <font> axelyne <$$font> , or <font> axtre <$$font>
. RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2R.27

Howebeit properly that line that is called an <font> axtre <$$font> ,
whiche gooeth thoroughe the myddell of a Globe ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2R.28

for as a diameter is in a circle , so is an axe lyne or axtre in a Globe
, <P_1.B2V> that lyne that goeth from side to syde , and passeth by the
middell of it . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.29

And the two poyntes that suche a lyne maketh in the vtter bounde or
platte of the globe , are named <font> polis <$$font> , w=ch= you may
call aptly in englysh , <font> tourne pointes <$$font> : of whiche I do
more largely intreate , in the booke that I haue written of the vse of
the globe . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.30

But to returne to the diuersityes of figures that remayne vndeclared ,
the most simple of them ar such ones as be made but of two lynes , as
are <font> the cantle of a circle <$$font> , and the <font> halfe circle
<$$font> , of which I haue spoken allready . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.31

Likewyse the <font> halfe of an egge forme <$$font> , the <font> cantle
of an egge forme <$$font> , the <font> halfe of a tunne fourme <$$font>
, and the <font> cantle of a tunne fourme <$$font> , and besyde these a
figure moche like to a tunne fourme , saue that it is sharp couered at
both the endes , and therfore doth consist of twoo lynes , where a tunne
forme is made of one lyne , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.32

and that figure is named an <font> yey fourme <$$font> .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.33

The nexte kynd of figures are those that be made of .iij. lynes
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.34

other be all right lynes , all crooked lynes , other some right and some
crooked . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.35

But what fourme so euer they be of , they are named generally triangles
. RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.36

for <font> a triangle <$$font> is nothinge els to say , but a figure of
three corners . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.37

And thys is a generall rule , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.38

looke how many lynes any figure hath , so mannye corners it hath also ,
yf it bee a platte forme , and not a bodye . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.39

For a bodye hath dyuers lynes metyng sometime in one corner .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.40

Now to geue you example of triangles , there is one whiche is all of
croked lynes , and may be taken fur a portio~ of a globe as the figur
marked w=t= A RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.41

An other hath two compassed lines and one right lyne ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.42

and is as the portion of halfe a globe , example of B.
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B2V.43

An other hatht but one compassed <P_1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R> lyne ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.44

and is the quarter of a circle , named a quadrate ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.45

and the ryght lynes make a right corner , as you se in C . Other lesse
then it as you se in {TEXT:missing_"in"} D , whose right lines make a
sharpe corner , or greater then a quadrate , as is F ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.46

and then the right lynes of it do make a blunt corner .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.47

Also some triangles haue all righte lynes
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.48

and they be distincted in sonder by their angles , or corners .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.49

for other their corners bee all sharpe , as you see in the figure , E.
other ij. sharpe and one right square , as is the figure G other ij.
sharp and one blunt as in the figure H
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.50

There is also an other distinction of the names of triangles , according
to their sides , whiche other be all equal as in the figure E ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.51

and that the Greekes doo call Isopleuron , and Latine men aequilaterium
: RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.52

and in english it may be called a <font> threlike triangle <$$font> ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.53

other els two sydes bee equall and the thyrd vnequall , which the
Greekes call Isosceles , the Latine men aequicurio ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.54

and in english <font> tweyleke <$$font> may they be called , as in G , H
, and K . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.55

For , they may be of iij. kinds that is to say , with one square angle
, as is G , or with a blunte corner as H , or with all in sharpe korners
, as you see in K . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.56

Further_more it may be y=t= they haue neuer a one syde equall to an
other , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.57

and they be in iij kyndes also distinct lyke the twilekes , as you maye
perceaue by these examples .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1R.58

M.N , and O where M. hath a right angle , N , A , blunte angle , and O
, all sharpe angles these the Greekes and latine men do
<P_1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V> cal scalena
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V.59

and in englishe theye may be called <font> nouelekes <$$font> ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V.60

for thei haue no side equall , or like lo~g , to ani other in the same
figur . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V.61

Here it is to be noted , that in a tria~gle al the angles bee called
<font> inner@ @a~gles <$$font> except ani side bee drawenne forth in
lengthe , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V.62

for then is that fourthe corner caled an <font> vtter corner <$$font> ,
as in this exa~ple because A , B , is drawen in length ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V.63

therfore the a~gle C , is called an vtter a~gle
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V.64

And thus haue I done with tria~guled figures ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V.65

and nowe foloweth <font> quadrangles <$$font> , which are figures of
iiij. corners and of iiij. lines also , of whiche there be diuers
kindes , but chiefely v . that is to say , a <font> square quadrate
<$$font> , whose sides bee all equall , and al the angles square , as
you se here in this figure Q .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V.66

The second kind is called a long square , whose foure corners be all
square , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V.67

but the sides are not equall eche to other ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V.68

yet is euery side equall to that other that is against it , as you maye
perceaue in this figure R .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B3R_misnumbered_as_1.B1V.69

<P_1.B4R>

The thyrd kind is called <font> losenges <$$font> or <font> diamondes
<$$font> , whose sides bee all equall , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.71

but it hath neuer a square corner , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.72

for two of them be sharpe , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.73

and the other two be blunt , as appeareth in , S .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.74

The iiij. sorte are like vnto losenges , saue that they are longer one
waye , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.75

and their sides be not equal , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.76

yet ther corners are like the corners of a losing ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.77

and therfore ar they named <font> losengelike <$$font> or <font>
diamo~dlike <$$font> , whose figur is noted with T
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.78

Here shal you marke that al those squares which haue their sides al
equal , may be called also for easy vnderstandinge , <font> likesides
<$$font> , as Q. and S . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.79

and those that haue only the contrary sydes equal , as R. and T. haue
, those wyll I call <font> likeiammys <$$font> , for a difference .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.80

The fift sorte doth containe all other fashions of foure_cornered figurs
, RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.81

and ar called of the Grekes trapezia , of Latin me~ mensulae and of
Arabitians , helmuariphe , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.82

they may be called in englishe <font> borde formes <$$font> ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.83

they haue no syde equall to an other as these examples shew ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.84

neither keepe they any rate in their corners , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.85

and therfore are they counted <font> vnruled formes <$$font> ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.86

and the other foure kindes onely are counted <font> ruled formes
<$$font> , in the kynde of quadrangles . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.87

Of these vnruled formes ther is no numbre , they are so mannye and so
dyuers , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.88

yet by arte they may be changed into other kindes of figures , and
therby be brought to measure and proportion , as in the thirtene
conclusion is partly taught , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.89

but more plainly in my booke of measuring you may see it .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4R.90

<P_1.B4V>

And nowe to make an eande of the dyuers kyndes of figures , there dothe
folowe now figures of .v. sydes , other v. corners , which we may call
<font> cinkangles <$$font> , whose sydes partlye are all equall as in A
, and those are counted <font> ruled cinkeangles <$$font> . and partlye
vnequall as in , B and they are called <font> vnruled <$$font> .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4V.92

Likewyse shall you iudge of <font> siseangles <$$font> , which haue sixe
corners , <font> septangles <$$font> , which haue seuen angles , and so
forth , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4V.93

for as mannye numbres as there maye be of sydes and angles , so manye
diuers kindes be there of figures , vnto which yow shall geue names
according to the numbre of their sides and angles , of whiche for this
tyme I wyll make an ende , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4V.94

and wyll sette forthe on example of a syseangle , which I had almost
forgotten , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4V.95

and that is it , whose vse commeth often in Geometry ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4V.96

and is called a <font> squire <$$font> , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4V.97

is made of two long squares ioyned togither , as this example sheweth .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4V.98

And thus I make an eand to speake of platte formes ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4V.99

and will briefelye saye somwhat touching the figures of <font> bodeis
<$$font> which partly haue one platte forme for their bound , and y=t=
iust rou~d as a <font> globe <$$font> hath , or ended long as in an
<font> egge <$$font> , and a <font> tunne fourme <$$font> , whose
pictures are these . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4V.100

Howebeit you must marke that I meane not the very figure of a tunne ,
when I saye tunne form , but a figure like a tunne ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.B4V.101

for a <font> tune fourme <$$font> , <P_1.C1R> hath but one plat forme ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1R.102

and therfore must needs be round at the endes , where as <font> a tunne
<$$font> hath thre platte formes , and is flatte at eche end , as partly
these pictures do shewe . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1R.103

<font> Bodies of two plattes <$$font> are other cantles or halues of
those other bodies , that haue but one platte forme ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1R.104

or els they are lyke in fvorme to two such cantles ioyned togither as
this A doth partly expresse {TEXT:eppresse} : RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1R.105

or els it is called a <font> rounde spire <$$font> , or <font> triple
fourme <$$font> , as in this figure is some what expressed
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1R.106

Nowe of three plattes there are made certain figures of bodyes , as the
cantels and halues of all bodyes that haue but ij. plattys , and also
the halues of halfe globys and canteles of a globe .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1R.107

Lykewyse a rounde piller , and a spyre made of a rounde spyre , slytte
in ij. partes long ways . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1R.108

But as these formes be harde to be iudged by their pycturs , so I doe
entende to passe them ouer with a great number of other formes of bodyes
, which afterwarde shall be set forth in the boke of Perspectiue ,
bicause that without perspectiue knowledge , it is not easy to iudge
truly the formes of them in flatte protacture .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1R.109

And thus I make an ende for this tyme , of the definitions Geometricall
, appertayning to this parte of practise , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1R.110

and the rest wil I prosecute as cause shall serue .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1R.111

<P_1.C1V>

<heading>

SONDRY CONCLUSIONS GEOMETRICAL . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.114

THE FYRST CONCLVSION . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.115

TO MAKE A THRELIKE TRIANGLE OR ANY LYNE MEASURABLE .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.116

<$$heading>

Take the iuste le~gth of the lyne with your co~passe ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.118

and stay the one foot of the compas in one of the endes of that line ,
turning the other vp or doun at your will , drawyng the arche of a
circle against the midle of the line , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.119

and doo like wise with the same co~passe vnaltered , at the other end of
the line , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.120

and wher these ij. croked lynes doth crosse , frome thence drawe a lyne
to ech@ @end of your first line , and there shall appear a threlike
triangle drawen on that line . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.121

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.122

A.B. is the first line , on which I wold make the threlike triangle ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.123

therfore I open the compasse as wyde as that line is long ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.124

and draw two arch lines that mete in C , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.125

then from C. I draw ij other lines one to A , another to B ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.126

and than I haue my purpose . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.127

<heading>

THE .II CONCLVSION . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.129

IF YOU WIL MAKE A TWILIKE OR A NOUELIKE TRIANGLE ON ANI CERTAINE LINE .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.130

<$$heading>

Consider fyrst the length that yow will haue the other sides to containe
, RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.132

and to that length open your compasse , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C1V.133

and <P_1.C2R> then worke as you did in the threleke triangle ,
remembryng this , that in a nouelike triangle you must take ij.
lengthes besyde the fyrste lyne , and draw an arche lyne with one of
the~ at the one ende , and with the other at the other end ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.134

the exa~ple is as in the other before . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.135

<heading>

THE III. CONCL. RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.137

TO DIUIDE AN ANGLE OF RIGHT LINES INTO IJ. = PARTES .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.138

<$$heading>

First open your compasse as largely as you can , so that it do not
excede the length of the shortest line y=t= incloseth the angle .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.140

Then set one foote of the compasse in the verye point of the angle
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.141

and with the other fote draw a compassed arch fro~ the one lyne of the
angle to the other , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.142

that arch shall you deuide in halfe , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.143

and the~ draw a line fro~ the a~gle to y=e= middle of y=e= arch , and so
y=e= angle is diuided into ij. equall partes .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.144

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.145

Let the tria~gle be A.B.C , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.146

the~ set I one foot of y=e= co~passe in B , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.147

and with the other I draw y=e= arch D.E , which I part into ij. equall
parts in F , and the~ draw a line fro~ B , to F ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.148

& so I haue mine inte~t RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.149

<heading>

THE IIII. CONCL. RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.151

TO DEUIDE ANY MEASURABLE LINE INTO IJ. =L PARTES .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.152

<$$heading>

Open your compasse to the iust le~gth of y=e= line .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.154

And the~ set one foote steddely at the one ende of the line ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.155

& w=t= the other fote draw an arch of a circle against y=e= midle of the
line , both ouer it , and also vnder it , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2R.156

then doo lykewaise <P_1.C2V> at the other ende of the line .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.157

And marke where those arche lines do meet crosse waies ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.158

and betwene those ij. pricks draw a line , and it shall cut the first
line in two equall portions . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.159

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.160

The lyne is A.B. accordyng to which I open the compasse and make .iiij.
arche lines , whiche meete in C. and D , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.161

then drawe I a lyne from C , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.162

so haue I my purpose . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.163

This conclusion serueth for makyng of quadrates and squires , beside
many other commodities , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.164

howebeit it maye bee don more readylye by this conclusion that foloweth
nexte . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.165

<heading>

THE FIFT CONCLVSION . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.167

TO MAKE A PLUMME LINE OR ANY PRICKE THAT YOU WILL IN ANY RIGHT LYNE
APPOINTED . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.168

<$$heading>

Open youre compas so that it be not wyder then from the pricke appoynted
in the line to the shortest ende of the line , but rather shorter .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.170

Then sette the one foote of the compasse in the firste pricke appointed
, RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.171

and with the other fote marke ij. other prickes , one of eche syde of
that fyrste , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.172

afterwarde open your compasse to the wydenes of those ij. new prickes ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.173

and draw from them ij. arch lynes , as you did in the fyrst conclusion
, for making of a threlyke tria~gle . then if you do mark their
crossing , and from it drawe a line to your fyrste pricke , it shall bee
a iust plum lyne on that place . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.174

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.175

The lyne is A.B. RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.176

the prick on whiche I shoulde make the plumme lyne , is C .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.177

then open I the compasse as wyde as A , C , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.178

and sette one foote in C. RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.179

and with the other doo I marke out C.A. and C.B ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.180

then open I the compasse as wide as A.B , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.181

and make ij. arch lines which do crosse in D ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.182

and so haue I doone . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C2V.183

Howebeeit , it happeneth so sommetymes , that the <P_1.C3R> pricke on
whiche you would make the perpendicular or plum line , is so nere the
eand of your line , that you can not extende any notable length from it
to th@ @one end of the line , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.184

and if so be it then that you maie not drawe your line lenger fro~ that
end , then doth this conclusion require a newe ayde ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.185

for the last deuise will not serue . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.186

In suche case therfore shall you dooe thus : RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.187

If your line be of any notable length , deuide it into fiue partes .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.188

And if it be not so long that it maie yelde fiue notable partes , then
make an other line at will , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.189

and parte it into fiue equall portio~s : so that thre of those partes
maie be found in your line . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.190

Then open your compas as wide as thre of these fiue measures be ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.191

and sette the one foote of the compas in the pricke , where you would
haue the plumme line to lighte <paren> whiche I call the first pricke ,
<$$paren> RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.192

and with the other foote drawe an arche line righte ouer the pricke , as
you can ayme it : RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.193

then open youre compas as wide as all fiue measures be ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.194

and set the one foote in the fourth pricke , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.195

and with the other foote draw an other arch line crosse the first ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.196

and where thei two do crosse , thense draw a line to the poinct where
you woulde haue the perpendicular line to light , and you haue doone .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.197

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.198

The line is A.B . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.199

and A. is the prick , on whiche the perpendicular line must light .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.200

Therfore I deuide A.B. into fiue partes equall ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.201

then do I open the compas to the widenesse of three partes <paren> that
is A.D. <$$paren> and let one foote staie in A.
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.202

and with the other I make an arche line in C .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3R.203

Afterwarde I open the compas as wide as A.B. <P_1.C3V> <paren> that is
as wide as all fiue partes <$$paren> RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.204

and set one foote in the .iiij. pricke , which is E , drawyng an arch
line with the other foote in C. also . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.205

Then do I draw thence a line vnto A , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.206

and so haue I doone . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.207

But and if the line be to shorte to be parted into fiue partes , I shall
deuide it into iij. partes only , as you see the line F.G ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.208

and then make D. and other line <paren> as is K.L. <$$paren> whiche I
deuide into .v. suche diuisions , as F.G. containeth .iij {COM:sic} ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.209

then open I the compaas as wide as .iiij. partes <paren> whiche is K.M
. <$$paren> RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.210

and so set I one foote of the compas in F , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.211

and with the other I drawe an arch lyne toward H ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.212

then open I the co~pas as wide as K.L. <paren> that is all .v. partes
<$$paren> RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.213

and set one foote in G , <paren> that is the iij. pricke <$$paren>
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.214

and with the other I draw an arch line toward H. also :
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.215

and where those .ij. arch lines do crosse <paren> whiche is by H.
<$$paren> thence draw I a line vnto F , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.216

and that maketh a very plumbe line to F.G , as my desire was .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.217

The maner of workyng of this conclusion , is like to the second
conclusion , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.218

but the reason of it doth depe~d of the .xlvi. prorosicio~ of y=e=
first boke of Euclide . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.219

An other waie yet . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.220

set one foote of the compas in the prick , on whiche you would haue the
plumbe line to light , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.221

and stretche forth th@ @other foote toward the longest end of the line ,
as wide as you can for the length of the line ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.222

and so draw a quarter of a compas or more , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.223

then without stirring of the compas , set one foote of it in the same
line , where as the circular line did begin , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.224

and extend th@ @other in the circular line , settyng a marke where it
doth light , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.225

then take half that quantitie more there vnto ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.226

and by that prick that endeth the last part , draw a line to the pricke
assigned , and it shall be a perpendicular . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.227

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.228

A.B. is the line appointed , to whiche I must make a perpendicular line
to light in the pricke assigned , which is A .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C3V.229

Therfore doo I set one foote of the compas in A , and extend the other
vnto D. makyng a part of a circle , <P_1.C4R> more then a quarter ,
that is D.E . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.230

Then do I set one foote of the compas vnaltered in D , and stretch the
other in the circular line , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.231

and it doth light in F , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.232

this space betwene D. and F. I deuide into halfe in the pricke G ,
whiche halfe I take with the compas , and set it beyond F. vnto H ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.233

and therfore is H. the point , by whiche the perpendicular line must be
drawen , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.234

so say I that the line H.A , is a plumbe line to A.B , as the conclusion
would . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.235

<heading>

THE .VI. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.237

TO DRAWE A STREIGHT LINE FROM ANY PRICKE THAT IS NOT IN A LINE , AND TO
MAKE IT PERPENDICULAR TO AN OTHER LINE . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.238

<$$heading>

Open your compas so wide that it may extend somewhat farther , the~ from
the prick to the line , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.240

then sette the one foote of the compas in the pricke ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.241

and with the other shall you draw a co~passed line , that shall crosse
that other first line in .ij. places RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.242

Now if you deuide that arch line into .ij. equall partes , and from the
middell pricke therof vnto the prick without the line you drawe a
streight line , it shal@ @be a plumbe line to that firste lyne ,
accordyng to the conclusion . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.243

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.244

C. is the appointed pricke , from whiche vnto the line A.B. I must
draw a perpe~dicular . RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.245

Therfore I open the co~pas so wide , that it may haue one foote in C ,
and th@ @other to reach ouer the line , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.246

and with y=t= foote I draw an arch line as you see , betwene A. and B ,
which arch line I deuide in the middell in the point D .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.247

Then drawe I a line from C. to D , RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.248

and it is perpendicular to the line A.B , accordyng as my desire was .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,1.C4R.249

<P_2.E4R>

<heading>

THE XXXIIJ. THEOREME . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.252

IN ALL RIGHT_ANGULED TRIANGLES , THE SQUARE OF THAT SIDE WHICHE LIETH
AGAINST THE RIGHT ANGLE , IS =L TO THE .IJ. SQUARES OF BOTH THE OTHER
SIDES RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.253

<$$heading>

<font> Example <$$font> . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.255

A.B.C. is a triangle , hauing a ryght angle in B. Wherfore it foloweth
, that the square of A.C , <paren> whiche is the side that lyeth agaynst
the right angle <$$paren> shall be as muche as the two squares of A.B.
and B.C. which are the other .ij. sides . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.256

By the square of any lyne , you muste vnderstande a figure made iuste
square , hauyng all his iiij. sydes equall to that line , whereof it is
the square , RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.257

so is A.C.F , the square of A.C . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.258

Lykewais A.B.D. is the square of A.B . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.259

And B.CE. is the square of B.C . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.260

Now by the numbre of the diuisions in eche of these squares , may you
perceaue not onely what the square of any line is called , but also that
the theoreme is true , and expressed playnly bothe by lines and numbre .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.261

For as you see , the greatter square <paren> that is A.C.F. <$$paren>
hath fiue diuisions on eche syde , all equall togyther ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.262

and those in the whole square are twenty_and_fiue .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.263

Nowe in the left square , whiche is A.B.D. there are but .iij. of
those diuisions in one syde , RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.264

and that yeldeth nyne in the whole . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.265

So lykeways you see in the meane square A.C.E. in euery syde .iiij.
partes , whiche in the whole amount vnto sixtene .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.266

Nowe adde togyther all the partes of the two lesser squares , that is to
saye , sixtene and nyne , and you perceyue that they make
twenty_and_fiue , whyche is an equall numbre to the summe of the
greatter square . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4R.267

<P_2.E4V>

By this theoreme you may vnderstand a redy way to know the syde of any
ryght_anguled triangle that is vnknowen , so that you knowe the lengthe
of any two sydes of it . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4V.269

For by tournynge the two sydes certayne into theyr squares , and so
addynge them togyther , other subtractynge the one from the other
<paren> accordyng as in the vse of these theoremes I haue sette foorthe
<$$paren> and then fyndynge the roote of the square that remayneth ,
which roote <paren> I meane the syde of the square <$$paren> is the
iuste length of the unknowen syde , whyche is sought for .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4V.270

But this appertaineth to the thyrde booke , RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4V.271

and therefore I wyll speake no more of it at this tyme .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4V.272

<heading>

THE XXXIIIJ. THEOREME . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4V.274

IF SO BE IT , THAT IN ANY TRIANGLE , THE SQUARE OF THE ONE SYDE BE =L TO
THE .IJ. SQUARES OF THE OTHER IJ. SIDES , THAN MUST NEDES THAT CORNER
BE A RIGHT CORNER , WHICH IS CONTEINED BETWENE THOSE TWO LESSER SYDES .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4V.275

<$$heading>

<font> Example <$$font> . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4V.277

As in the figure of the laste Theoreme , bicause A.C , made in square ,
is as much as the square of A.B , and also as the square of B.C. ioyned
bothe togyther , therefore the angle that is inclosed betwene those .ij.
lesser lynes , A.B. and B.C. <paren> that is to say <$$paren> the
angle B. whiche lieth against the line A.C , must nedes be a ryght
angle . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4V.278

This teoreme dothe so depende of the truthe of the laste , that whan you
perceaue the truthe of the one , you can not iustly doubt of the others
truthe , RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4V.279

for they conteine one sentence , contrary waies pronounced .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4V.280

<heading>

THE .xxxv. THEOREME . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.E4V.282

IF THERE BE SET FORTH .IJ. RIGHT LINES , AND ONE OF THEM PARTED INTO
SUNDRY PARTES , HOW MANY <P_2.F1R> OR FEW SO EUER THEY BE , THE SQUARE
THAT IS MADE OF THOSE IJ. RIGHT LINES PROPOSED , IS =L TO ALL THE
SQUARES , THAT ARE MADE OF THE VNDIUIDED LINE , AND EUERY PARTE OF THE
DIUIDED LINE . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1R.283

<$$heading>

<font> Example <$$font> . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1R.285

The ij. lines proposed ar AB. and C.D , RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1R.286

and the lyne A.B. is deuided into thre partes by E. and F .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1R.287

Now saith this theoreme , that the square that is made of those two
whole lines A.B. and C.D , so that the line A.B. sta~deth for the
le~gth of the square , and the other line C.D. for the bredth of the
same . That square <paren> I say <$$paren> will be equall to all the
squares that be made , of the vndiueded lyne <paren> which is C.D.
<$$paren> and euery portion of the diueded line .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1R.288

And to declare that particularly , Fyrst I make an other line G.K ,
equall to the line C.D , and the line G.H. to be equal to the line A.B
, and to bee diuided into iij. like partes , so that G.M. is equall to
A.E , and M.N. equal to E.F , RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1R.289

and then muste N.H. nedes remaine equall to F.B .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1R.290

Then of those ij. lines G.K , vndeuided , and G.H. which is deuided ,
I make a square , that is G.H.K.L , In which square if I drawe crosse
lines frome one side to the other , according to the diuisions of the
line G.H , then will it appear plaine , that the theoreme doth affirme .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1R.291

For the first square G.M.O.K , must needes be equal to the square of the
line C.D , and the first portio~ of the diuided line , which is A.E ,
for bicause their sides are equall . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1R.292

And so the seconde <P_2.F1V> square that is M.N.P.O , shall be equall to
the square of C.D , and the second part of A.B , that is E.F .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1V.293

Also the third square which is N.H.L.P , must of necessitee be equal to
the square of C.D , and F.B , bicause those lines be so coupeled that
euery couple are equall in the seuerall figures .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1V.294

And so shal you not only in this example , but in all other finde it
true , that if one line be deuided into sondry partes , and another line
whole and vndiuided , matched with him in a square , that square which
is made of these two whole lines , is as muche iuste and equally , as
all the seuerall squares , whiche bee made of the whole line vndiuided ,
and euery part seuerally of the diuided line .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1V.295

<heading>

THE XXXVI. THEOREME . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1V.297

IF A RIGHT LINE BE PARTED INTO IJ. PARTES , AS CHAUNCE MAY HAPPE , THE
SQUARE THAT IS MADE OF THAT WHOLE LINE , IS =L TO BOTHE THE SQUARES THAT
ARE MADE OF THE SAME LINE , AND THE TWOO PARTES OF IT SEUERALLY .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1V.298

<$$heading>

<font> Example <$$font> . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1V.300

The line propouned beyng A.B. and deuided , as chaunce happeneth , in
C. into ij. unequall partes , I say that the square made of the hole
line A.B , is equal to the two squares made of the same line with the
twoo partes of it selfe , as with A.C , and with C.B ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F1V.301

for the square D,E.F.G. is equal to the two other partial squares of
D.H.K.G and H.E.F.K , but that the greater square is equall to the
square of the whole line A.B , and the <P_2.F2R> partiall squares equall
to the squares of the second partes of the same line ioyned with the
whole line , RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2R.302

your eye may iudg without muche declaracion , so that I shall not neede
to make more exposition therof , but that you may examine it , as you
did in the laste Theoreme . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2R.303

<heading>

THE XXXVIJ THEOREME . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2R.305

IF A RIGHT LINE BE DEUIDED BY CHAUNCE , AS IT MAYE HAPPEN , THE SQUARE
THAT IS MADE OF THE WHOLE LINE , AND ONE OF THE PARTES OF IT WHICH
SOEUER IT BE , SHAL BE =L TO THAT SQUARE THAT IS MADE OF THE IJ. PARTES
IOYNED TOGITHER , AND TO AN OTHER SQUARE MADE OF THAT PART , WHICH WAS
BEFORE IOYNED WITH THE WHOLE LINE . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2R.306

<$$heading>

<font> Example <$$font> . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2R.308

The line A.B. is deuided in C. into twoo partes , though not equally ,
of which two partes for an example I take the first , that is A.C ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2R.309

and of it I make one side of a square , as for example D.G. accomptinge
those two lines to be equall , RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2R.310

the other side of the square is D.E , whiche is equall to the whole line
A.B . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2R.311

Now may it appeare , to your eye , that the great square made of the
whole line A.B , and of one of his partes that is A.C , <P_2.F2V>
<paren> which is equall with D.G. <$$paren> is equal to two partiall
squares , wherof the one is made of the saide greatter portion A.C ,
in_as_muche as not only D.G , beynge one of his sides , but also D.H.
beinge the other side , are eche of them equall to A.C .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2V.312

The second square is H.E.F.K , in which the one side H.E , is equal to
C.B , being the lesser parte of the line , A.B , and E.F. is equall to
A.C. which is the greater parte of the same line . So that those two
squares D.H.K.G , and H , E , F , K , bee bothe of them no more then the
greate square D.E,F,G , accordinge to the wordes of the Theoreme afore
saide . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2V.313

<heading>

THE XXXVIIJ. THEOREME . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2V.315

IF A RIGHTE LINE BE DEUIDED BY CHAUNCE , INTO PARTES , THE SQUARE THAT
IS MADE OF THAT WHOLE LINE , IS =L TO BOTH THE SQUARES THAT AR MADE OF
ECHE PARTE OF THE LINE , AND MOREOUER TO TWO SQUARES MADE OF THE ONE
PORTION OF THE DIUIDED LINE IOYNED WITH THE OTHER IN SQUARE .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2V.316

<$$heading>

<font> Example <$$font> . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2V.318

Lette the diuided line bee A , B , and parted in C , into twoo partes :
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F2V.319

Nowe saithe the Theoreme , that the square of the whole lyne A , B , is
as mouche iuste as the square of A.C , and the square of C.B. , eche by
it selfe , and more ouer as muche twise , as A.C. and C.B. <P_2.F3R>
ioyned in one square will make . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3R.320

For as you se , the great square D.E.F.G , conteyneth in hym foure
lesser squares , of whiche the first and the greatest is N.M.F.K , and
is equall to the square of the lyne A.C . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3R.321

The second square is the lest of them all , that is D.H.L.N ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3R.322

and it is equall to the square of the line B.C .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3R.323

Then are there two other longe squares both of one bygnes , that is
H.E.N.M. and L.N.G.K , eche of them both hauyng .ij. sides equall to
A.C , the longer parte of the diuided line , and there other two sides
equall to C.B , beeyng the shorter parte of the said line A.B .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3R.324

So is that greatest square beeyng made of the hole lyne A.B , equal to
the ij. squares of eche of his partes seuerally , and more by as muche
iust as .ij. longe squares , made of the longer portion of the diuided
lyne ioyned in square with the shorter parte of the same diuided line as
the theoreme wold . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3R.325

And as here I haue put an example of a lyne diuided into .ij. partes ,
so the theoreme is true of all diuided lines , of what number so euer
the partes be , foure , fyue , or syxe . etc.
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3R.326

This theoreme hath great vse not only in geometrie , but also in
arithmetike , as herafter I will declare in conuenient place
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3R.327

<heading>

THE .XXXIX. THEOREME . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3R.329

IF A RIGHT LINE BE DEUIDED INTO TWO =L PARTES , AND ONE OF THESE .IJ.
PARTES DIUIDED AGAYN INTO TWO OTHER PARTES , AS HAPPENETH THE LONGE
SQUARE THAT IS MADE OF THE THYRD OR LATER PART OF THAT DIUIDED LINE ,
WITH THE RESIDUE OF THE SAME LINE , AND THE SQUARE OF THE MYDLEMOSTE
PARTE , ARE BOTHE TOGITHER =L TO THE SQUARE OF HALFE THE FIRSTE LINE .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3R.330

<$$heading>

<P_2.F3V>

<font> Example <$$font> . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3V.333

The line A.B. is diuided into ij. equal partes in C ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3V.334

and that parte C.B. is diuided agayne as hapneth in D . Wherfere saith
the Theorem that the long square made of D.B. and A.D , with the square
of C.D. <paren> which is the mydle portion <$$paren> shall bothe be
equall to the square of half the lyne A.B , that is to saye , to the
square of A.C , or els of C.D , which make all one .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3V.335

The long square F.G.N.O. whiche is the longe square that the theoreme
speaketh of , is made of .ij. long squares , wherof the fyrst is
F.G.M.K , and the seconde is K.N.O.M . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3V.336

The square of the myddle portion is L.M.O.P .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3V.337

And the square of the halfe of the fyrste lyne is E.K.Q.L .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3V.338

Nowe by the theoreme , that longe square F.G.M.O , with the iuste square
L.M.O.P , muste bee equall to the greate square E.K.Q.L , whyche thynge
bycause it seemeth somewhat difficult to vnderstande , althoughe I
intende not here to make demonstrations of the Theoremes , bycause it is
appoynted to be done in the newe edition of Euclide , yet I wyll shew
you brefely how the equalitee of the partes doth stande .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3V.339

And fyrst I say , that where the comparyson of equalitee is made
betweene the greate square <paren> whiche is made of halfe the line A.B.
<$$paren> and two other , where of the fyrst is the longe square F.G.N.O
, and the seconde is the full square L.M.O.P , which is one portion of
the great square allredye , and so is that longe square K.N.M.O , beynge
a parcell also of the longe square F.G.N.O , Wherfore as those two
partes are common to bothe partes compared in equalitee , and therfore
beynge bothe abated from eche parte , if the reste of bothe the other
partes bee equall , than were those whole partes equall before :
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F3V.340

Nowe the reste of the great square , those <P_2.F4R> two lesser squares
beyng taken away is that longe square E.N.P.Q , whyche is equall to the
long square F.G.K.M , beyng the rest of the other parte .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4R.341

And that they two be equall , theyr sydes doo declare .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4R.342

For the longest lynes that is F.K and E.Q are equall ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4R.343

and so are the shorter lynes , F.G , and E.N ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4R.344

and so appereth the truthe of the Theoreme . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4R.345

<heading>

THE .XL. THEOREME . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4R.347

IF A RIGHT LINE BE DIUIDED INTO .IJ. EUEN PARTES , AND AN OTHER RIGHT
LINE ANNEXED TO ONE ENDE OF THAT LINE , SO THAT IT MAKE ONE RIGHTE LINE
WITH THE FIRSTE . THE LONGE SQUARE THAT IS MADE OF THIS WHOLE LINE SO
AUGMENTED , AND THE PORTION THAT IS ADDED WITH THE SQUARE OF HALFE THE
RIGHT LINE , SHALL BE =L TO THE SQUARE OF THAT LINE , WHICHE IS
CONPOUNDED OF HALFE THE FIRSTE LINE , AND THE PARTE NEWLY ADDED .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4R.348

<$$heading>

<font> Example <$$font> . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4R.350

The fyrst lyne propouned is A.B , RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4R.351

and it is diuided into ij. equall partes in C , and an other ryght lyne
, I meane B.D. annexed to one ende of the fyrste lyne .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4R.352

Nowe say I , that the long square A.D.M.K , is made of the whole lyne so
augme~ted , that is A.D , and the portio~ annexed , y=t= is D.M .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4R.353

for D.M is equall to B.D , wherfore y=t= long square A.D.M.K , with the
<P_2.F4V> square of halfe the first line , that is E.G.H.L , is equall
to the great square E.F.D.C. whiche square is made of the line C.D.
that is to saie , of a line compounded of halfe the first line , beyng
C.B , and the portion annexed , that is B.D .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.354

And it is easyly perceaued , if you consyder that the longe square
A.C.L.K. <paren> whiche onely is lefte out of the great square
<$$paren> hath another longe square equall to hym , and to supply his
steede in the great square , and that is G,F.M.H .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.355

For their sydes be of lyke lines in length . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.356

<heading>

THE XLI. THEOREME . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.358

IF A RIGHT LINE BE DIUIDED BY CHAUNCE , THE SQUARE OF THE SAME WHOLE
LINE , AND THE SQUARE OF ONE OF HIS PARTES ARE IUSTE =L TO THE LO~G
SQUARE OF THE WHOLE LINE , AND THE SAYDE PARTE TWISE TAKEN , AND MORE
OUER TO THE SQUARE OF THE OTHER PARTE OF THE SAYD LINE .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.359

<$$heading>

<font> Example <$$font> . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.361

A.B. is the line diuided in C . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.362

And D.E.F.G , is the square of the whole line ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.363

D.H.K.M. is the square of the lesser portion <paren> whyche I take for
an example <$$paren> RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.364

and therfore must bee twise reckened . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.365

Nowe I saye that those ij. squares are equall to two longe squares of
the whole line A.B , and his sayd portion A.C , and also to the square
of the other portion of the sayd first line , whiche portion is C.B ,
and his square K.N.F.L RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.366

In this theoreme there is no difficultie , if you co~syder that the
litle square D.H.K.M. is iiij. tymes reckened , that is to say , fyrst
of all as a parte of the greatest square , whiche is D.E.F.G .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.F4V.367

Secondly he is rekned <P_2.G1R> by him selfe .
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.G1R.368

Thirdely he is accompted as parcell of the long square D.E.N.M ,
RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.G1R.369

And fourthly he is taken as a part of the other long square D.H.L.G , so
that in_as_muche as he is twise reckened in one part of the compariso~
of equalitee , and twise also in the second parte , there can rise none
occasion of errour or doubtfulnes therby . RECORD-1551-E1-H,2.G1R.370

