<BEGIN_rhaddsr-1703-e3-h>

<P_43>

<heading:edcomment:SIR_RICHARD_HADDOCK_TO_HIS_SON_RICHARD>

Navy Office , RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.4

this 27th Nov=r= , 1702 . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.5

Deare Son , I have yo=rs= of yesterday's date , from {SIC:form} the
Downes , w=ch= brings us the joyfull tydeings of yo=r= safe arrivall
there . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.6

Yo=r= long passage from Newfoundland put us in great feare of your
wellfare , RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.7

and perticularly your mo=r= hath bine for a month or 5 weekes crying for
you and yo=r= brother Nic=s= safety ; RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.8

but blessed be God you are both come well home . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.9

Your bro=r= now with us came up from the Downes by leave from his Cap=t=
, RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.10

and hath behaved himself with so much bravery and couradge that he hath
gained the good report of the Duke of Ormond , his Capt=t= , &c. , both
in the action at Rotta and St. Mary Port , and Vigo ,
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.11

and was the first man that borded one of the gallions at Vigo , w=ch= is
come home . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.12

I do not find by yo=r= letter that you were w=th= your Comodore at the
takeing and destroying the French shipps to the southwards of Trepassa ,
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.13

and consequently you will not come in for your share of that capture .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.14

The news_papers tells us yo=r= prize is got into Plym=o= ,
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.15

and for your boate w=th= 5 men you say you left behind at Plym=o= we
never heard anything of it , w=ch= gives you trouble ;
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.16

and because you write not of my Coz W=m@ @'s= wellfare , I am conscernd
for feare he might be in that boate . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.17

To_morrow morning I intend to go to y=e= Adm=ty= and endeavor you may
come into the River , if his R. Highness orders your cleaneing .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,43.18

God Allmighty hath blest y=e= forces of her Maj=ty= and her Allies ,
<P_44> both by land and sea , in a wonderfull manner ; for w=ch= we
lately had a publick day of thanksgiveing in this citty .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.19

The Queene , House of Lords and Comons , w=th= the Bishops , Judges ,
&c. came to S=t= Paul's Church , where , after sermon , Te Deum was
sung . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.20

Since your leaveing England , two of our bord are dead , viz=t=. Mr.
Sotherne and my good freind Com=r= Willshaw , who dyed y=e= 23=d=
Sept=r= last . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.21

My Coz Anna Babb , that was in one of our almes houses at Stepny , is
likewise dead , RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.22

and my poore Coz=n= Lockwood@ @'s son in law , Coz=n= Hodges , dyed
lately at Gosport , since his arrivall from Cadix and Vigo , who waited
a tender on y=e= Duke of Ormond@ @'s shipp . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.23

We are all in good health , praised be God , RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.24

and do kindly salut you . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.25

I am your most afection=t= father , R=d= Haddock .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.26

Pray let me know how yo=r= shipp proves . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.27

I have concerd my selfe to get one of y=e= 4=th= rates building at
Deptfod for you , RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.28

and this day spake to S=r= Geo. Rooke about it , and formerly to y=e=
other 3 Councill of y=e= Lord High Adm=ll= . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.29

I know she is tender by your reifeing your courses ;
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.30

and t@ @was well hinted in yours to y=e= Adm=ty= .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.31

I am glad you past by Plym=o= . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.32

Orders went thither some tyme since to cleane you and severall of yo=r=
consarts . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.33

R=d= H. RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.34

On Her Majesty's Service . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.35

To Capt=n= Richard Haddock , Comand=r= of her Maj=ty= Shipp the Reserve
, these present , In y=e= Downes . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.36

<heading:edcomment:RICHARD_HADDOCK_TO_HIS_SON_RICHARD>

Navy Office , RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.38

this 10=th= Decemb=r= , 1703 . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.39

My deare Son , Your letter of the 17=th= Nov=r= past , giveing me acc=t=
of the unhapy disaster of your ship being run ashore by a Dutch pilot
and of your happy getting off againe , I rec=d= 3 or 4 ds. after its
date ; RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,44.40

but , hopeing <P_45> you might have gote away before an answer could
arrive you , I forbore answering it to you to Helvoet Sluce .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.41

I have just now rec=d= yours of the 7=th= instant , Tuesday , and , to
our great joy , the acc=t= of God Almighty@ @'s wonderfull preservation
of you in the late most dreadfull storm , w=ch= no man liveing can
remember the like . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.42

I perseave you have had an acc=t= of the most sad and lamentable efects
of it heere in England , not only in the losse of our shipping
{COM:preceding_word_"shipping"_emended} , but about 1500 men in the
Queen's shipps . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.43

I shall not eneumerate y=e= perticulars of the losse , only that Capt.
Emes , w=th= his wife and son and all y=e= men in y=e= Restauration ,
lost on y=e= Goodwin , and poore Tom Blake drowned at Bristoll in y=e=
Canterbury store ship cast away . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.44

The Dorcetshire we have acc=t= of her being on y=e= back of Yarm=o=
Sands , cruseing , I supose for want of anchors and cables ,
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.45

and hope y=e= Association is cruseing in the sea on the like occasion .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.46

My deare son Nic=o= hapend to be sick on bord her , as S=r= S.
Fairebone wrote me from the Downes . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.47

I sent Tom Apleby imediatly to Deale to bring him up ;
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.48

but the ship sailed y=e= morning before he gote downe .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.49

I hope he will come well home to us . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.50

Pray God the Russell may be got of y=e= sands and into Helvoet Sluce .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.51

Wee haue 7 or 8 vessells w=th= anchors and cables in Harw=ch= or Oasely
bay , ready to put to sea when we heare where S=r= Stafford is .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.52

S=r= Cloud. Shovell I hope now safe at the Nore ;
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.53

his mainemast cut downe after he had drove 3 leag=s= from y=e= Longs ,
very neare the Galloper . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.54

Y=e= S=t= Geo. and R. Oake , now at Blackstakes , rode out y=e= storme
w=th=out damage ; and the Cambridge I beleive the same .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.55

The 4 ships that broke from their ground takle was the Association ,
Russell , Revenge , and Dorcetshire . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.56

The Revenge was in Solebay some tyme since , and furnish w=th= anchors
and cables from y=e= Nottingham and another man of warr y=t= went out
Yarm=o= roads to looke for our shipps . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,45.57

Capt. Kerr in y=e= Revenge gave acc=t= that he saw <P_46> y=e=
Association , Monday last was sevenight ; so that we are in hope she is
very well . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,46.58

I shall not inlarge , only to give you our kind saluts .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,46.59

Pray God send you w=th= y=e= King of Spaine well out that place and over
to us . RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,46.60

My harty and humble service to S=r= Geo: Rooke .
RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,46.61

I am your most afec=t= father , R. H. RHADDSR-1703-E3-H,46.62

