<BEGIN_roper-1555-e1-h>

<P_29>

Nowe while Sir Thomas Moore was Chauncellour of the Duchy , the sea of
Roome chaunced to be void , <P_30> which was cause of much trouble .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,30.3

For Cardinall Wolsey , a man very ambitious , and desirous <paren> as
good hope and likelyhod he had <$$paren> to aspire vnto that dignity ,
perceaving himself of his expectacion disapointed , by meanes of the
Emperour Chareles {COM:preceding_word_"Chareles"_emended} so highely
comendinge one Cardinall Adrian , sometyme his scholemaster , to the
Cardinalls of Roome , in the tyme of their election , for his vertue and
worthines , that therevppon was he chosen Pope ; who from Spayne , where
he was then resident , cominge on foote to Roome , before his entry into
the Citye , did put of his hosen and showes , barefoote and barlegged
passing throwe the streates towards his pallaice , with such humblenes
that all the people had him in greate reuerence ; Cardinall Wolsey , I
say , waxed so wood therwith , that he studied to invent all waies of
reuengment of his grief against the Emperour ; which , as it was the
begininge of a lamentable tragedye , so some parte <em> of it <$$em> as
not impertinent to my present purpose , I recknid requisite here to put
in remembraunce . ROPER-1555-E1-H,30.4

This Cardinall therefore , not ignorant of the kings inconstante and
mutable disposicion , soone inclined to withdrawe his devotion from his
owne most noble , vertuous , and lawfull wif , Queene Katherine , awnt
to <P_31> th@ @emperour , vppon euery light occasion , and vppon other ,
to her in nobility , wisdome , vertue , favour and bewtye farre
incomparable , to fixx his affection , meaning to make this his so light
disposition an instrument to bring aboute his vngodly intent , devised
to allure the kinge <paren> then alredye , contrary to his mind ,
nothing les lookinge for , fallinge in love with the Ladye Anne Bullen
<$$paren> to cast fantasy to one of the Frenche kings Sisters : which
thing , because of the Enmity and warre that was at that tyme betweene
the French king and the Emperour <paren> whom , for the cause afore
remembred , he mortally maligned <$$paren> he was very
{COM:preceding_word_"very"_emended} desirouse to procure ;
ROPER-1555-E1-H,31.5

And for the better atcheving thereof , requested Langland , Bishoppe of
Lincolne , and ghostly father to the kinge , to put a scruple into <em>
his graces <$$em> head , that itt was not lawfull for him to marry his
brothers wife : which the kinge , not sory to heare of , opened it first
to Sir Thomas Moore , whose councell he required therein , shewing hym
certaine places of scripture that somewhat seemed to serve his appetite
; which , when he had pervsed , and <P_32> thervppon , as one that had
never professed the studye of divinity , himself excused to be vnmeete
many waies to medle with suche matters , ROPER-1555-E1-H,32.6

The king , not satisfied with this awneswer , so sore still pressed
vppon him therefore , that in conclusion he condiscended to his graces
motion . ROPER-1555-E1-H,32.7

And further , forasmuche as the case {COM:preceding_word_"case"_emended}
was of such importaunce as needed great
{COM:preceding_word_"great"_emended} advisement and deliberation , he
besought his grace of sufficient respite advisedly to consider of it .
Wherewith the king , well contented , said vnto him that Tunstall and
Clark , Byshoppes of Dirham and Bathe , with other lerned of his pryvy
Councell , should also be dealers therein . ROPER-1555-E1-H,32.8

So Sir Thomas Moore departing , conferred those places of scripture with
expositions <em> of diuers <$$em> of the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} old holy doctors ;
ROPER-1555-E1-H,32.9

and at his cominge to the courte , in talking with his grace of th@
@afore sayd {COM:preceding_word_"sayd"_emended} matter , he said : " To
be plaine with your grace , neyther my lord of Dyrham nor my lord of
Bathe , thoughe I knowe them both to be wise , vertuous , learned and
honorable prelates , nor my self , with the rest of your councell ,
being all your graces owne seruants , for your manifold benefites <P_33>
dailey bestowed on vs so most bounden to you , be , in my iudgment ,
meete councelors for your grace herin . ROPER-1555-E1-H,33.10

But if your grace mind to vnderstand the truth , suche councellors may
you haue devised , as neither for respecte of their owne worldly
comoditye , nor for feare of your princely aucthority , will be inclined
to deceave you . " ROPER-1555-E1-H,33.11

To whom he named then {COM:preceding_word_"then"_emended} St Hierome ,
St Awsten , and divers other old {COM:preceding_word_"old"_emended} holy
doctors , both greekes and latines ; ROPER-1555-E1-H,33.12

and moreover shewed him what aucthorities he had gathered out of them ;
which , althoughe the kinge <paren> as disagreable with his desire
<$$paren> did not very well like of , yeat were they by Sir Thomas Moore
, who in all his communicacion with the king in that matter had alwaies
most discreetely behaved himself , so wisely tempered , that he bothe
presently tooke them in good parte , and oftetimes had thereof conferens
with him agayne . ROPER-1555-E1-H,33.13

After this were there certaine questions among his councell proponed ,
whether the king needed in this case to have any scruple at all ; and if
he had , what way were best <em> to be taken <$$em> to deliuer him of it
. The most parte of whom were of opinion that there was good <P_34>
cause <em> of scruple <$$em> , and that for discharginge of it , sute
were <em> mete to be <$$em> made to the Sea of Rome , where the king
hoped by liberalty to obtaine his purpose ; wherein as it after appeared
, he was far deceaved . ROPER-1555-E1-H,34.14

Then was there for the triall and examinacion of this matrimony procured
frome Rome a comission , in which Cardinall Campegius and Cardinall
Wolsey were ioyned Comissioners ; who , for the determination thereof ,
sate at the Black Friers in London , where A libell was put in for the
adnullinge of the said matrimony , alleaging the mariage betweene the
king and Queene to be vnlawfull . ROPER-1555-E1-H,34.15

And for proof of the mariage to be lawfull , was there brought in a
dispensation , in which , after divers disputacions theron holden ,
there appeared an imperfection , which , by an instrument or breif ,
vppon search found in the Tresury of Spaine , and sent to the
Comissioners into England , was supplied . ROPER-1555-E1-H,34.16

And so should iudgment haue {COM:preceding_word_"haue"_emended} bine
geuen by the Pope accordingly , had not the king , vppon intelligens
thereof , before the same {COM:preceding_word_"same"_emended} iudgement
, appealed to the next generall councell . After whos appellacion the
cardinall vppon that matter sate no longer . ROPER-1555-E1-H,34.17

It fortuned before the matter of the said matrimony <P_35> brought in
question , when I , in talke with Sir Thomas Moore , of a certaine ioy
comended vnto him the happy estate of this
{COM:preceding_word_"this"_emended} Realme , that had so chatholike a
prince that no heretike durst shewe his face , so vertuous and learned a
clergy , so grave and sound a nobility , and so loving , obedient
subiectes , all in one faithe agreing together : " Troth it is indeed ,
sonne Roper , " quoth he , ROPER-1555-E1-H,35.18

and in comending all degrees and estates of the same went farre beyond
me , ROPER-1555-E1-H,35.19

" And yeat , sonne Roper , I pray god , " said
{COM:preceding_word_"said"_emended} he , " that some of vs , as highe as
we seeme to sitt vppon the mountaynes , treading heretikes vnder our
feete like antes , live not the day that we gladly wold wishe to be at a
league and composition with them , to let them haue their churches
quietly to themselfes , so that they wold be contente to let vs have
ours quietly to our selves . " ROPER-1555-E1-H,35.20

After that I had told him many consideracions why he had no cause so to
say : ROPER-1555-E1-H,35.21

" Well , " said he , " I pray god , sonne Roper , some of vs live not
till that day , " shewing me no reason why he
{COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} should put any doubte therein . To
whom I said : " By my troth , sir , it is very desperately spoken . "
ROPER-1555-E1-H,35.22

That vyle tearme , I cry god mercy , did I geeue him . Who , by thes
<P_36> wordes perceiuinge me in a fvme , said merily vnto me : " Well ,
well , sonne Roper , It shall not be so , ROPER-1555-E1-H,36.23

It shall not be so . " ROPER-1555-E1-H,36.24

Whom , in xvj yeares and more , being in house conuersant with him , I
could neuer perceiue as much as once in a fvme . ROPER-1555-E1-H,36.25

But nowe to retorne againe where I lefte . ROPER-1555-E1-H,36.26

After the supplieng of the Imperfections of the dispensation , sent
<paren> as is <em> before rehersed <$$em> <$$paren> to the Comissioners
into England , the kinge , taking the matter for ended , and then
meaninge {COM:preceding_word_"meaninge"_emended} no farther to proceed
in that matter , assigned the Bishoppe of Durham and Sir Thomas Moore to
goe Embassadors to Cambray , a place neyther Emperiall nor Frenche , to
treate a peace betweene the Emperour , the French king , and him . In
the concluding whereof Sir Thomas Moore so worthily handled himself ,
procuring in our league far more benefites vnto this realme then at that
time by the kinge or his Councell was thought <P_37> possible to be
compassed , that for his good service in that voiage , the kinge , when
he after made him Lord Chauncelour , caused the Duke of Norffolke
openley to declare vnto the people <paren> as you shall heare hereafter
<em> more at large <$$em> <$$paren> howe much all England was bound vnto
him . ROPER-1555-E1-H,37.27

Nowe vppon the coming home of the Byshoppe of Dyrham and Sir Thomas More
from Cameray , the king was as earnest in persuading Sir Thomas Moore to
agree vnto the matter of his mariage as before , by many and divers
waies provoking him thereunto , For the which cause , as it was thought
, he the rather soone after made him Lord Chauncelor ;
ROPER-1555-E1-H,37.28

And further declaring {COM:preceding_word_"declaring"_emended} vnto him
that , thoughe at his goinge ouer Sea to Cameray , he was in vtter
dispaire thereof , yeat he had conceaved since some good hope to
compasse it . ROPER-1555-E1-H,37.29

For albeit his mariage , being against the positive lawes of the churche
and the written Lawes of god , was holpen by the dispensation , yeat was
there another thinge found out of Late , he said , whereby his mariage
appeared to be so directly against the lawe of nature , that it could in
no wise by the church be dispensable ; As Doctor Stokesley <P_38>
<paren> whom he had then preferred to be Byshoppe of London , and in
that case cheifly credited <$$paren> was able to instructe him , with
whom he praied him in that point to conferre . ROPER-1555-E1-H,38.30

But for all his conferens with him , he sawe nothing of such force as
coulde induce him to chaunge his opinion therein : which
notwithstandinge , the Bishoppe shewed himself in his reporte of him to
the kings highnes so good and favorable that he said he found him in his
graces cause very towarde , and desirouse to find some good matter
wherewithe he might truly serve his grace to his contentation .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,38.31

This Bishopp Stokesley , being by the Cardinall not long before in the
Starre Chamber openley put to rebuke and awarded to the Fleete , not
brooking this contumelious vsage , and thincking that Forasmuch as the
Cardinall , for lack of such forwardnes in setting forthe the kings
divorse as his grace looked for , was out of his highnes favour , he had
nowe a good occassion offred him to revenge his quarell against him ,
further to incense the kings displeasure towards him , busily travailed
to invente some collorable devise for the kings furtheraunce in that
<P_39> behalfe ; which <paren> as before is mencioned <$$paren> he to
his grace revealed , hoping thereby to bring the kinge to the better
liking of himself , and the more mislikinge of the Cardinall ; whom his
highnes therefore soone after of his office displaced , and to Sir
Thomas Moore , the rather to move him to incline to his side ,
ROPER-1555-E1-H,39.32

the same in his steede committed . Who , betweene the Dukes of
Norffolke and Suffolk , being brought throwghe Westminster Hall to his
place in the Chancery , The Duke of Norffolke , in Audiens of all the
people there assembled , shewed that he was from the kinge himself
straightly charged , by speciall comission , there openly , in presens
of them all , to make declaration howe much all England was beholdinge
to Sir Thomas Moore for his good service , and howe worthy he was to
haue the highest roome in the realme , and howe dearly his grace loved
and trusted him , for which , said the duke , he had greate cause to
reioyce . Wherunto Sir Thomas Moore , among many other his hvmble and
wise sayengs not nowe in my memory , awneswered , That althoughe he had
good cause to take comforte of his highnes singuler Favour towards him ,
that he had , farre aboue his desertes , so highly comended him , <P_40>
to whom therfore {COM:preceding_word_"therfore"_emended} he acknowledged
himself most deeply bounden ; ROPER-1555-E1-H,40.33

yeat , neuertheles , he must for his owne parte needes confes , that in
all things by his grace alleaged he had done no more then was his duty ;
ROPER-1555-E1-H,40.34

And further disabled himself as vnmeete for that roome , wherein ,
considering howe wise and honourable a prelate had lately before taken
so greate a fall , he had , he said , thereof no cause to reioice .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,40.35

And as they had before {COM:preceding_word_"before"_emended} , on the
kings behalf , charged him vprightly to minister indifferent iustice to
the people , without corruption or affection , So did he likewise charge
them againe , that if they sawe him , at any time , in any thinge ,
digresse from any parte of his duty in that honorable office , euen as
they wold discharge theyr owne duty and fidelitye to god and the kinge ,
so should they not faile <em> to disclose it <$$em> to his grace , who
otherwise might haue iust occasion to lay his fault wholy to their
Charge . ROPER-1555-E1-H,40.36

While he was Lorde Chauncelor , being at leisure <paren> as seldome he
was <$$paren> one of his sonnes in Lawe <em> on a tyme <$$em> said
merily vnto him : " When Cardinall Wolsey was lord Chauncelour , not
only divers of his privye Chamber , but such also as were his
doorekeepers gatt greate gayne . " ROPER-1555-E1-H,40.37

<P_41>

And since he had maried one of his daughters , and gaue still
attendaunce vppon him , he thought he mighte of reason looke for some ;
where he indeed , because he was so {COM:preceding_word_"so"_emended}
redy himself to heare euery man , poore and riche , and kepte no doores
shut from them , could find none ; which was to him a great discourage .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,41.39

And wheras els , some for freindshippe , some for kinred , and some for
profitte , wold gladly haue had {COM:preceding_word_"had"_emended} his
furtheraunce in bringing them to his presens , If he should nowe take
any thinge of them , he knewe , he said , he should do them greate
wronge , For that they might do as muche for them selfes as he could do
for them : Which condicion , althoughe he thought in Sir Thomas Moore
very comendable , yeat to him , said he , being his sonne , he found it
nothing profitable . ROPER-1555-E1-H,41.40

When he had told him this tale : " You saie well , sonne , " quoth he ;
ROPER-1555-E1-H,41.41

" I do not mislike that you are of conscience so scrupulous ,
ROPER-1555-E1-H,41.42

but many other waies be there , <P_42> sonne , that I may both do your
self good , and pleasure your freind also . ROPER-1555-E1-H,42.43

For sometyme may I by my word stand your Frend in steede ,
ROPER-1555-E1-H,42.44

and sometime may I by my letter helpe him ; ROPER-1555-E1-H,42.45

or if he haue a cause depending before me , at your request I may heare
him before another . ROPER-1555-E1-H,42.46

Or if his cause be not all the best , yeat may I moue the parties to
fall to some reasonable end by arbitrement . ROPER-1555-E1-H,42.47

Howbeit , this one thing , sonne , I assure thee on my faith , that if
the parties will at my handes call for iustice , then , al were it my
father stood on the one side , and the Divill on the t@ @other , his
cause being good , the Divill should haue right . "
ROPER-1555-E1-H,42.48

So offred he his sonne , as he thoughte , he said , as much favour as
with reason he coulde require . ROPER-1555-E1-H,42.49

And that he wold for no respecte digresse from iustice , well appered by
a pleine example of another of his sonnes in lawe called master Heron .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,42.50

For when he , having a matter before him in the Chauncery , and
presuminge to much of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} his favour ,
wold by him in no wise be perswaded to agre to anye indifferent <P_43>
order , then made he in conclusion a flatt decre against him .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,43.51

This Lord Chauncelour vsed comonly euery after_noone to sitt in his open
haule , to th@ @entent that {COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} , if any
persons had any suite vnto him , they might the more boldly come to his
presens , and there open their complaintes before him ; whose manner was
also to reade euery bill himself , ere he wold award any sub pena ;
which bearing matter sufficient
{COM:preceding_word_"sufficient"_emended} worthy a sub pena , wold he
sett his hand vnto , or els cancell it . ROPER-1555-E1-H,43.52

Whensoeuer he passed throughe westminster hall to his place in the
Chauncery by the courte of the kinges Benche , if his father , one of
the Judges thereof {COM:preceding_word_"thereof"_emended} , had bine
sate ere he came , he wold goe into the same courte , and there
reuerently kneeling downe in the sight of them all , duly aske his
fathers blessinge . ROPER-1555-E1-H,43.53

And if it fortuned that his father and he , at readings in Lincolnes
Inne , mett together , as they sometime did , notwithstanding his highe
office , he wold offer in argument the prehemynens to his father ,
thoughe he , for his office sake , wold refuse to take it .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,43.54

And for the better declaration of his naturall affection towards his
father , he not <P_44> only , while he lay on
{COM:preceding_word_"on"_emended} his death bedd , <em> accordinge to
his dutie <$$em> , ofte times with comfortable wordes most kindly came
to visite him , ROPER-1555-E1-H,44.55

But also at his departure out of the world , with teares taking him
about the necke , most lovingly kissed and imbraced him , commending him
into the mercifull handes of almighty god , ROPER-1555-E1-H,44.56

and so departed from him . ROPER-1555-E1-H,44.57

<P_82>

When Sir Thomas Moore had continued a good while in the Tower , my Lady
, his wife , obtayned lycens to see him ; who , at her first cominge ,
like a simple ignorant woman , and somewhat worldly too , with this
manner of salutacion bluntlye saluted him : ROPER-1555-E1-H,82.59

" What the good yere , master Moore , " quoth she ,
ROPER-1555-E1-H,82.60

" I mervaile that you , that have bine alwaies hitherto taken for so
wise a man , will nowe so play the foole to lye heare in this close ,
filthy prison , and be content thus to be shut vpp amongst mise and
rattes , when you might be abroade at your libertye , and with the
favour and good will both of the kinge and his Councell , If yow wold
but doe as all the Byshops and best learned of this realme haue
{COM:preceding_word_"haue"_emended} done . ROPER-1555-E1-H,82.61

And seinge you have at Chelsey a <P_83> right faire house , your library
, your bookes , your gallery , your garden , your orchard , and all
other necessaries so handsome aboute you , where you might in the
company of me your wife , your {COM:preceding_word_"your"_emended}
children , and howshold be meerye , I muse what a gods name you meane
heare still thus fondly to tarye . " ROPER-1555-E1-H,83.62

After he had a while quietly heard her , with a chearefull countenaunce
he said vnto her : " I pray thee , good mistris Alice , tell me one
thinge . " ROPER-1555-E1-H,83.63

" What is that ? " quoth shee . ROPER-1555-E1-H,83.64

" Is not this house , " quoth he , " as nighe heauen as my owne ? " To
whom shee , after hir accustomed homely fashion , not liking such talke
, awneswered , " Tylle valle , Tylle valle ! " ROPER-1555-E1-H,83.65

" Howe say you , mistris Alice , " quoth he , ROPER-1555-E1-H,83.66

" is itt not so ? " ROPER-1555-E1-H,83.67

" Bone deus , bone deus , man {COM:preceding_word_"man"_emended} , will
this geare neuer be lefte ? " quoth shee . ROPER-1555-E1-H,83.68

" Well then , mistris Ales , if it be so , " <em> quoth he <$$em> , " it
is very well . ROPER-1555-E1-H,83.69

For I see no greate cause why I should much Ioye either
{COM:preceding_word_"either"_emended} of my gay house or of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} any thinge belonginge therunto ; when
, if I should but seuen yeares lye buried vnder the ground , and then
arise and come thither {COM:preceding_word_"thither"_emended} againe , I
should not faile to find some therein <P_84> that wold bid me get me
{COM:preceding_word_"me"_emended} out of doores , and tell me it were
none of mine . ROPER-1555-E1-H,84.70

What cause haue I then to like such an house as wold so soone forgett
his master ? " ROPER-1555-E1-H,84.71

So her perswasions moved him but a litle . ROPER-1555-E1-H,84.72

Not longe after came there to him the Lord Chauncelour , the dukes of
Norfolke and Suffolk , with master Secretory and certaine other of the
privy Counsaile , at two seuerall times , by all pollicies possible
procuringe him , eyther precisely to confesse the supremacy , or
precisely to denye it ; wherunto , as appeareth by his examinations
{COM:preceding_word_"examinations"_emended} in the said great book ,
they could neuer bringe him . ROPER-1555-E1-H,84.73

Shortlye herevppon , master Riche , afterwardes Lord Riche , then newlye
made the kings Solicitor , Sir Richard Sowthwell , and one master Palmer
, servaunt to the Secretory , were sent to Sir Thomas Moore into the
Tower , to fetche away his bookes from him . ROPER-1555-E1-H,84.74

And while Sir Richard Southwell and master Palmer were busye in the
trussing vppe of his bookes , master Rich , pretending freindly talke
with him , amonge other things , of a sett cours , as it seemed , saide
thus vnto him : ROPER-1555-E1-H,84.75

<P_85>

" Forasmuch as it is well knowen , master Moore , that you are a man
bothe wise and well learned as@ @well in the lawes of the realme as
otherwise , I pray you therefore , Sir , lett me be so bold as of good
will to putte vnto you this case . ROPER-1555-E1-H,85.77

Admitt there were , Sir , " quoth he , " an acte of parliament that all
the Realme should take me for kinge . ROPER-1555-E1-H,85.78

Wold not you , master Moore , take me for kinge ? "
ROPER-1555-E1-H,85.79

" Yes , sir , " quoth Sir Thomas Moore , " that wold I . "
ROPER-1555-E1-H,85.80

" I put case further , " quoth master Riche , " that there were an acte
of parliament that all the Realme should take me for Pope .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,85.81

Wold not you then , master Moore , take me for Pope ? "
ROPER-1555-E1-H,85.82

" For awneswer , Sir {COM:preceding_word_"Sir"_emended} , " quoth Sir
Thomas Moore , " to your firste case : the parliament may well , master
Riche , medle with the state of temporall princes .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,85.83

But to make awneswer to your other case , I will put you this case :
ROPER-1555-E1-H,85.84

Suppose the parliament wold make a lawe that god shold not be god .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,85.85

Wold you then , master Riche , say that god were not god ? "
ROPER-1555-E1-H,85.86

<P_86>

" No , Sir , " quoth he , " that wold I not , sith no parliament maye
make any such lawe . " ROPER-1555-E1-H,86.88

" No more , " said Sir Thomas Moore , as master Riche reported of him ,
" could the parliament make the kinge Supreame head of the churche . "
Vppon whose onlye reporte was Sir Thomas Moore indicted of treason vppon
the statute wherby {COM:preceding_word_"wherby"_emended} it was made
treason to denye the kinge to be supreame head of the churche . Into
which indictment were putt thes haynouse wordes - " Maliciously ,
trayterouslye , and Diabolically " . ROPER-1555-E1-H,86.89

When Sir Thomas Moore was brought from the tower to westminster hall to
awneswer the Indictment , and at the kings bench barre before the Iudges
thervppon arraigned , he openly told them that he wold vppon that
indictment haue abidden in lawe , but that he therby shoulde haue bine
driven to confesse of himself the matter indeede , that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} was the deniall of the kings
supremacye , which he protested was vntrue . Wherefore he therto
pleaded not giltye ; ROPER-1555-E1-H,86.90

and so reserved vnto himself advantage to be taken of the body of the
matter , after verdicte , to avoid that Indictment ;
ROPER-1555-E1-H,86.91

And moreouer added that {COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} if thos only
odious tearmes , " Maliciously , traiterouslye , and diabolicallye , "
were put out of the <P_87> Indictment , he sawe therein nothinge iustlye
to charge him . ROPER-1555-E1-H,87.92

And for proof to the Jury that Sir Thomas Moore was guilty of this
treason , master Rich was called forth to giue evidence vnto them vppon
his oath , as he did . Against whom thus
{COM:preceding_word_"thus"_emended} sworne , Sir Thomas Moore began in
this wise to say : " If I were a man , my lordes , that did not regarde
an othe , I needed {COM:preceding_word_"needed"_emended} not , as it is
well knowen , in this place , at this tyme , nor in this case , to stand
here {COM:preceding_word_"here"_emended} as an accused person .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,87.93

And if this othe {COM:preceding_word_"othe"_emended} of yours , master
Riche , be true , then pray I that I neuer see god in the face ; which I
wold not say , were it otherwise , to winne the whole world . "
ROPER-1555-E1-H,87.94

Then recited {COM:preceding_word_"recited"_emended} he to the courte the
discourse of all theyr communicacion in the Tower , accordinge to the
truthe , ROPER-1555-E1-H,87.95

and said : " In good faithe , master Riche , I am soryer
{COM:preceding_word_"soryer"_emended} for your periurye then for my owne
perill . ROPER-1555-E1-H,87.96

And yow shall vnderstand that neyther I , nor no man els to my knowledge
, ever tooke you to be a man of such creditt as in any matter of
importaunce I , or any other , would at anye tyme vouchsaf to
communicate with you . ROPER-1555-E1-H,87.97

And I , as <P_88> you knowe , of no small while haue bine acquainted
with yow and your conuersacion , who haue knowen you from your youth
hitherto ; ROPER-1555-E1-H,88.98

For we longe dwelled both in one parishe together , where , as your self
can tell <paren> I am sory you compell me so to say <$$paren> you were
esteemed very light of your tongue , A greate dicer , and of no
comendable fame . ROPER-1555-E1-H,88.99

And so in your house at the temple , wheare hath bine your cheif
bringing vppe , were you likewise accompted . ROPER-1555-E1-H,88.100

" Can it therefore seeme likely vnto your honorable Lordshipps that I
wold , in so weyghty a cause , so vnadvisedlye overshootte my self as to
trust master Rich , a man of me alwaies reputed for one of so litle
truth , as your lordshipps haue heard , So farre aboue my soueraigne
Lord the kinge , or any of his noble Councellours , that I wold vnto him
vtter the secreates of my consciens towchinge the kings supremacye , The
speciall pointe and only marke at my handes so longe sought for : A
thinge which I neuer did , nor neuer wold , after the statute thereof
made , reveale either to the kings highnes himself , or to any of his
honorable councellours {COM:preceding_word_"councellours"_emended} , as
it is not vnknowne to your honors , at sundry seuerall times sent from
his graces owne person vnto the <P_89> Tower vnto me for none other
purpose ? ROPER-1555-E1-H,89.101

Can this in your iudgments , my lordes , seeme likely to be true ?
ROPER-1555-E1-H,89.102

And yet {COM:preceding_word_"yet"_emended} , if I
{COM:preceding_word_"I"_emended} had so done
{COM:preceding_word_"done"_emended} indeed , my lords , as master Rich
hath sworne , seing it was spoken but in Familiar secreate talk ,
nothing affirminge , and only in puttinge of cases , without other
displeasaunt circumstances , it can@ @not iustly be taken to be spoken
maliciouslye ; ROPER-1555-E1-H,89.103

And where there is no malice , there can be no offence .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,89.104

And ouer this I can never thincke , my lordes , that so many worthye
{COM:preceding_word_"worthye"_emended} Bishoppes , so many honorable
parsonages , and so {COM:preceding_word_"so"_emended} many other
worshippfull , vertuous , wise and well learned men as att the makinge
of that lawe were in the Parliament assembled , ever ment to haue any
man pvnished by death in whom there coulde be found no malice , taking '
malitia ' for {COM:preceding_word_"for"_emended} ' maleuolentia ' ;
ROPER-1555-E1-H,89.105

For if ' malicia ' be generally taken for ' sinne ' , no man is there
then that can thereof excuse himself : ROPER-1555-E1-H,89.106

Quia si dixerimus quod peccatum non habemus , nosmet ipsos seducimus ,
et veritas in nobis non est . ROPER-1555-E1-H,89.107

And only this word ' maliciously ' is in the statute <P_90> materiall ,
as this terme ' forcible ' is in the statute of forcible entries ; By
which statute , if a man enter peaceably , and put not his aduersary out
forcibly , it is no offence . ROPER-1555-E1-H,90.108

But if he put him out forcibly , then by that statute it is an offence ,
ROPER-1555-E1-H,90.109

and so shall he be punished by this tearme ' forcibly ' .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,90.110

" Besides this , the manifold goodnes of the kings highnes himself ,
that hath bine so many waies my singuler good Lord and gracious
soueraigne , that hath so deerely loved and trusted me , even att my
very {COM:preceding_word_"very"_emended} first cominge into his noble
service with the dignity of his honourable pryvy Councell vouchsafing to
admit me , and to offices of greate creditt and worshippe most liberally
advanced me , and finally with that waighty Roome of his graces highe
Chauncelour <paren> the like whereof he neuer did to temporall man
before <$$paren> next to his owne roiall person the highest officer in
this noble realme , so farr aboue my merittes or qualities able and
meete therefore , of his incomparable benignity honoured and exalted me
, by the space of XX=ti= yeares and more shewing his continewall favour
towards me , And <paren> vntill at my owne poore suite , it pleased his
highnes , geving me licens , with <P_91> his maiesties favour , to
bestowe the residue of my life for the provision of my soule in the
service of god , of his especiall goodnes thereof to discharg and
vnburthen me <$$paren> most beningly heaped honours continually more and
more vppon me : ROPER-1555-E1-H,91.111

All this his highnes goodnes , I say , <em> so long <$$em> thus
bountifully extended towards me , were in my minde , my Lordes , matter
sufficient to convince this sclaunderous surmise by this man so
wrongfully imagined against me . " ROPER-1555-E1-H,91.112

Master Rich , seing himself so disproved , and his credit so fowlye
defaced , cawsed Sir Richard Southwell and master Palmer , that at the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} time of their communicacion were in
the chamber , to be sworne what wordes had passed betweene them .
Wheruppon master Palmer , vppon his deposition , said that he was so
buysye about the trussinge vppe of Sir Thomas Moores bookes in a sack ,
that he tooke no head to their talke . ROPER-1555-E1-H,91.113

Sir Richard Southwell likewise , vppon his deposition , said that
because he was apointed only to looke vnto the conveyaunce of his bookes
, he gaue no eare vnto them . ROPER-1555-E1-H,91.114

After this were there many other Reasons , not nowe <P_92> in my
remembraunce , by Sir Thomas Moore in his owne defens alleaged , to the
discredit of master Riches aforesaid evidence , and proof of the
cleerenes of his owne consciens . All whiche notwithstandinge , the
Jury found him guilty . ROPER-1555-E1-H,92.115

And incontinent vppon their {COM:preceding_word_"their"_emended}
verdicte , the Lord Chauncelour , for that matter cheif Comissioner ,
begininge <em> to proceede <$$em> in iudgment against him , Sir Thomas
Moore said to him : " My Lord , when I was toward the Lawe , the manner
in such case was to aske the prisoner before Iudgment why Iudgment
should not be geuen agaynste him . " Wherevppon the lord Chauncelour ,
stayeng his Iudgment , wherein he had partely proceeded , demaunded of
him what he was able to say to the contrary . Who then in this sorte
moste humbly made awneswer : ROPER-1555-E1-H,92.116

" Forasmuch as , my Lorde , " quoth he , " this Indictment is grounded
vppon an acte of parliamente directly repugnant to the lawes of god and
his holy churche , the supreeme gouernment
{COM:preceding_word_"gouernment"_emended} of which , or of any parte
whereof , may no temporall prince presume by any lawe to take vppon him
, as rightfully belonging to the Sea of Roome , a spirituall
preheminence by the mouth of our Sauiour hymself , personally present
vppon the earth , only {COM:preceding_word_"only"_emended} to St Peeter
and his successors , Byshopps of the same Sea , <P_93> by speciall
prerogative graunted ; It is therefore in lawe amongest Christen men
insufficient to charge any Christen man . " ROPER-1555-E1-H,93.117

And for proofe thereof , like as , amonge diuers
{COM:preceding_word_"diuers"_emended} other reasons and aucthorities ,
he declared that this Realme , being but one member and smale
{COM:preceding_word_"smale"_emended} parte of the Church , might not
make a particuler lawe disagreable with the generall lawe of Christes
vniuersall Catholike Churche , No more then the city of London , beinge
but one poore member in respecte of the whole realme , might make a lawe
against an acte of parliament to bind the whole realme ;
ROPER-1555-E1-H,93.118

So farther shewed he that it was contrary both to the lawes and statutes
of our owne Land yeat vnrepealed , As they might evidently perceaue in
Magna charta : Quod ecclesia Anglicana libera sit , et habeat omnia iura
sua integra et libertates suas illaesas ; And also contrarye to that
sacred oath which the kinges highnes himself and euery other christian
prince alwaies with greate solemnitye receaved at their Coronations ;
Alleaginge moreover that no more might this realme of England refuse
obediens to the Sea of Roome then might the child refuse obediens to his
<P_94> owne {COM:preceding_word_"owne"_emended} naturall father .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,94.119

For , as St Pawle said of the Corinthians : " I haue regenerated you ,
my children in Christ , " So might St Gregorye , Pope of Roome , of whom
, by St Austyne , his messenger , we first receaved the Christian faithe
, of vs Englishmen truly saye : " Yow are my children , because I haue
geuen to you euerlasting salvacion , a farr <em> higher and <$$em>
better inheritaunce then any carnall father can leaue to his child , and
by regeneration {COM:preceding_word_"regeneration"_emended} made you my
spirituall children in Christe . " ROPER-1555-E1-H,94.120

Then was it by the Lorde Chauncelour therunto awneswered , that seinge
all the Byshoppes , Vniuersities and best learned of this
{COM:preceding_word_"this"_emended} Realme had to this acte agreed , It
was muche mervayled that he alone against them all would so stiffly
stick therat {COM:preceding_word_"therat"_emended} , and so vehemently
argue there against . ROPER-1555-E1-H,94.121

To that Sir Thomas Moore replied , sayenge : " If the number of
Bishoppes and vniuersytyes be so materiall as your lordeshippe seemethe
to take it , Then se I litle cause , my lorde , why that thing in my
consciens should make any chainge . ROPER-1555-E1-H,94.122

For I nothinge doubte but that , thoughe not in this realme , yeat in
Christendome aboute , of thes well lerned Bishoppes and vertuous men
that <P_95> are yeat alive , they be not the fewer parte that be of my
mind therein . ROPER-1555-E1-H,95.123

But if I should speake of those whiche already be dead , of whom many be
nowe holy sainctes in heaven , I am very sure it is the farre greater
parte of them that , all the while they
{COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} lived , thoughte in this case that
waye that I thinck nowe . ROPER-1555-E1-H,95.124

And therefore am I not bounde , my lord , to conforme my consciens to
the Councell of one Realme against the generall Councell of Christendome
. " ROPER-1555-E1-H,95.125

Nowe when Sir Thomas Moore , for th@ @avoydinge of the Indictment , had
taken as many exceptions as he thought meete , and many
{COM:preceding_word_"many"_emended} moe reasons then I can nowe remember
alleaged , The Lord Chauncelour , loth to haue the burthen of that
Iudgmente wholye to depend vppon himself , there openlye asked th@
@advise of the Lord Fitz James , then Lord Cheif Justice of the kings
Bench , and ioyned in Comission with him , whether this indictment were
sufficient or not . Who , like a wise man , awneswered : " My lords all
, By St Julian " <paren> that was euer his oath <$$paren> , " I must
needes confes that if th@ @acte of parliament be not vnlawfull , then is
not the Indictment in my conscience insufficient .
ROPER-1555-E1-H,95.126

