<BEGIN_roxinden-1626-e2-h>

<P_26>

<heading:edcomment:XX_RICHARD_OXINDEN_TO_HIS_SON_HENRY>

I have sent v@ @=ll= at this time unto you which I thinke will be
sufficient to discharge all your expence . ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.4

You write unto mee that you doe intende to come downe presently , and
that your tutor will come downe with you , whome I should bee very glad
to see heare , ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.5

and I will have you to tell him from me that if it please him to take
<em> the paynes <$$em> to come to us , he shall be as hartely wellcome
as any frend we have livinge . ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.6

I had thought to have written unto him aboute it ,
ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.7

but finding myself an ill scribe I have left it undonne , hopinge that
you have soe carried youre selfe towards him ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.8

but you can persuade more with him than my letter could .
ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.9

I shall expect youre comminge according to youre writinge .
ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.10

You may very easily come down in too dayes . ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.11

Youre best way is to come from London to Gravesend by water ,
ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.12

and from Gravesend you may easily come to my house in halfe a day .
ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.13

Thus wishing you to remember me unto your tutor and the rest of our
frends , I leave you to the protection of the Almightie ,
ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.14

Your lovinge father Richard Oxinden <font> ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.15

From Barham ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.16

this 14th of June 1626 <$$font> ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.17

To my very lovinge sonne , Mr. Henry Oxinden , at Corpus Christi
Collidge in Oxfoord , give this . ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,26.18

<P_29>

<heading:edcomment:XXIII_RICHARD_OXINDEN_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN_AT_OXFORD>

Sonne , I am very sorry to heare that you are sicke
ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,29.21

but I trust God {COM:preceding_word_"God"_emended} that he will restore
you to {COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} your former health ,
ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,29.22

how <P_30> soe ever I most {COM:preceding_word_"most"_emended} earnestly
desire that you will take the visitation patiently , submitting youre
will to his that hath sent it . ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,30.23

I do {COM:preceding_word_"do"_emended} assure you that it shall be the
greatest comfort unto me that may be to heare that you doe patiently and
cheerefully undergoe this that God hath layd upone you .
ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,30.24

Sonne , I woold with all my heart have come unto you , if I did thinke I
could have donne you any good , ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,30.25

but I am well assured that youre tutor will doe as much for you as I
could if I weare with you . ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,30.26

I have sent unto you Goodman Cooper , one hoome I thinke you will well
like of , ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,30.27

and when he doth returne , if that you doe desire that I should then
come unto you , I will doe it with all possible speed .
ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,30.28

I have sent some money unto you by him , ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,30.29

and your grandmother hath sent you a token , ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,30.30

and your mother hath sent you another , ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,30.31

and wee all do ioyne in prayer to God that it will please him to send
you youre health agayne . ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,30.32

Soe in hast I rest Youer ever loveinge father Richard Oxinden <font>
From Barham this 7th of July 1627 <$$font> ROXINDEN-1626-E2-H,30.33

