<BEGIN_rplumpt-1536-e1-h>

<P_231>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_X>

To his mother at Plompton be this letter delivered .
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,231.4

Right worshipful mother , I humbly recommend mee unto you , desiring you
of your dayly blessing , praing <font> Jesu <$$font> long to continew
your helth to his pleasur . RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,231.5

Mother , I thanke you for the ..... you send mee ,
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,231.6

for yf you were not , I were not able to live ; RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,231.7

for this same Christmasse hath cost mee as much as you send mee .
Wherfore , I am afraid I shal not have money to serve mee to Easter .
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,231.8

Also I wold desire you to send mee word of the letter that I wrote to my
father and you , for to moove my Lady Gascoin to write to <P_232> my
lord , her brother , not to bee only his servant , but of his houshold
and attending unto him ; RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,232.9

for els he wold do as other lords do , knowes not half their servants .
Wherfor , I desire you that you wil moove my lady Gascoin to write so to
my lord , that I may bee his houshold servant .
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,232.10

Also , mother , I wold desire you to mark wel my letter , that I sent
you by Mr. Oughtred ; RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,232.11

and here I send you a godly New Testament by this bearer .
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,232.12

And yf the prologue bee so small that ye can@ @not wel reade them , ther
is my fathers book , RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,232.13

and they are bothe one , RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,232.14

and my fathers book hath the prologue printed in bigger letters .
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,232.15

Yf it wil please you to read the introducement , ye shal see marvelous
things hyd in it . RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,232.16

And as for the understanding of it , dout not ; RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,232.17

for God wil give knowledge to whom he will give knowledg of the
Scriptures , as soon to a shepperd as to a priest , yf he ask knowledg
of God faithfully . Wherfor , pray to God , and desire Jesus Christ to
pray for you and with you . RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,232.18

No more to you at this tyme , RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,232.19

but God fill you <P_233> with al spiritual knowledge , to the glory of
God , the helth of your soule , and the profit of your poor nieghbor .
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,233.20

Written at the Temple , the 12 day of ianuary .
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,233.21

By your sonn , Robert Plompton . RPLUMPT-1536-E1-H,233.22

<heading:edcomment:anno_circa_1536>

