<BEGIN_smith-1591-e2-h>

<P_B1V>

I haue spoken of Briberie and Simonie , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B1V.3

and now I must speake of their sister Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B1V.4

Manie times haue I thought to speake of this Theame ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B1V.5

but the argume~ts which are alleaged for it , haue made mee doubtfull
what to say in it , because it hath gone as it were vnder a protection .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B1V.6

At last you see it falleth into my text , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B1V.7

and therefore now I can@ @not bauke it any longer .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B1V.8

Therefore if any heere haue fauoured this occupation before , let him
now submit his <P_B2R> thoughts vnto Gods thoughts ;
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2R.9

for I will alleage nothing against it , but that which is built vppon
the rocke . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2R.10

Vsurie is the sin which God wil trie now whether you loue better than
his worde : that is , whether you will leaue it if he forbid it :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2R.11

for if hee flatly forbid it , and yet you wilfully retaine it , then you
loue Vsurie better than Gods worde . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2R.12

Therefore one saith well that our Vsurers are Hereticks , because after
manie admonitions , yet they maintaine their errour , and persist in it
obstinatly as Papists doo in Poperie . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2R.13

For this cause I am glad that I haue any occasion to griple with this
sin , where it hath made so many spoyles , & where it hath so many
patrons : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2R.14

for it is said that there be moe of this profession in this Citie , than
there bee in all the <P_B2V> land beside . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2V.15

There be certaine sins which are like an vnreasonable enemie which will
not be reconciled to death , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2V.16

and this is one of those euerlasting sins which liue and die with a man
. SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2V.17

For when he hath resigned his pride and his enuie and his lust , yet
Vsurie remaineth with him , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2V.18

& he saith as <font> Naaman <$$font> said , <font> Let the Lord bee
mercifull vnto me in this <$$font> : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2V.19

let me haue a dispensation for this , as though this were a necessarie
sinne , and hee could not liue without it . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2V.20

There be three sinnes which are counted no sinnes ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2V.21

and yet they doo more hurt than all their fellows ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2V.22

& those are Briberie , Nonresidencie , and Vsurie :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2V.23

these three because they are gainful are turned from sinnes to
occupatio~s . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B2V.24

How many of this Citie for all that they are Vsurers , yet would be
counted honest me~ , <P_B3R> and would faine haue Vsurie esteemed as a
trade : whereas if it were not so gainfull , it would bee counted as
great a sinne as any other , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.25

and so it is counted of all but them which liue by it .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.26

This is the nature of pleasure and profite to make sinnes seeme no
sinnes , if we gaine anything by them , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.27

but the more gainfull a sinne is , the more daungerous it is ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.28

and the more gainfull Vsurie is , the more daungerous it is .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.29

I will speake the more of it , because happely you shall not heare of
this matter againe . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.30

First I will define what Vsurie is , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.31

then I wil shew you what Vsurie doth signifie : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.32

then I will shewe the vnlawfulnes of it : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.33

then I will shewe the kindes of it : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.34

then I will shewe the arguments which are alleaged for it :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.35

then I will shewe the punishment of it : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3R.36

then I will <P_B3V> shewe you what opinion wee should holde of them
which doo not lend vpon Vsurie , but borrow vpon Vsurie .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3V.37

Lastly , I will shewe you what they should doo which haue got their
riches by Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3V.38

Touching the first , Vsurie is that gaine which is gotten by lending ,
for the vse of the thing which a man lendeth , couenanting before with
the borrower to receaue more tha~ was borrowed : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3V.39

and therefore one calls the Vsurer a legall theefe , because before hee
steale , he tels the partie how much hee will steale , as though hee
stole by law . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3V.40

This word <font> more <$$font> , comes in like a sixt finger , which
makes a monster , because it is more than should be .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3V.41

Another defining Vsurie , calleth it the <font> Contrarie to Charitie
<$$font> : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3V.42

for <font> Paule <$$font> saith , <font> Loue seeketh not her owne
<$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B3V.43

but Vsurie seeketh an <P_B4R> others which is not her owne :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4R.44

therfore Vsurie is farre from loue , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4R.45

but <font> God is Loue <$$font> , saith <font> Iohn <$$font> ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4R.46

therefore Vsurie is farre from God too . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4R.47

Now , al the Commandements of God are fulfilled by loue , which Christ
noteth when hee draweth all the Commandements to one Commandement ,
which is , <font> Loue God aboue all things , and thy neighbour as thy
selfe <$$font> : as if hee should say , hee which loueth God , will
keepe all the Commaundements which respect God , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4R.48

and he which loueth his neighbour will keepe all the Commaundements
which respect his neighbour : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4R.49

therefore to maintaine loue , God forbiddeth all things which hinder
this loue : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4R.50

and among the rest here hee forbiddeth Vsurie , as one of her deadliest
enemies : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4R.51

for a man can not loue and be an Vsurer , because <P_B4V> Vsurie is a
kinde of crueltie , and a kinde of extortion , and a kinde of
persecution , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4V.52

and therfore the want of loue doth make Vsurers : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4V.53

for if there were loue there would bee no Vsurie , no deceit , no
extortion , no slaundering , no reuenging , no oppression ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4V.54

but wee should liue in peace and ioye and contentment like the Angels ;
whereby you see that all our sinnes are against our selues :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4V.55

for if there were no deceit , then we should not bee deceiued :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4V.56

if there were no slander , then wee should not bee slandered :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4V.57

if there were no enuie , then wee should not bee enuied :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4V.58

if there were no extortion , then we should not bee iniuried :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4V.59

if there were no Vsurie then we should not bee oppressed .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4V.60

Therfore Gods law had been better for vs than our owne lawe :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B4V.61

for if his law did stand , the~ we should <P_B5R> not be deceiued , nor
slandered , nor enuied , nor iniured , nor oppressed .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5R.62

God hath commanded euery ma~ to lend freely , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5R.63

& who would not borrowe freely ? SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5R.64

Therefore they which brought in vsurie , brought in a lawe against
themselues . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5R.65

The first Vsurers which wee reade of , were the <font> Iewes <$$font> ,
which were forbidden to be Vsurers , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5R.66

yet for want of faith and loue , <font> Ezekiel & Nehemiah <$$font> doth
shewe how the <font> Iewes <$$font> , euen the <font> Iewes <$$font>
which receiued this lawe from God himselfe , did swarue from it as they
did from the rest . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5R.67

First , they did lend vppon Vsurie to straungers ;
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5R.68

after they began to lend vppon Vsurie to their brethren ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5R.69

and now there be no such Vsurers vppon earth as the <font> Iewes
<$$font> which were forbidden to be Vsurers . Wherby you may see how
the malice of man hath <P_B5V> turned mercie into crueltie .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5V.70

For whereas lending was commaunded for the benefite of men , Vsurie hath
turned it to the vndoing of men : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5V.71

for they take when they seeme to giue ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5V.72

they hurt when they seeme to helpe ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5V.73

they damage when they seeme to vauntage : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5V.74

therefore it is well noted that Vsurie hath her name of byting ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5V.75

and she may well signifie byting ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5V.76

for many haue not onely been bitten by it , but deuoured by it , that is
, consumed all that they haue : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5V.77

therfore as the Apostle saith , <font> If you bite one another , take
heede you be not deuoured one of another <$$font> :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5V.78

so I may say if you be Vsurers one to another , take heede you bee not
deuoured one of another , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5V.79

for Vsurers are biters . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B5V.80

As the name of the Diuell doth declare what an enemie he is ; so the
name of Vsurie dooth declare <P_B6R> what an enemie she is .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6R.81

That you may knowe Vsurie for a byter , her name doth signifie byting .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6R.82

If there were one byting Vsurie , and another healing Vsurie , then
Vsurie should haue two names ; one of byting , and another of healing :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6R.83

but all Vsurie signifieth byting , to shewe that al Vsurie is vnlawfull
. SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6R.84

Now , you haue heard what Vsurie is , and of what it is deriued , you
shall heare the vnlawfulnes of it . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6R.85

First , it is against the law of charitie , because charitie biddeth vs
to giue euery man his owne , and to require no more than our own ;
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6R.86

but Vsurie requireth more than her owne , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6R.87

and giues not to other their owne . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6R.88

Charitie reioyceth to communicate her goods to other ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6R.89

and Vsurie reioyceth to gather other mens goods to her selfe .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6R.90

<P_B6V>

Secondly , it is against the lawe of Natio~s ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.92

for euerie Nation hath some lawe against Vsurie , and some restraint
against Vsurers , as you shall heare when wee speake of the punishment .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.93

Thirdly , as it is against the law of Nations , so it is against the law
of Nature , that is , the naturall compassion which should bee among men
. SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.94

You see a riuer when it goeth by an emptie place ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.95

it will not passe vntill it hath filled that emptie place ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.96

& then it goeth forward to another emptie place SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.97

and filleth it , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.98

and so to another emptie place SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.99

and filleth it , alwaies filling the places which are emptie :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.100

so should wee , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.101

the rich should fill the poore , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.102

the ful should fill the hungrie , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.103

they which abound should fill them which want , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.104

for the rich are but Gods Amners , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B6V.105

and their riches <P_B7R> are committed to them of God to distribute and
doo good as God dooth himselfe : SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7R.106

As the water is charitable after a sorte , so is the ayre ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7R.107

for it goeth to emptie places too , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7R.108

and filleth them as the water doth . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7R.109

Nature can@ @not abide that any place should bee emptie ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7R.110

and therefore the ayre though it bee a light bodie , and so naturally
ascendeth vpward : yet rather than any place in the earth shuld be
emptie , the ayre wil descend as it were fro~ his throne , and goe into
caues , into dens , and into dungeons , to fill them .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7R.111

If the rich were so good to their emptie brethren , as the ayre and
water are to other emptie things ; as there is no emptie place in the
worlde , so there should be no emptie person in the world :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7R.112

that is , the rich in <font> Israel <$$font> would fill the poore in
<font> Israel <$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7R.113

but <P_B7V> the riche make the poore to fill them ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7V.114

for Vsurers feede vpon the poore , euen as great fishes deuoure the
small . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7V.115

Therfore he which sayd <font> Let there not be a begger in Israel
<$$font> , sayd too , let there not be an Vsurer in <font> Israel
<$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7V.116

for if there be Vsurers in <font> Israel <$$font> , there wil be beggers
in <font> Israel <$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7V.117

for Vsurers make beggers , euen as Lawyers make quarrellers .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7V.118

Fourthly , it is against the law of God . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7V.119

First , it is forbidde~ in <font> Exo. 22 . <$$font> where it is sayd
, <font> If thou lend money vnto my people , that is , to the poore with
thee , thou shalt not oppresse them with Vsurie <$$font> :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7V.120

heere Vsurie is called oppression , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7V.121

therefore if oppression be a sinne , Vsury is a sinne too .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7V.122

Secondly , it is forbidde~ in <font> Leu. 25. 36 . <$$font> where it
is sayd , <font> Thou shalt not giue thy money to Vsurie , nor lend thy
vittailes for increase <$$font> . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B7V.123

Heere you <P_B8R> may see , that men may be Vsurers of vittailes and
other thinges , as well as of money . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8R.124

Thirdly , it is forbidden in <font> Deut. 23 . <$$font> where it is
sayde , <font> Thou shalt not lende vnto thy brother vpon Vsurie
<$$font> . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8R.125

And least you shoulde saye , that he meaneth but one kinde of Vsurie ,
he sheweth , that he meaneth all kinds of Vsurie :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8R.126

for after he sayth , <font> as vsurie of money , vsurie of vittailes ,
vsurie of corne , or vsurie of any thing which is giuen to Vsurie
<$$font> : because some are not Vsurers of money ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8R.127

but some are Vsurers of vittailes , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8R.128

some are Vsurers of Cloth , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8R.129

some are Vsurers of Corne , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8R.130

some are Vsurers of Wine , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8R.131

some are Vsurers of Oyle , and some of one thing , and some of an other
, SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8R.132

and none would bee counted Vsurers , but they which lend money vpon
Vsurie ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8R.133

therefore God forbiddeth so preciselie <P_B8V> Vsurie of any thing ,
shewing , that all Vsurie is vnlawfull . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8V.134

It is a miserable occupation to liue by sinne , and a great comfort to a
man when he looketh vpon his Golde and Siluer , and his heart telleth
him , all this is well gotten , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8V.135

and when he lieth vpon his deathbed , and must leaue all to his children
, he can say vnto them , I leaue you mine owne ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8V.136

but the Vsurer can@ @not saye , I leaue you mine own ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8V.137

but I leaue you other mens , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8V.138

therefore the Vsurer can neuer dye in peace , because if he dye before
he make restitution , he dyeth in his sinne . SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8V.139

When Christ raysed <font> Lazarus <$$font> from death , after he had
layne foure dayes in the graue , he wept so ouer his Sepulcher , that
the standers about sayd one to an other , <font> See how he loued him
<$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-H,B8V.140

As it may be sayde of Christ , See how <P_C1R> he loueth vs , so it
should be sayd of vs , See how they loue their breethren .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.141

For Christ sayd to his Disciples , <font> Loue one another , as I haue
loued you <$$font> . SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.142

But it may be sayde of the Vsurer , See how hee hateth hys breethren ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.143

and heare how he loueth them : SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.144

for hee loueth them in wordes , SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.145

and hateth them in deedes . SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.146

He sayth that he loueth them , and that he lendeth for compassion ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.147

but it is for compassion of himselfe , that he may gaine by his lending
. SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.148

The Vsurer loueth the borrower , as the Iuye loueth the Oke :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.149

The Iuye loueth the Oke to growe vp by it , SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.150

so the Vsurer loueth the borrower to grow rich by him .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.151

The Iuye claspeth the Oke like a louer , SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.152

but it claspeth out all the iuice and sap , that the Oke can not thriue
after : SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.153

So the Vsurer lendeth like a frie~d , SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1R.154

<P_C1V>

but hee couenanteth like an enemye , SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1V.156

for he claspeth the borrower with such bands , that euer after he
diminisheth , as fast as the other encreaseth . SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1V.157

Christe expounding the commaundement which forbiddeth to steale , sayth
, <font> lende freely <$$font> , shewing that Vsurie , because she
lendeth not freely , is a kinde of theft , and the Vsurers a kind of
theeues , SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1V.158

for else this exposition were not right . SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1V.159

Therfore <font> Zacheus <$$font> , as though he had stolne other mens
goods , when he began to repent , he restored them againe foure foulde ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1V.160

euen as theeues are inioyned to restore four fould for that which they
haue stolne , so <font> Zacheus <$$font> restored foure foulde , as
though he had stolne . SMITH-1591-E2-H,C1V.161

It seemeth that <font> Zacheus <$$font> was no greate theefe , because
hee restored foure foulde <P_C2R> for all that he had gotten wrongfully
, SMITH-1591-E2-H,C2R.162

for hee got but the fourth part of his goods wrongfully at the most ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,C2R.163

or else he could not haue restored foure fould againe .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,C2R.164

But now , if some should restore foure fould , for all that they haue
gotten wrongfully , they shoulde restore more than they haue , because
all which Vsurers get , they get wrongfully : SMITH-1591-E2-H,C2R.165

for their occupation is a sinne , SMITH-1591-E2-H,C2R.166

and therefore one sayth , Because they can@ @not restore foure fould
heere , they shall suffer an_hundreth fould heereafter .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,C2R.167

<font> Amaziah <$$font> is forbidden to strengthen himself with the
armyes of <font> Israel <$$font> , onely because <font> Israel <$$font>
had offended God ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,C2R.168

if <font> Amaziah <$$font> might not ioyne the armyes of <font> Israel
<$$font> with his armyes to strengthen him , darest thou ioyne the goods
of the poore with thy goodes to inrich thee ? SMITH-1591-E2-H,C2R.169

<P_D7R>

It remaineth that we speake of the Vsurers punishment :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7R.171

Then , what may be thought of them which doo not take Vsurie , but giue
Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7R.172

Lastly , what they should doo , which haue got their riches by Vsurie .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7R.173

To begin with the punishment , not onely Gods lawe , but euen the Cannon
lawe doth so condemne Vsurie , that first it dooth excommunicate him
from the Church , <P_D7V> as though he had no communion with Saints .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7V.174

Secondly , it dooth detaine him from the Sacraments , as though hee had
no communion with Christ . SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7V.175

Thirdly , it dooth depriue him of his Sepulcher ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7V.176

and will not suffer him to be buried , as though he were not worthie to
lye in the earth but to lye in hell . SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7V.177

Lastly , it maketh his will to be no will , as though his goods were not
his owne : SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7V.178

for nothing is ours but that which wee haue rightlie got :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7V.179

and therefore wee say , It is mine by right , as though it were not ours
, vnles it be ours by right . SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7V.180

This is the iudgement of mans lawe . SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7V.181

Now you shal heare the iudgement of Gods lawe . SMITH-1591-E2-H,D7V.182

A Vsurer dooth receiue two Incomes ; one <P_D8R> of the borrower , and
another of the reuenger ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8R.183

of the borrower he lookes for gaine ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8R.184

but of the reuenger hee lookes for punishment : SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8R.185

therefore al the Scripture prophecieth euill vnto him , as <font>
Michaiah <$$font> did to <font> Achab <$$font> .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8R.186

<font> Salomon <$$font> saith , <font> He which increaseth his riches by
Vsurie , gathereth for them which will bee mercifull to the poore
<$$font> . SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8R.187

As if he should say , when hee hath loden himselfe like a cart , he
shall be vnloden like a cart againe , SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8R.188

and they shall inherit his money for whom hee did neuer gather it .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8R.189

For , hee which is vnmerciful to the poore , meaneth not to gather for
them which will bee mercifull to the poore : SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8R.190

but <font> Salomon <$$font> saieth , That they shall be his heires which
will bee mercifull as he was vnmercifull . SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8R.191

Now marke whether this prophecie <P_D8V> of <font> Salomon <$$font> be
true , SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8V.192

I know not how many in this Citie doo increase by Vsurie ;
SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8V.193

but this prophecie seemeth to bee verified of many :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8V.194

For it is noted , that the riches and lands of Aldermen and Merchants ,
and other in <font> London <$$font> , do not last so long , nor indure
so wel , as the riches and lands of others in the Countrey , and that
their children doo not prooue so well as others , nor come to that place
in the Common weale , which for their wealth their parents looked that
they should come to . SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8V.195

I can giue no reason for it but the reason of <font> Salomon , He which
increaseth by Vsurie , gathereth for them which will bee mercifull to
the poore <$$font> . SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8V.196

That is , their riches shall goe from their heires to Gods heires ,
according to that , <font> The riches of the sinner is laid vp for the
righteous <$$font> : SMITH-1591-E2-H,D8V.197

that is , the righteous <P_E1R> shall inioy that which the wicked
gathereth . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1R.198

All riches are vncertaine , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1R.199

but the riches which are euill gotten , are most vncertaine :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1R.200

They may bee called mooueable goodes , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1R.201

for they are very mooueable , like the clowdes which neuer rest til they
fall as they climed . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1R.202

God saith , that he will smite the Vsurer with his fist , not with the
palme of his hande , but with his fist , which giueth a greater blow .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1R.203

As his hands were shut against the poore , so Gods hands shall be shut
against him , that his punishment may be like his sinne .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1R.204

But if you will heare their finall sentence , <font> Dauid <$$font>
saith heere , <font> That they shall not dwell in Gods temple , nor rest
in his holie mountaine <$$font> . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1R.205

Then we will seeke no moe punishments , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1R.206

for this punishment is all punishme~ts , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1R.207

If they shall not come to heauen , <P_E1V> whose then shall those riches
be ? SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1V.208

nay , whose then shall the owner be when that day commeth ?
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1V.209

If he shall not rest in heauen , then he shall rest in Hell where no
rest is . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1V.210

Then saith one , the Vsurer shall crie vnto his children , Cursed be you
my children , because you were the cause of these torments ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1V.211

for least you should be poore , I was an Vsurer ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1V.212

and robbed other , to leaue riches vnto you . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1V.213

To whome , the children shall replie againe , nay , Cursed be you father
, SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1V.214

for you were the cause of our torments ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1V.215

for if you had not left vs other mens goodes , we had not kept other
mens goodes . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E1V.216

Thus when they are cursed of God , they shall curse one another , curse
the Lord for condemning them , curse their sinnes for accusing them ,
curse their parents for begetting <P_E2R> them , and curse themselues ,
because they can@ @not helpe themselues . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2R.217

As they which are blessed doe nothing but blesse , so they which are
cursed do nothing but curse . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2R.218

This is the second Vsurie which the Vsurer shall receiue of God ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2R.219

after he hath receiued Vsurie of men , then the name of Vsurie shall be
fulfilled , as it signifieth biting , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2R.220

so when it hath bitten other , it shall bite the Vsurer too , and neuer
rest biting ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2R.221

then they shall wish that they could restore againe as <font> Zacheus
<$$font> did , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2R.222

and shall not restore because their money is gone .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2R.223

Therefore if Christ be come to your hearts , as he came to <font>
Zacheus <$$font> house , restore now as <font> Zacheus <$$font> did ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2R.224

and escape this iudgment . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2R.225

This is the end of the Vsurer and his money , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2R.226

if they stay together till death , yet at last there <P_E2V> shall bee a
diuision . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2V.227

The Deuill shall take his soule , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2V.228

the earth shall take his body , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2V.229

the strangers shall take his goods , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2V.230

and the mourners shall reioyce vnder their blackes , and say , Wickednes
is come to the graue . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2V.231

Therefore , if thou wouldest not be counted an Vsurer then , refraine to
be an Vsurer now , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2V.232

for they which are Vsurers now , shall be counted Vsurers then .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2V.233

Thus you haue heard the Vsurers payment . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2V.234

Now if you will know whether it be vnlawfull to giue Vsurie , as it is
vnlawfull to take Vsurie , I wish that you could resolue your selues ,
that I mighte not speake of it : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2V.235

for I haue hearde some Preachers say , that there be some truthes which
they would be loth to preach , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E2V.236

and so there be some truthes which I would be <P_E3R> loth to preache ,
because many heare by halues , and some for malice or ignorance will
take things otherwise than they are spoken , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3R.237

yet because I haue promised , I will speake some thing of it .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3R.238

Well then , may we neither take Vsurie , nor giue Vsurie ?
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3R.239

I knowe that <font> Ieremy <$$font> saith , <font> I haue not lent vpon
Vsurie to others , neyther haue others lent vpon Vsurie to me <$$font> ;
as though both were vnlawfull , not only to take Vsurie , but to giue
Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3R.240

But thereby <font> Ieremy <$$font> doeth signifie , that he was no
medler in the world , whereby they should enuie him like other men ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3R.241

and therefore hee cleareth himselfe chiefely from Vsurie , because
Vsurers were most enuyed . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3R.242

And to shewe that he was not an Vsurer , he saith , that he was not a
borrower , which is <P_E3V> more lawfull than to be an Vsurer , like a
man which saith I doe neither hate him , nor knowe him .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3V.243

Why SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3V.244

it was lawfull to knowe him , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3V.245

but to proue that he did not hate him , he sayth , he doth not knowe him
: SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3V.246

So <font> Ieremy <$$font> , to proue that he had not lent vppon Vsurie ,
doth say , that hee neuer borrowed vppon Vsurie , which many will doe
that will not lende . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3V.247

The best Expositors giue this sense of it . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3V.248

I knowe beside , that Christ did cast forth the buyers out of his temple
, as well as the sellers , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3V.249

but that was not for buying , but for buying in the temple , where they
should not buy , but pray : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3V.250

or else it was as lawfull to buy any thing , as it is lawfull to vse it
. SMITH-1591-E2-H,E3V.251

I know beside , that it is a common saying , if there were no buyers ,
<P_E4R> there would be no sellers , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4R.252

if there were no bribe giuers , there would be no bribe takers .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4R.253

But in this case it may be rather sayd , if there were no takers , there
would be no giuers , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4R.254

for the giuer doeth not make the receiuer to take ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4R.255

but the receiuer doth make the giuer to giue , because he will not lende
vnlesse the other will giue him for the lone : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4R.256

therefore as we say , the receiuer makes a theefe : so I may say , the
receiuer of Vsurie makes the giuer of Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4R.257

Therefore I would be loth to compare them which are constrained to
borrow vppon Vsurie , vnto them which did buy in the temple , and were
not constrayned more than they which solde in the temple .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4R.258

Much lesse may I compare them which giue Vsurie , vnto them which take
Vsurie : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4R.259

for there is as great <P_E4V> oddes betweene them , as there is betweene
giuing and taking , or betweene couetousnesse and necessitie ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4V.260

for one is couetousnesse , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4V.261

and the other is necessitie . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4V.262

Hee which lendeth for Vsurie , lendeth for couetousnesse ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4V.263

but he which borroweth vpon Vsurie , borroweth for necessitie .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4V.264

Now , for necessitie God hath allowed many things ; as for necessitie it
was lawfull for <font> Adams <$$font> sonnes to marrie with <font> Adams
<$$font> daughters , because there were no other women .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4V.265

For necessitie it was lawfull for <font> Dauid <$$font> to eate the Shew
bread , because he had no other foode . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4V.266

For necessitie it was lawfull to worke , and heale , and fight vppon the
Saboath , which was not lawfull , but for necessitie .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E4V.267

Therfore for necessitie why may not a man pay more than he borrowed ,
<P_E5R> seeing no Scripture doth forbid vs to pay more than wee borrow ,
but to require more than wee lend . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5R.268

Some doo thinke that as God did vse the ambition of <font> Absalom
<$$font> , and the malice of <font> Pharaoh <$$font> , & the trecherie
of <font> Iudas <$$font> vnto good ; so men may vse the couetousnes of
vsurers vnto good : that is , to helpe at a neede , when a man is like
to bee vndone , and his children cast away , and his Lease forfeited ,
and many inconueniences beside like to insue <paren> which you knowe
better than I <$$paren> vnlesse hee haue present money at some time to
preuent a mischiefe . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5R.269

For example hereof , I may alleage how <font> Iaacob <$$font> did vse
the sinne of <font> Laban <$$font> : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5R.270

<font> Laban <$$font> did euill in swearing by Idolls ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5R.271

but <font> Iaacob <$$font> did not euill in receiuing such an oath of
him , though it was an vnlawfull oath . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5R.272

<P_E5V>

So , though the Vsurer doo euill in taking Vsurie , yet a man doth not
euill in giuing Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.274

Beside , I may alleage the example of <font> Abraham <$$font> and <font>
Abimelech <$$font> : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.275

<font> Abraham <$$font> made a couena~t with <font> Abimelech <$$font> ;
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.276

to confirme this couenant , <font> Abraham <$$font> sware ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.277

and <font> Abimelech <$$font> sware , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.278

<font> Abraham <$$font> sware by the true God , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.279

but <font> Abimelech <$$font> sware by his false Gods ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.280

and yet <font> Abraham <$$font> did receiue this oath
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.281

and sinned not . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.282

So , if her Maiestie and the Turke should make a couenant , the Turk
would not sweare as the Queene would sweare ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.283

for the Queene would sweare by the Lorde , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.284

but the Turke would sweare by Mahomet : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E5V.285

if it be lawfull then to receiue such an oath , though it bee an
vnlawfull oath , why may it not bee lawfull for mee , to giue more than
I borrowed , though it bee <P_E6R> vnlawfull for the Vsurer to take more
than hee lended ? SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6R.286

Beside , a Prince may not pardon a wilfull murderer ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6R.287

yet I think that no man wil say in hast , that he which hath committed
murder may not take a pardon . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6R.288

As this vnlawfull giuing doth not make the taking vnlawfull ; so the
other vnlawfull taking doth not make the giuing vnlawfull .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6R.289

Beside , it is lawfull to suffer iniurie , though it be vnlawfull to
offer iniurie : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6R.290

It is lawfull to suffer iniurie , as Christ paide tribute , which was
iniurie ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6R.291

but it is not lawfull to offer iniurie , because there are sixe
Commandements against it . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6R.292

Now , to take Vsurie , is as it were to offer iniurie ;
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6R.293

but to giue Vsurie , is as it were to suffer iniurie :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6R.294

therefore though I may not take more than I borrowed , yet I <P_E6V> may
giue more than I borrowed . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6V.295

Moreouer , I may compare giuing of Vsurie to swearing ;
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6V.296

if a man sweare without cause he sinneth ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6V.297

but if he sweare as the word teacheth him to sweare , he sinneth not :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6V.298

so , if a man borrow vpon Vsurie and borrow without cause , he sinneth ,
because he feedeth the Vsurer : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6V.299

but els , as a man maye sweare in some case , so in some case a man may
borrowe vpon Vsurie , that is , in case of necessitie , when a man must
needes borrow , and can borrowe of none but of Vsurers .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6V.300

Lastly , I may alleage that Vsurie and Vsurer are neuer read in the
scripture , but they signifie him which takes Vsurie , not him which
giues Vsurie : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6V.301

and therfore the Scripture seemeth to forbid taking , but not giuing .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E6V.302

<P_E7R>

Many reasons moe are alleaged which I can@ @not refute ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7R.304

and therefore I will not contradict them : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7R.305

yet I meane not to decide the question , because I will not be mistaken
; SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7R.306

but if some should come vnto me in that necessitie and extremitie which
I can imagine , and aske ; may I borrowe money of these Vsurers to saue
my life , or my credite , or my liuing , seeing no man will lend mee
freelie ? I would answere him as the Prophet answered <font> Naaman
<$$font> , neither doo SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7R.307

nor doo not , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7R.308

but <font> goe in peace <$$font> . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7R.309

I will not forbid thee SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7R.310

nor I will not condemne thee , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7R.311

but if thy conscience condemne thee not , I thinke thy sinne one of the
least sinnes ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7R.312

& as <font> Naaman <$$font> praied , <font> Lord be mercifull vnto me in
this <$$font> : so I think the Lord will bee mercifull vnto thee in this
: SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7R.313

but if thy conscience goe <P_E7V> against it : then doo it not ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7V.314

for it is sinne to thee though it bee free for another , because
whatsoeuer is not done of faith is sinne . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7V.315

I charge you in the feare of God that you do not mistake that which is
said , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7V.316

for I knowe no learned preacher , nor learned writer of other mind .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7V.317

Yet least you should mistake the matter , as I distinguished of lenders
, so I will distinguish of borrowers . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7V.318

If some may borrow vpon Vsurie , it dooth not followe that all may
borrowe vppon Vsurie , because all haue not the like cause :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7V.319

therefore doo not say that I teach you to borrowe vpon Vsurie ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7V.320

for I thinke that the most in this citie which borrowe vppon Vsurie ,
should not borrowe as they doo , because they rather maintaine Vsurie ,
than supplie their necessitie . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E7V.321

<P_E8R>

Some I know borrow for meere necessitie ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8R.323

if any may be allowed , those are they : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8R.324

but there is a kind of borrowers in this Citie which feede Vsurers as
the bellowes kindle the fire ; SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8R.325

for they haue no neede to borrow , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8R.326

but because they would bee rich , and richer , and richest of all :
therfore they will imploy al the money which they can borrowe , thinking
to get more by the vse of it , than the Vsurie of it doth come too .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8R.327

This maketh the~ sell their wares so deare , because they must not only
gaine the price but the interest beside , and more than the interest too
, SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8R.328

or els they gaine nothing . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8R.329

These borrowers are in another predicament than those which borrowe for
necessitie : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8R.330

and therefore if they bee not olde enough to answere for themselues , I
am too young to answere <P_E8V> for them . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8V.331

There are other borrowers as I haue heard , which for some secrete cause
would seeme barer and needier than they are , either because they would
not bee charged deeplie with Subsidies , or els because they would
compou~d with their Creditors for a little : SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8V.332

therefore they will haue alwaies some thing for Vsurie , that their
Creditors may thinke them bare of money , or that other may pitie the~
in their charges . SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8V.333

These are like those Foxes which haue wealth enough to pay their debts ,
and yet lie in prison because they would defraud their Creditors .
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8V.334

I doubt not but there bee moe sorts than I knowe ,
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8V.335

I can@ @not hunt euerie corner because I want experie~ce :
SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8V.336

but this is my conclusion , SMITH-1591-E2-H,E8V.337

I would haue no man pay interest vnto Vsurers but for necessitie , euen
as a <P_F1R> trauailer giueth his pursse to a theefe , because he can@
@not choose . SMITH-1591-E2-H,F1R.338

Thus you haue heard what I can say of them which take Vsurie , and them
which giue Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-H,F1R.339

