<BEGIN_spencer-1688-e3-h>

<P_3.4,311>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_DXVIII>

<P_3.4,312>

Windsor , SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,312.5

Septem. 25th , 1687 . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,312.6

S=r=. The King commands me to send you the enclosed Letter to the Pope
, for making Father Petre a Cardinall , which he would have you deliver
as soon as you can , and accompany it with such expressions in his
Majesty's name as shall be proper on this occasion .
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,312.7

His Majesty depends very much on your care , prudence , and experience
in that Court to bring this matter to a good issue ,
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,312.8

and would therefore have you with all the addresse and diligence you can
, endeavor by such meanes as may be most effectuall to obtaine the
satisfaction his Majesty expects in this request , which is so
reasonable and of so great advantage to his service , that it can hardly
be imagined it should admit of any difficulty .
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,312.9

His Majesty has also writ a Letter to the Cardinall of Norfolk on this
subject , which I have sent to you by another conveyance ,
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,312.10

and am S=r= , your {SIC:you} affectionate friend and servant ,
Sunderland P. SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,312.11

The King has writ two Letters to the Pope for greater security ,
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,312.12

one is sent by the way of France , the other by Flanders ,
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,312.13

they are both on the same <P_3.4,313> subject , as you will see by the
copies which go inclosed , SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,313.14

and therefore you are to deliver but one of them .
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,313.15

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_DXIX>

Whitehall , SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,313.17

Novem. 4th , 1687 . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,313.18

S=r= , The King having resolved to put his owne and his subjects
affaires at Rome into the hands of the Cardinal d'Este as Protector of
his Dominions , commands me to let you know it ;
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,313.19

and has writ to the Cardinal of Norfolk himselfe to acquaint him with
this resolution . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,313.20

The Letter goes enclosed which you will take care to deliver .
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,313.21

You are not to speake of this matter to any person till you heare
further from me . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,313.22

I am , S=r= , your most humble servant , Sunderland P.
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,313.23

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_DXX>

Whitehall , SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,313.25

Novem. 25th , 1687 . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,313.26

S=r=. The King having , by the enclosed to the Pope , recommended
<P_3.4,314> Father Phillip Ellis , D=r=. Gifford , and D=r=. Smith ,
to be Bishops in partibus , his Maj=ty= would have you deliver the same
to his Holinesse , and sollicit the expedition of their Bulls and other
Dispatches requisite in this behalfe . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,314.27

I am , S=r= , your most humble servant , Sunderland P.
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,314.28

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_DXXI>

Whitehall , SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,314.30

December 22d , 1687 . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,314.31

S=r= , The King having received an account as well by your letters as
otherwise , that Father Petre has been misrepresented to his Holinesse
as a person very ambitious and continually pressing his Majesty to
obtain a Cap for him , his Majesty has thought it {SIC:if} fit for his
owne honor and the vindication of Father Petre , to write the enclosed
to his Holinesse and to the Generall of the Jesuits , to let them know
that his Majesty has been induced from his owne motion alone to repeate
his instances for Father Petre's promotion , as having had long
experience of his merit , and the many services he has done to the
Catholique Church , for which he has also suffered much ; and that
therefore his Majesty is perswaded his Holinesse will <P_3.4,315> agree
to his desires herein . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,315.32

His Majesty would have you deliver these Letters as soon as you can ,
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,315.33

and hopes the Pope will not any longer delay gratifying him in so
reasonable a request , and which his Majesty desires so earnestly from
his Holinesse . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,315.34

I am , S=r= , your affectionate friend and humble servant , Sunderland
P. SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,315.35

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_DXXII>

Whitehall , SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,315.37

February 20th , 1687-8 . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,315.38

S=r= , The King having thought fit to make the Cardinal d'Este Protector
of his dominions at Rome , and intending you should give your attendance
upon him , as the King's Secretary , and be with him in his pallace ,
his Majesty commands me to let you know , that accordingly , as soon as
the Cardinal comes to Rome , you must apply yourself to him , and tell
him you have received orders to attend his Highness for his commands
upon all occasions . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,315.39

His Majesty will continue you in the station of his Agent ,
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,315.40

but you must upon noe occasion make use of that character <P_3.4,316>
for transacting any business , but only such as the Cardinal shall
direct , unlesse you shall at any time receive an expresse command from
hence . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,316.41

I have writ to the Cardinal to this effect , so that you must govern
yourself accordingly . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,316.42

S=r= , your affectionate friend and servant , Sunderland P.
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,316.43

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_DXXIII>

Whitehall , SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,316.45

June 4 , 1688 . SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,316.46

S=r= , I have received several letters from you ,
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,316.47

but have nothing to say in answer to any of them except that of the 22th
of May , which I have laid before the King , who commands me to tell you
that my Lord Thomas Howard , who will goe hence in a few days with the
character of Envoy Extraordinary to the Pope , and will be speedily at
Rome , has directions to satisfy his Holinesse concerning the Oath of
which you write , taken by the Catholick Privy Counsellors .
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,316.48

I am , S=r= , your most affectionate friend and servant , Sunderland P.
SPENCER-1688-E3-H,3.4,316.49

