<BEGIN_stat-1511-e1-h>

<P_3,8>

<heading>

CHAPTER XIV . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.4

AN ACT AGAYNST WEARING OF COSTLY APPARRELL . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.5

<$$heading>

Forasmuche as the greate and costly array and apparell used wythin this
Realme contrary to good Statutes therof made hathe be the Occasion of
grete impov~isshing of divers of the King~ Sugiect~ and p~voked meny of
them to robbe and to doo extorc~on and other unlawfull Dedes to
maynteyne therby ther costeley arrey : In eschewyng wherof , Be it
ordeyned by the Auctoritie of this p~sent P~liament that no p~sone of
whate estate condic~on or degre that he be use in his apparell eny Cloth
of golde of Purpoure Coloure or Sylke of Purpoure Coloure but onely the
Kyng the Qwene the Kyng~ Moder the Kyng~ Chylder the King~ Brethers and
Susters , upon payne to forfett the seid Apparell wherwyth so ev~ yt be
myxte , and for usying the same to forfaite xx pounde :
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.7

And that no man under the astate of a Duke use in eny apparell of his
Body or uppon his Horses eny clothe of gold of tyssue uppon payne to
forfeyt the same apparell wherwyth so ev~ yt be myxte and for usyng the
same to forfette xx marke ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.8

and that no man undre the degree of an Erle were in his apparrell any
Sables uppon payne to forfeyt the same apparell . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.9

And that no manne undre the degree of a Baron use in his Apparell of his
body or of his Horses eny clothe of golde or clothe of Sylver or tynsyn
Satten ne no other Sylke or Clothe myxte or broderd wyth Golde or Sylver
uppon payne of forfeyture of the same apparrell , albeit that yt be
myxte wyth eny other Sylke or clothe , STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.10

and for usyng of the same to forfett x marke . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.11

And that no Ma~ne under the Degree of a Lorde or a Knyght of the Garter
were any Wollen Clothe made oute of this Realme of Englonde Irelonde
Wales Cales or the Marches of the same or Berwyk , upon payne to
forfayte the seid Clothe and for usyng of the same to forfayte x pounde
. STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.12

And that no ma~ne undre the degree of a Knyght of the Garter
{SIC:Carter} were in his goune or Cote or eny other hys apparell any
Velvett of the Colour of Crymesyn or blewe uppon payne to forfett the
same Gowne or Cote or other apparell and for usyng of the same to
forfett xl Shyllyng~ . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.13

And that eny of the Usshers of the Kyng~ Chambre for the tyme being that
fyrste sueth his Accion of Detynue for the same apparell have the seid
Forefeytours of the seid apparell , STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.14

and yff none of the seid Usshers co~mence ther accion therof wythin xv
days in the terme nexte after the seid forfeytoure , then the Kyng~
Chamberleyn for the tyme beyng to have therof hys lyke acc~on .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.15

And the Kyng oure Souv~aigne Lorde and his Heyres to have the one halfe
of the seid Forfeytours of the seid money so forfeyted ,
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.16

and the seid Chamberleyn of the Kyng for the tyme beyng to have the seid
other halfe of the money . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.17

Provided that yf ther be eny lyke Forfeyture co~mytted or done by eny of
the Qwenys sarvand~ beyng in her Cheker roule that then eny of the
Usshers of her Chambre , and in theyr defaute the Qwenys Chamb~leyn for
the tyme beyng have lyke acc~on for the seid forfeytures as ys aforeseid
for the Kyng~ Usshers and his Chamberleyn . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.18

And that no manne undre the degree of a Knyght , excepte Esquyers for
the Kyng~ body hys Cuppe berers Carvours and Sewers havyng the ordynarie
Fee for the same and all other Esquyers for the body havyng possession
of Landes and Tenement~ or other Hereditament~ in theyr handes or other
to ther use to the yerely value of CCC marke and Lordes Sonnes and
Heyres , Justices of the one Benche or of the other , the Maister of the
Rolles , and Barons of the Kyng~ Eschequer and all other of the Kyng~
Councell and Mayres of the Citie of London for the tyme beyng , use or
were eny Velvett in theyr gowenes or Rydyng Cootes or Furres of Martron
in theyr apparrell uppon payne to forfette the same Furre and apparell
wherwyth so ever yt be myxte and for usyng of the same to forfett xl
Shyllyng~ . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.19

Nor no p~sone other then be above named were Velvet in their Dublett~
nor Satten nor Damaske in their gownes nor Cotes , excepte he be a
Lordes Sone or a Gentilman havyng in his possession or other to his use
Landes or Tenement~ or annuytyes at the leste for Terme of Lyffe to the
yerely valewe of an_hundreth pounde above all repryses , uppon payne to
forfeyte the same apparell wherwyth so ev~ yt be myxte and for usyng of
the same to forfett xl Shillyng~ . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.20

Nor no p~sone use or were Satten or Damaske in ther Doblett~ nor Sylke
or Chamlett in their Gowenes or Cootes nott havyng Landes or Tenement~
in hys possession or other hys use Office or Fee for terme of Lyffe or
Lyff~ to the yerely value of xx=ti= Pounde , excepte he be a Yoman of
the Crowne or of the Kyng~ garde or gromes of the Kyng~ Chambre or of
the Qwenys having therfore the Kyng~ Fee or the Qwenes uppon payne to
forfett the same apparell wherwyth soev~ hyt be myxte , and for usyng of
the same to forfett xl Shyllyng~ . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.21

And that no ma~ne undre the degree of a Gentilman excepte Graduates of
the Univ~sities and excepte Yomen Gromes and pagys of the Kyng~ Chambre
and of oure Souv~aigne Lady the Qwene@ @s , and excepte suche Men as
have Landes Ten~t~ or Fees or Anuytyes to the yerely value of x li. for
Terme of Lyffe or an_hundrethe pounde in Good~ use or were eny Furres ,
wherof ther ys no like kynde growyng in this lande of Englonde Irelonde
Wales or in any Lande under the Kyng~ obeysaunce , upon payne to forfett
the same Furres and for usying of the same to forfett xl Shelyngs .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.22

The Value of ther Good~ to be tryed by there owne Othes .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.23

And that no ma~ne under the degree of a Knyght excepte sp~uall Me~ne and
Sergeauntes at the Lawe or graduates of Univ~sities use eny more Clothe
in eny longe Gowne then foure broyde yerdes , and in a Rydyng Gowne or
Cotte above thre yerdes uppon payne of forfeyture of the same .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.24

And that noo s~vyng ma~ne undre the Degre of a Gentilman use or were eny
Goune or Coote or suche lyke apparrell of more Clothe then too brode
yerdes and an halfe in a shorte Gowne and thre brode yerdes in a longe
Gowne , and that in the seid Gowne or Coote they were no mann~ Furre ,
uppon payne of Forfeyture of the sayd apparrell or the value therof .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.25

And that no s~vyng ma~ne waytyng uppon his Maister under the degree of a
Gentilman use or were eny garded Hose or eny clothe above the pryce of
xx d. the yerde in hys Hose except yt be of his Maisters weryng Hose
apon payne of forfeyture of iij s. iiij d. STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.26

And that no ma~ne undre the degree of a Knyght were any garded or
pynshed Sherte or pynched partelet of Lynnen clothe uppon payne of
Forfeyture of the same Sherte or Partelett STAT-1511-E1-H,3,8.27

and for usyng of the <P_3,9> same to forfeyte x. shillyng~ .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.28

And that no s~vaunte of Husbondy {TEXT:husbandy} nor Sheparde nor comen
Laborer nor s~v=a=nte wnto eny Artificer owte of Cytie or borowe nor
husbondman havyng no good~ of his owne above the value of x. pounde use
or were any Clothe wherof the broode yerde passythe in pryce twoo
shillyng~ STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.29

nor that eny of the seid s~v=a=nts of Husbondrye Sheppardes nor Laborers
were eny hose above the pryce of x d. the yerde uppon payne of
imprisonament in the Stokkys by thre days . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.30

And that he that wyll sue for eny of the seid Forfeytures of the seid
apparell forfeyted by eny p~sone undre the degree of a Lorde or a Knyght
of the Garter have the seid apparell so forfeyted by acc~one of detynue
. STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.31

And the Kyng oure Souv~aigne Lorde to have the oon halfe of the
forfeyture of the seid Money so forfeyted , or the Lord of the
Franchysse yf yt be recoverd or p~sented wythin a Fraunches or Lete ,
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.32

and the p~tie that wyll sue have the other halfe ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.33

And the sute to be by acc~on of dette ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.34

And that in eny wyse of all the seid Acco~nes the Defendaunte shal@
@nott wage his Lawe nor by p~tecc~on nor essoyne STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.35

nor the partie to be barred by the Kyng~ p~done nor be delayde by eny
plee to the dissablement of his p~sone . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.36

And that the Lorde Stuarde of the Kyng~ House for the tyme beyng wythin
the Verge and Justices of Assize and Justices of the Peace , Stewardes
in letes or lawe-days and ev~y of them have also power to inqwere and
holde plee of ev~y Defaulte of the p~mysses as well by examynac~on of
the p~tie as after the course of the Co~en Lawe , and to determyn the
same as@ @well at the Kyng~ sute as at the suet of the p~tie .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.37

Provyded alwey that this Acte be nott p~judiciall nor hurtfull to eny
sp~uall or temporall manne in weryng eny Ornament~ of the Churche in
executing dyvine s~vyce nor to any m~chaunt~ strayngers .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.38

Provided also that yt shal@ @be lefull to all Maires Recorders Aldermen
Shyreffes and Bailles and all other hede Officers of Cities or bowrghes
or Townes corporatt that nowe be or hereafter shal@ @be to use & were
lyke apparrell in their Gownes , dublett~ , clokes , and other apparrell
as ther p~decessours have donne in tymes paste , this Acte in eny wyse
notwythstondyng . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.39

Provided also that this acte be nott p~judiciall nor hurtfull to eny
Woman or to eny ambassatures Hencemen Harroldes of armes Mynstrelles
Players in enterludes , nor to any ma~ne weryng any apparrell of the
Kyng~ lyverey geven hym by the King , for the tyme beyng of his
Attendance aboute the Kyng~ Grace . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.40

Also be it enacted by auctoritie aforeseid that all other Statutes of
array made afore the makyng of this p~sent Statute , and all Penalties
or Forfeytures to be levyd or demaunded by reasone of them or eny of
them be utterly voyde repelled and of none effecte and discharged .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.41

And that this acte of array made at this present P~liament begynne to
take his effecte at the Feaste of Seynt Michell Th@ @archaungell next
co~myng and nott before , and to endure unto the nexte Parliament .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.42

Provyded also that this acte extend nott to eny p~sone or p~sones usyng
eny manner of apparrell as@ @well uppon hyme selfe as uppon hys horse ,
beyng in the Kyngs s~vyce in time of Warre . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.43

Provided alwey that the King~ Grace by this p~sent Acte be nott letted
nor restreyned of his lyb~tie but that his Highnes at hys pleasure by
his Plakkarde or his letter or his byll assigned wyth his moste gracious
hande may graunte and gyve Licence and auctoritie to suche of his
Sugiect~ as his Grace shall thinke convenyent to were all and suche
singler apparell on his body or his horses as shall stande wyth the
pleasure of the Kyng~ Grace , wythoute damage or forfeyture to hym or
them that so doythe of eny apparell or other payne conteyned in this
astatute . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,9.44

<P_3,26>

<heading>

CHAPTER IV . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.47

AN ACT OF PRYVILEG~ FOR SUCH P~SONS AS ARE IN THE KING~ WARRS .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.48

<$$heading>

The Kyng oure Sov~aigne Lorde for dyv~s causes and reasonable
consideracions hym movyng by th@ @assent of the lordes sp~uall and
temporall and the Comeyns in this p~sent parliament assembled and by
auctorite of the same hath enacted ordeyned and stablysshed that ev~y
p~son of what condicion or degre he be of , beyng or hereaft~ be yn our
seid Sov~aigne Lorde the Kyng~ Wages and s~vice of Warre beyond the see
or uppon the see , at his pleasure have the p~tecc~on of p~fectur~ or
moratur~ cum clausula volum~ ; and in the excepcion of the seid
p~teccion there be made omyssion of Assises ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.50

and that the seid p~teccions be allowable in all the Kyng~ court~ and
other courtes where the seid p~teccions shal@ @be pleded or layed for
any of the seid p~sons in all pleyse of Assise as@ @well of novell
disseasyn as of fressheforce without any difficultie ;
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.51

and excepte all way that the seid p~teccions be not alowable in accions
of dette taken or to be taken by oure Sov~aigne Lorde the Kynge or by
any p~son to his use or to the use of oure late Sov~aigne Lorde Kyng
Henry the vij=th= or to th@ @use of his executo=r=s for the p~fourmaunce
of his Will nor in any appelle of murdre or felonye by any p~son or
p~sons sued or to be sued . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.52

And that a sp~iall clause be exp~ssed in the same p~teccions for the
same . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.53

Also be it enacted that the Jugement~ to be geven from hensforth in such
Assise arained or to be arained shall not be p~judiciall to any of the
seid p~sons so being in the s~vice of oure Sov~aigne Lorde the Kyng as
is afore seid which have any thyng in rev~sion or remaynder in londys or
ten~t~ wherof such assise be arained if the names of thos p~sons which
be in the rev~sion or the remayndre of such londys or ten~t~ be not in
the seid Assise , but that the seid Jugement be ayenst all theym voide ;
the seid ordynance to endure and be available to ev~y of the seid p~sons
as longe as he abideth so in the Kyng~ Wages and s~vice of Warre .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.54

And if this ordynaunce touchyng the seid p~sons so nowe abidyng or that
after this shall so abide in the s~vice of the Kyng~ Highnesse be not
sufficient for the eyse and suertie of theym ; Be it ordeyned and
enacted by the same auctorite that oure Sovaigne Lorde the Kynge and the
Lordes of his Counceill for the tyme being have full power in all man~
of accions sut~ and p~cesse to graunte to ev~y of such p~sons p~teccions
as shal@ @be in theire causes avaylable after theire discressions duryng
the tyme that they or any of theym contynue in the seid s~vice of Warre
. STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.55

Provided that this acte be not available to any p~son for any entre syn
the first day of this p~sent parliament . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.56

Also be it enacted that if any discent of any landes or ten~t~ or any
other right or enhereditament~ be to any p~son or p~sons being within
this realme or els where that that discent be of no greater effecte to
the damage or hurt of the seid p~sons being in the Kyng~ s~vice as is
afore seid Then {it_would_be} if the seid p~sons in the Kyng~ s~vice so
being were within the Age of xxj yeres . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.57

Also be it ordeyned by the seid auctorite that all such p~sons as shall
passe ov~ the see or bide uppon the see in the Kynges s~vice as is
aforeseid ev~ych of theym which have landes and ten~t~ holden of the
Kyng or of any other to theire only use shall mowe laufully make therof
alienacion feoffament~ and t=a=nsmutacion of possession by dede or dedys
fyne or fynes recov~er or recov~ers for the p~fourmaunce of their willys
without any fyne for the seid alienacions feoffamentys fynes recov~es or
t=a=nsmutacion of possession therfor to be made ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.58

And that they and ev~y of theym theire heires and assignes and the
heires and assignes of ev~y of theym be discharged of all such fynes by
the seid Acte without l~res patentes of licence or p~don or other
discharge to be had in that behalfe . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,26.59

<P_3,27>

And furthermore be it also ordeyned and enacted by the seid Auctorite
that if any of the seid p~sons so being in the seid s~vice which hold
landes or ten~t~ of the Kyng or of any other by Knyght~ s~vice or
otherwise wherfor his heire oweth to be in Warde , and fortune in the
seid s~vice to decesse be_yonde the see or uppon the see or that any
feoffament of the same land~ and ten~t~ be supposed to be made by
collusion the heire of the owner of the same landes and ten~t~ beyng
within age , That then the feoffees or executours of such p~son so
decessed have the warde and mariage of the heire so being within age and
of the landys and ten~t~ so holden duryng the nonage of ev~y such heire
to the p~fourmaunce of the Will of the seid p~son so decessed without
any accompte or other thyng therfor to be yelden paiyng yerely the rent~
to the chefe Lorde or Lord~ of the fee : STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.61

Savyng to ev~y p~son or p~sons other then the seid p~sons that shall
make any such alienacion feoffament fyne or suffer recov~ye to be had
ayenst theym without paiyng therfor any fyne to the Kyng or the Lorde or
Lord~ of whom the seid land~ is holden for the same such right title use
and int~est as they had before the seid feoffament alienacion fyne
recov~ye or t=a=nsmutacion of possession or any of theym made or suffred
of any such lond~ ten~t~ or hereditament~ wherof any such feoffament
fyne alienacion or recov~e so shal@ @be made . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.62

Provyded all_wey that this Acte extend not to any Capitens or Souldiours
that nowe be or hereafter shal@ @be reteyned within the Townes of Caleys
Hammes Guysnes Rise banke and Berwyk Wales or any of theym and the
Marches of the same . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.63

<heading>

CHAPTER V . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.65

AN ACT AGAYNST SUCH CAPTAYNES AS ABRIDG THEIRE SOLDYERS OF THEIRE PAYE .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.66

<$$heading>

For_asmoche that the Kynge oure sov~aigne Lorde entendeth by the grace
of God to send ov~ the see a greate armye trustyng therby not only to
p~serve this his realme in his auncient fame and honoure but also to set
in p~fyte peace and t=a=nquyllite his subgiett~ of the same and the
better to be disposed to s~ve God ; How_be_it many tymes by the
inordynate covetisenes of Capiteynes reteyned with Princes afore this
tyme greate parte of the nombre of Soudeours for whom such Capiteynes
have endented with Princes at tyme of nede have lakked of theire nombre
of Soudiours wherby great Jeop~dy have ensued and irrecup~able damages
may ensue if remedy therfor be not seen and had . Be it ordeyned
therfor by auctorite of this p~sent p~liamente That if any Capitayne be
reteyned or hereafter shal@ @be to s~ve the Kyng on the see or beyond
the see in feit of Warr~ which have not his or theire hole and p~fite
nombre of men and Souldiours accordyng as he shal@ @be reteigned with
the Kyng or gefe not theym theyre full Wages without abriggement as he
shall receyve of the Kynge for theym , he shall for such defaute
forfaite to the Kyng all his goodes and catalles and theire bodies to
prison . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.68

And that ev~y Capteigne Petycapteyne and all other havyng under theyme
retynue of Souldeour or Soldeours at the Kyng~ Wag~ shall uppon the
payne afore seid pay to the retynue of Souldeour or Souldeours and ev~y
of the same the Wag~ ratably as is allowed unto theym by the Kyng oure
Sov~aigne Lorde or the Tresourer of his Warres without lessyng or
withdrawyng of any parte therof . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.69

And for as longe tyme as they shall receyve Wag~ for theym this payment
to be made unto the seid retynues and ev~y Souldeour of the same of
theire Capteyns and Petycapteyns all ways within vj daies next and
immediatly after that the seid Capteyn Petycapteyn or other shal@ @have
receyved theire Wag~ of the Kynge or of the Tresourer of his Warres or
of theire Lord~ or Maisters . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.70

And if any Souldeour being no Capteyn ymmediatly reteygned with the Kyng
which hereaft~ shal@ @be in Wagys and reteygned or take any Priste to
s~ve the Kyng uppon the see or uppon the lond or beyond the see departe
out of the Kyng~ s~vice without licence of the Kyng~ leuetenaunt there
that such departyng be takyn demed and adjuged felonie and that he so
offendyng suffer for the seid offence punyshment and execucion of
felonye . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.71

And for_as_much as his offence stretcheth to the hurte and jeop~die of
the Kyng oure Sov~aigne Lorde the Nobles of the realme and of all the
comen well therof that therfor he or they so offendyng not being within
orders of holy Church enjoy not the benefice of his clergie .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.72

And that it be ordeigned by the seid auctorite that the Justic~ of the
peace of ev~y Shire of Englond where any such offenders be taken have
power to enquyre of the seid offenses STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.73

and the same to here and det~myne as they do and may do of felonies
trespaces and other offenses exp~ssed in the Kyng~ Com~yssion to theym
made as though the seid offenses were done in the same Shire ;
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.74

And also that the seid dep~tyng of such Souldeours and also theire
reteignours if it be trav~sed tried in the same Shire where they be for
such cause arrested and arrayned . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.75

Provided all_way that no Capteyn be charged by this acte for lak of his
nombre reteigned as is abovesaid whos Souldeours shall happe to die or
otherwise departe not in the defaute of the Capteyn , So that the seid
Capteyn if he be at londe wages shewe the departyng or lakkyng of his
Souldeour within x daies after the lakkyng of the seid Souldeour unto
the Kyng~ Leuetenaunte ther & to the Tresourer of the Warres ; Or if the
Capteyne be at the See Wag~ if he shewe the dep~tyng or lakkyng of the
Souldeour so lakkyng to the Admyrall of the Navye where he is reteyned
at the next metyng with the seid Admyrall . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.76

Provyded all_wey that this acte extend not to any Capteyns or Souldeours
that nowe be or hereafter shal@ @be reteigned within the townes of
Caleys Hammes Guysnes Ryse Banke and Berwyk Walys or any of theym and
the Marches of the same . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.77

Provyded all_wey that this Acte be not p~judiciall nor hurtfull to the
seid Capiteyns Petycaptens nor any other havyng under theym retynue of
Souldeours nor any of theym for non_payment of the Kyng~ Wag~ to theire
houshold s~vaunt~ and other to whom they shall daily fynde and geve mete
and drynke duryng the seid s~vice of Warre . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,27.78

<P_3,28>

<heading>

CHAPTER VI . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.81

AN ACT AGAYNST DECEYPTFULL MAKING OF WOLLEN CLOTH .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.82

<$$heading>

For the deceitfull drapyng and makyng of wollen clothes made and draped
within this Realme , And also for mesuryng in sale of the same , Our
Sov~ayn Lord the Kyng by th@ @advyse and assent of his Lord~ sp~uell and
temp~ell and the Comons in this p~sent parliament assembled and by
auctorite of the same hath ordyned establisshed and enacted dyv~se
ordyn=a=nc~ and statut~ for the trewe makyng and drapyng of suche wollen
clothes and for mesuryng in sales the trewe content of the same in man~
and fo=r=me folowyng ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.84

Fyrst That the Wolle whiche shal@ @be delyv~ed for or by the Clothier to
any p~sone or p~sones for brekyng kembyng cardyng or spy~nyng of the
same the delyv~e therof shal@ @be by even just and true poise and weight
of haberdepois sealid by auctorite not excedyng in weight after the rate
of xij pounde Wolle seymed above oon quart~ of a pound for the waste of
the same wolle and in noon other maner ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.85

And that the breker or kember to delyv~ agayn to the seid Clothier the
same Woll so broken and kempt and the carder and Spynner to delyv~ agayn
to the same Clothier yerne of the same Woll by the same even just and
true poise and weight the wast thereof excepted without any part therof
concealyng or eny more oyle water or other thyng put therunto deceyvably
upon payn to be sett upon the pillorie or the Cukkyngstole Man or Woman
as the case shall requyre upon due prof of suche deceyte afore and by
the discrecyon of the Maire Baily or other Hede Officer of Citie Burgh
or Town where the deceyt shall appere , The same Maire Baily or Hede
Officer callyng to hym such p~sones as shall seme to hym convenyent for
the prof of suche deceyt . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.86

Item that the Wever whiche shall have the wevyng of eny wollen yerne to
be webbed into cloth shall weve werk and put into the webbe for Cloth to
be made therof as@ @moche and all the same yerne as the Clothier or eny
p~sone for hym shall delyv~ to the same Wev~ with his usyd mark put to
the same without changyng or eny p~cell therof levyng out of the same
webbe STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.87

or that restore to the same Clothier the surpluis of the same yerne if
eny be left not put into the same Webbe and without eny more oyle brene
moistur dust sonde or other thyng deceyvably puttyng to or castyng to
the same Webbe upon payne to be sett upon the pillorie by prof
discrecion and in man~ as is aforeseyd . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.88

Item that no man~ p~sone bye eny coloured Wolle or coloured wollen Yerne
of eny Carder Spynner or Wev~ but onely in open Markett upon payn to be
sett upon the pillorie in man~ aforeseyd . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.89

Item that the Walker and Fuller shall truely walke fulle thikke and
werke ev~y webbe of wollen yerne whiche he shall have to walke fulle
thikke or werke without eny Flokkes or any other man~ deceyt to be usyd
in the same and shall not rowe nor werke any Clothe or Webbe with any
Cardes on the right side nor of the wrong side upon payn to be sett upon
the pillory in man~ afore rehersed . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.90

Item that the Clothier nor other p~sone whatsoev~ he be after the fest
of Midsom~ next cu~myng shall not put eny cloth to sale which when it
shal@ @be full wette shall shrynke more than oon yerd in all the lenght
and oon quart~ of a yerd in the brede for the more p~t therof ; and
clothes callyd Narowes or Straites after the rate , upon payn to forfet
for ev~y clothe otherwise put to sale iij s. iiij d. and besyd~ that
to deducte of his price for the same to be rebated to the byer therof
as@ @moche after the rate as the same clothe so otherwise put to sale
beyng full wette shall shrynke more than a yerd of that it was in lenght
tyme of the same sale and as it shall {COM:sic} beyng wette shall
{COM:sic} want of the brede of oon yerd and iij quart~s of a yerd .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.91

Item that the byer of Wollen clothes denysen or alyen after the byeng
therof shall not drawe nor cause to be drawen in lenght nor streyn nor
do to be streyned in brede the same clothes nor any of them by teynto=r=
or wynche or by eny other meane upon payn of forfature for ev~y of the
same clothes so to be drawen or streyned C s. STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.92

Provyded alwey that if suche byer of clothes for proof cause soche
clothes to be full wette he may drawe and strayn them for evenyng of
them oonly so that excede not oon yerd in length more than it shal@ @be
when it shal@ @be <$$em> full wette . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.93

Item that no man~ p~sone what degre or condicion so ev~ he be of werk or
putt upon any wollen Clothes any Flokkes or other deceyvable thyng upon
payn to forfayt for ev~y cloth so wrought deceyvably with Flokk~ or
other deceyvable thyng xl s ; and besyd~ that to be sett upon the
pillory in man~ and fo=r=me afore reherced . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.94

Item that no man~ p~sone or p~sones denysen nor alyen shall not drawe
nor strayn nor do to be drawen or strayned within this Realme nor any of
the p~tyes of beyond the see any Wollen Clothes of the makyng or drapyng
within this Realme in length nor in brede more nor in other man~ than is
aforeseyd nor after the seid fest of Midsom~ send or convey nor cause to
be sent or convehed unto eny of the p~ties of beyond the see there to
put to sale eny wollen clothes of the makyng or drapyng of this Realme
drawen and strayned in length or brede more than is afore reherced after
the rate of xxiiij yerd~ for a brode cloth upon payn to forfait for ev~y
cloth so more drawen and strayned in length and brede than is afore seid
x l~i . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.95

Item that no man~ p~sone denysen nor other bye or sell any wollen
Clothes by other mesure more or lesse than after the treue content
therof to be moten and mesured by the yerd addyng to ev~y yerd oon enche
of the Rule of the true mesuryng for the content of the same clothes
upon payn to forfait for ev~y cloth to the cont=a=ry mesured C s .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.96

Item that ev~y Clothier and other p~sone which shall put or delyv~ to
eny p~sone eny Wolle to breke kembe carde or spynne or yerne to the
wevers to webbe or the webbe to the fullers to fulle walke & thikk shall
w=t=out deceyt or male engyne satisfye content and paye to the same
breker kember carder spynn~ wever and fuller for the same their labour
and workemanship~ redy money of the kyng~ coyn with_out to delyv~ for
payment of suche labour or workemanship~ or eny p~te therof in wares or
vitailes upon payn to forfait for ev~y defalt in that he or they shall
delyv~ for suche paiement for suche labour and Workemanship~ eny wares
or vitaile x s . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.97

Item that the Alnager or Seler after the seid fest of Midsom~ next
co~myng resonably requyred shall put to ev~y Wollen cloth made and
draped within the circuit or p~cint of his office to be sold the Kyng~
Seales of leed and not put to eny suche clothes eny seales of wexe in
any wise upon payne of forfaiture for ev~y cloth sealyd otherwise than
with leede iij s. iiij d. The oon moyte of all the said forfaitures
conteyned in all the seid ordyn=a=nc~ made for makyng and drapyng of
Wollen clothes and for the mesuryng therof to be to our Sov~ayn Lord the
Kyng and to ev~y p~sone whiche woll and shall sewe by writt bill or
other accion in that behalf agaynst any p~sone doyng to the cont=a=ry of
the same ordyn=a=nc~ the other moyte STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.98

And that the defendaunt in any plee upon any suche accion be not
admitted to wage his lawe nor any p~teccion nor essoyne for eny suche
defend=a=unt~ be allowed in the same . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.99

The said Act~ and Ordin=a=nc~ to endure unto the next p~liament .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,28.100

<P_3,29>

And be it furthermore ordeyned and enacted by th@ @advyse and auctoritie
aforesaid that the Kyng our Sov~ayn Lord or eny other p~sones take not
any advantage or p~fuyt of any penalties of forfaitures by an Act made
in the p~liament holden at Westm~ the xxiij day of Januare in the first
yere of the Reign of Richard the third late in dede and not in right
Kyng of Englond conc~nyng the makyng and drapyng of wollen Clothes geven
lymyted or assigned for eny cloth made or hereafter to be made but oonly
accordyng to the seid orden=a=nc~ and statut~ nowe made in this p~sent
p~liament , Eny acte statute orden=a=nce or p~vysion to the cont=a=ry
hertofore made notwithstondyng . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.102

Provyded alwey that this Acte extend not to Wollen Cloth called
Kendalles nor Clothes called Carpenell Whites comonly made for lynyng
for hosen . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.103

And p~vyded also that this Acte extend not to Wollen Clothes called
Tostok~ made in the Countie of Devonshire for medelyng Flokk~ with their
wolle , So they make the same clothes oonly of Wolle growyng in the
Countie of Devonshire and of noon other Wolle so that they drawe nor
streyn the same Clothes more nor in other man~ than is aforeseid .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.104

Provyded also this Acte or eny penaltie or articule therin conteyned
extend not ne in any wise be hurtfull or p~judiciall to any cloth makers
for makyng of any Cloth within the Countie of Cornewall but that all
Clothmakers within the same Countie may make cloth and use clothmakyng
as they before the makyng of this acte have usyd and accustomed , this
acte or any thyng therin conteyned notwithstondyng .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.105

Provyded also that this acte extend not nor be p~judicyall of or to the
maker m~chaunt or byer of eny wollen clothes called Bastard~ made with
cremyll Lystes . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.106

<heading>

CHAPTER VII . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.108

AN ACT AGAYNST CARRYING CLOTHES OVER SEA UNSHORNE .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.109

<$$heading>

Where att the Parliament holden att Westm~ the ix=th= day of Novemb~r
the thurd Yere of the reign of our late Sov~aign Lord Kyng Henry the
vij=th= whose soule God p~don , it was shewed by Shermen Fullers and
other Artificers that shuld live and opteyn their nedy Sustentacyon by
meane of drap~y made and drapyd w=t=in this Realme as@ @well thorowoute
the same Realme as within the Citie of London , that Whereas in a
statute made the vij=th= yere of the Reign of Kyng Edward the Fourth
amonges other it was conteyned that no p~sone denysen nor stranger shuld
carye or do to be caried to any parties beyond the see any Wollen Yarne
nor cloth unfulled but the Wollen Yarne to be made in this Realme shuld
be woven in the same ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.111

And also all cloth within the same made shuld be fulled and fully
wrought within the same before that any of the same shuld be had or
caried out of this Realme upon payn of forfaiture of the very value of
suche yerne not woven and cloth not fullyd had or caried out of this
Realme , the oon half of the same forfaiture to be levyed to the use of
the Kyng , and the other half of that to hym or them that shuld espye or
make p~ve of any suche Yarne not woven or cloth not fullyd caried to any
place beyond the See . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.112

And for as moche as in the seid statute of Kyng Edward there is noon
exp~sse mencyon made that the seid Clothes shuld be rowed and shorne
before that they be caryed and conveyhed out of this Realme , wherby the
seid power comons of the Craftes aforeseid myght be sett in labour and
occupacion Therfore the said Clothes then were and yet been in grete
nombre and plente caried and conveied oute of this realme unrowed and
unshorn into the p~ties of the beyond the see as well by denysens as by
strangers wherby outlandishe nacyons with the same drap~y been sett to
labo=r= and occupacyon to their grete enrichyng , and the pouer Comons
of the craftes aforsaid thorough all this Realme which of naturall
reason as the Kyng~ true ligemen shuld have and opteyn their nedy
sustentacion and lyvyng by meanes of the same drap~ey for lack of such
occupacion daily fall in grete nu~bre into Indilnes and pov~tie to their
utt~most distruccyon if it shuld then any lenger contynue ;
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.113

Whereupon our said Sov~aygn Lord Kyng Henry the vij=th= by the advyse of
the Lord~ sp~uall and temp~all and at the praiers of the Comons in his
said p~liament assembled and by auctoritie of the same ordeyned
establisshed and enacted That noo stranger nor denysen shuld carye or
make to be caried out of this Realme any wollen clothes but that they
before be barbyd rowed and shorn within the same Realme for the releif
and settyng aworke of the seid pouer Comons of the craftes aforeseid
upon payn of the forfaiture lymyted in the said Statute of Kyng Edward
made upon cloth caried out of this Realme not fullid to be devyded in
man~ and fo=r=me as in the same statut~ conteyned , So that Clothes
called Vesses Rayes Saillyng Clothes and all other Clothes com~only sold
at xl s. or under be not comprysed in the said Acte made the seid third
yere of the reign of our said late Sov~aign Lord Kyng Henry the vij=th=
as by the same actes more playnly apperyth : STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.114

And for lack of due execucyon of the seid act~ litell effect or p~fett
hath folowed or growen of the same to the seid pouer crafty men beyng
naturall Subgett~ which for lack of worke and occupacion daily fall in
Idilnesse and pov~tye : STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.115

Be it therfor ordeyned establisshed and enacted by the Kyng our Sov~aign
Lord and the Lord~ sp~uall and temp~all and the comons in this p~sent
p~liament assembled and by auctoritie of the same that the seid act~ and
orden=a=nc~ may stand and contynue in there full strenght and v~tue .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.116

And that they from hensforth been duely put in execucion accordyng to
the teno=r= p=r=porte and effect of the same and of either of them ;
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.117

And that ev~y p~sone that will sue for the same forfaitures be admitted
to his accion of dett by bill or informacion in any of the Kyng~ Court~
of Record where the same may be det~myned after the Cours of the co~en
lawe ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.118

And that the Defendant in such behalf in noo wise be admitted to wage
his Lawe nor that any p~teccion or essoyne be in the same alowable .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.119

Nev~thelesse for that the drapyng and makyng of suche clothes callid
Vesses Rayes Saillyng Clothes and other Clothes which tyme of makyng of
the Statute of Kyng Henry the vij=th= were co~monly solde at xl s. or
under the maker therof and Clothier of tymes passyd and nowe is and
herafter is like to be at gretter charge aboute the drapyng and makyng
of the same and also of all other clothes for that Wolle is of ferr
gretter price , and also the Cost~ and Charg~ for the workemanship of
such Clothes is ferr more chargeable than it were tyme of makyng of the
seid estatute ; Be it therfore p~vyded by the auctoritie aforeseid that
Clothes called Vesses Rayes Saillyng Clothes and other Clothes nowe
co~monly sold at iiij Mark~ or under be not comprised in this or any of
the seid Act~ but may be caried and conveyed oute of this Realme into
the p~ties of beyond the See not barbed rowed nor shorn , this or any of
the seid Actes notwithstondyng . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,29.120

<P_3,31>

<heading>

CHAPTER XI . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,31.123

AN ACT CONCERNING PHESICIONS & SURGEONS . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,31.124

<$$heading>

Forasmoche as the science and connyng of Physyke and Surg~ie to the
p~fecte knowlege wherof bee requisite bothe grete lernyng and ripe
exp~ience ys daily within this Royalme exc~cised by a grete multitude of
ignoraunt p~sones of whom the grete partie have no man~ of insight in
the same nor in any other kynde of lernyng some also can no l~res on the
boke soo@ @far@ @furth that co~mon Artific~s as Smythes Wevers and Women
boldely and custumably take upon theim grete curis and thyngys of great
difficultie In the which they partely use socery and which crafte
partely applie <P_3,32> such medicyne unto the disease as be verey
noyous and nothyng metely therfore to the high despleasoure of God great
infamye to the faculties and the grevous hurte damage and distruccion of
many of the Kyng~ liege people most sp~ally of them that can@ @not
descerne the uncu~nyng from the cunnyng ; Be it therfore to the suertie
and comfort of all man~ people by the auctoritie of thys p~sent
parliament enacted that noo p~son within the Citie of London nor within
vij myles of the same take upon hym to exc~cise and occupie as a
Phisicion or Surgion except he be first examined approved and admitted
by the Bisshop~ of London or by the Dean of Poules for the tyme beyng
callyng to hym or them iiij Doctours of Phisyk and for Surg~ie other
exp~t p~sones in that facultie And for the first examynacion such as
they shall thynk convenient ; And aft~ward alway iiij of them that have
been soo approved upon the payn of forfeytour for ev~y moneth that they
doo occupie as Phisicions or Surgeons not admitted nor examined after
the tenour of thys Acte of v li to be employed the oon half therof to
th@ @use of our Sov~aign Lord the Kyng and the other half therof to any
p~son that wyll sue for it by accion of dette in which no Wageour of
Lawe nor p~teccion shal@ @be allowed . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,32.126

And ov~ thys that noo p~son out of the seid Citie and p~cincte of vij
myles of the same except he have been as is seid before approved in the
same take upon hym to ex~cise and occupie as a Phisicion or Surgeon in
any Diocesse within thys Royalme but if he be first examined and
approved by the Bisshop of the same Diocesse or he beyng out of the
Diocesse by hys Vicar gen~all either of them callyng to them such expert
p~sons in the seid faculties as there discrecion shall thynk convenyent
and gyffyng ther lett~s testimonials under ther sealle to hym that they
shall soo approve upon like payn to them that occupie the cont=a=rie to
thys acte as is above seid to be levyed and employd after the fourme
before exp~ssed STAT-1511-E1-H,3,32.127

Provided alway that thys acte nor any thyng therin conteyned be
p~judiciall to the Univ~sities of Oxford and Cantebrigge or either of
them or to any privilegys g=a=unted to them . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,32.128

<P_3,33>

<heading>

CHAPTER XV . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,33.131

AN ACT CONCERNING HATT~ AND CAPP~ . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,33.132

<$$heading>

Where by the workers and makers of Cappes and Hattes within this Realme
of England have dailly occupied and sett on work in making of cappes and
hattes of the Kyng~ naturall Subjectis that is to sey Men Women Maydens
and Childern borne wythin this Realme of England to the great relief and
comfort of poore Prisoners within this Realme to the nombre of
thre_score_thowsand persones and above in carding spynnyng stitchyng
knyttyng thikkyng dressyng dyeng sheryng and pressyng wyth other c~ten
feates conc~nyng the workyng and makyng of cappes and hattes made and
wrought wythin the Citie of London and in dyv~se and many other Cities
Boroughes and Townes within this Realme wherby the King~ Subject~ here
naturally borne have had their poore lyving tyme out of mynde , Till of
late yeres past that so great haboundaunce of cappes and hattes redy
wrought and made have been and daily be brought from the p~ties of
beyond the See into this Realme , and here have been and daylly bee
uttred and sold to the great p~fite occupieng encreace and relyef of
Straungiers of other Realmes which had and have the workyng and makyng
of the same cappes and hattes , and to the great Idelnesse enpov~ysshyng
and utter undoing of great multitude of the Kyngis naturall subjectis
borne wythin this said Realme ; By reason wherof the Kyng~ Subject~
borne wythin this <P_3,34> Realme have not their poore leving nor be not
occupied nor sett on worke in making of cappes and hattes as they were
wont to be ; By occasyon wherof they fall to Idelnesse & other
inco~venie~t~ to beggyn~ & manyfold syknes to the great impov~ysshment
of the co~mons of this Realme ; In consideracion of the p~misses be yt
ordeigned enacted and establysshed by the Kyng our Souv~aigne Lord the
Lord~ sp~uall and temporall and the Co~mons in this p~sent p~liament
assembled and by the auctorite of the same , that from the furst day of
May next co~myng ther be no cappes nor hatt~ made and redy wrought in
any partie beyond the See bought by any of the Kinges Subject~ borne
undre the Kingis obbeysaunce except Lordes or Knyght~ uppon peyne of
Forfeiture for ev~y suche cappe or hatte so by theym or any of theim
bought xl s. the oon moyte of the same forfeyture to be to the King our
Sov~aigne Lord , and th@ @other moyte to hym or theym that wyll sue for
the same by accion of dett or otherwise ; In whiche acco~n the p~tie
defendaunt shal@ @not be admytted to wage his Lawe nor p~tecc~on nor
essoyne to be allowed in the same accion . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.134

Ferthermore be it enacted by the said auctorite that no Capper nor
Hatter nor other p~sone selle nor putt to sale any cappe or hatte that
shal@ @be made within this Realme after the Fest of Midsom~ next co~myng
but that it be sufficiently wrought and of a sufficient colour in ev~y
point after the goodnesse and fynesse of the woll wherof they shal@ @be
made uppon peyne of forfeyture of ev~y cappe or hatte so sold vj s.
viij d. And that the Capper nor none other p~sone shal@ @not take by
hym self or any other p~sone to his use for any Cappe made of the fynest
Leemynster woll above iij s. iiij d. ; Nor for any Cappe made of the
seconde sorte of the same Leemynster wolle above ij s. vj d. nor for
any cappe made of the third sort of Leemynster wolle above xx d. nor
for any cappe made of the fourth sorte of the same Leemynster wolle
above xij d. ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.135

And that no Capper Hatter nor any other p~sone shall not take by hymself
or any other p~sone to his use for any Cappe made of the fynest
Cotteswold woll above ij s. ; Nor for any cappe made of the seconde
sorte of the same Cotteswold woll above xvj d. And that all other
cappes and hattes of other woll to be sold at suche price as the bier
and seller may resounably agree . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.136

The cappe made of the seid fynest Leemynster woll to be marked in the
lynyng of the same cappe with a l~re L . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.137

The cappe made of the seconde sorte of the same Leemynster woll to be
marked with this mark Lr ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.138

The cappe made of the fynest Cotteswold woll to be marked with a l~re C.
in the lynyng therof ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.139

And the seconde cappe of the seconde sorte of Cotteswold woll to be
marked wyth this marke Cr ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.140

And the Hatter Capper nor other p~sone by hym self nor any other p~sone
to his use shall take of any of the Kyng~ Subject~ for any hatte of the
best makyng not engreyned more than ij s. ; STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.141

And yf any Capper Hatter or other p~sone take more money for any cappe
or hatte contrary to this acte , he to forfayte for ev~y cappe and hatte
for which he shall take mor than is aforerehersed xl. s .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.142

The moite therof to be to the Kyng our Sov~aigne Lord , and the other
moite to the p~tie grevid or any other p~sone that woll sue accion for
the same forfaiture by Writt Byll or Pleynte at the Co~en Lawe or after
custome of Citie or Towne wher it shall fortune suche forfaiture to bee
by like p~cesse as is used in accions of Debt in Court where it shal@
@be pursued . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.143

And that the Defendaunt in that behalf be not admytted to wage his Lawe
nor that any p~teccion or essoyne be to hym allowed .
STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.144

And that all and singuler Estatutes hertofore made conc~nyng hattes or
cappes be fromhensforth repelled and adnulled by vertue of this p~sent
parliament . STAT-1511-E1-H,3,34.145

