<BEGIN_stat-1697-e3-h>

<P_VII,75>

<heading>

CHAPTER XII . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,75.4

AN ACT FOR RELIEF OF POOR PRISONERS FOR DEBT OR DAMAGES .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,75.5

<$$heading>

Whereas for several charitable and good Reasons an Act of Parliament was
made in the Twenty_second and Twenty_third Yeares of the Reigne of our
late Sovereigne Lord King Charles the Second intituled An Act for the
Relief and Release of Poor distressed Prisoners for Debt and because of
some dubious Construction of some Word~ in the said Act the same did not
answer the full Intent for which it was made And therefore for
Explanation thereof and to supply the Defect~ which did obstruct the
good End~ and Purposes of the said Act another Act was made in the same
Parliament in the Thirtieth Yeare of the Reigne of the said late King
intituled An Act for the further Relief and Discharge of poor distressed
Prisoners for Debt by which said last mentioned Act it was enacted That
all Persons being in Prison upon the Twenty_ninth Day of May
One_thousand_six_hundred_seventy_and_eight for Debt or Damages upon any
manner of Processe whatsoever issuing out of any Court of Law or Equity
and who shall take the Oath in the said first recited Act mentioned
should and might bee released and discharged from their Imprisonment~ in
the same manner as Persons being Prisoners might have been by the said
first mentioned Act and in case the said Debt and Damages had been
ascertained by Judgement . And whereas several Persons have been
discharged by virtue of the said two Act~ and alsoe by virtue of one
other Act of Parliament made in the Second Yeare of the Reigne of His
present Majestie and of Her late Majestie Queen Mary entituled An Act
for Relief of Poor Prisoners for Debt or Damages but by reason of some
Defect~ in the said Act~ of Parliament the Discharges of many of the
said Persons have not been effectual . And whereas very many Persons
are detained in Prison although they are altogether unable to make any
Satisfaction to their Creditors and because of such Confinement are a
Charge and Burthen to the Kingdome and rendred incapable to doe such
Service as otherwise they might to their King and Countrey and for the
help of themselves and their Families Bee it therefore enacted by the
King~ most Excellent Majestie by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Lord~ Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled and by the Authority of the same that all Persons in Prison
upon the Five_and_twentieth Day of December in the Yeare of our Lord
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_five for Debt or Damages or for or
upon any Action or Actions or upon any mean Processe for Debt Account or
Trespasse upon the Case which Actions by Prosecution of Law may bee
Judgement~ for Debt or Damages or who may have Judgement~ entred upon
Record against them or are charged in Execution or imprisoned upon
Attachment~ for Debt or upon Outlawries before or after Judgement for
Debt or upon any other Processe whatsoever issued out of any Court of
Law or Equity for the Cause of Debt or Damages or Cost~ onely who shall
take the Oath in the said first recited Act mentioned and the Oath in
this present Act following required to bee taken by Prisoners shall and
may bee released and discharged from their Imprisonment~ in the same
forme and in such Manner as is contained and mentioned in the said two
first mentioned Act~ and as if such Person was Prisoner before and att
the time mentioned for the Release and Discharge of such Prisoner in
either of the said two first mentioned Act~ . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,75.7

And it is further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That any Justice or
Justices of the Peace who pursuant to the said Two first mentioned Act~
and according to the true Intent and Meaning of this present Act shall
make any Order for the Discharge of any Poor Prisoner for Debt such
Justice or Justices of Peace shall by Su~mons cause to come and call
before him or them any Sheriff Goaler or Keeper of Prison of such Goal
or Prison of and from which such Prisoner or Prisoners hee shee or they
is or are and shall administer and give to such Sheriff Goaler or Keeper
of Prison an Oath to this Effect following viz=t= .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,75.8

I A. B. doe swear That I. S. was really and truely my Prisoner in my
Custody without any Fraud or Deceit by mee or by any other to my
Knowledge att or upon the Five_and_twentieth Day of December in the
Yeare of our Lord One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_five .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,75.9

Soe help mee God . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,75.10

Provided and bee it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if such
Person who was Goaler or Keeper of such Goal or Prison on the said
Five_and_twentieth Day of December
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_five shall not happen to bee the
Goaler or Keeper of such Goal or Prison att the time of the making such
Su~mon that then the said Justice or Justic~ of the Peace before whom
the Sheriff Goaler or Keeper of such Prison shall appeare by virtue of
such Warrant shall administer and give to such Person as shall bee
Sheriff Goaler or Keeper of such Prison att the time of making of such
Summons an Oath to the Effect following viz=t= .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,75.11

I A. B. doe swear That I have examined the Committment~ or Book~ kept
of and concerning the Commitment~ of Prisoners to the Prison of C. in
the County of D. and that by them it doth appeare that I. S. was
really and truely a Prisoner in the Custody of E. F. the then Sheriff
Goaler or Keeper of the said Prison without any Fraud or Deceit by mee
or by the said E. F. or any other Person or Persons to my Knowledge or
Belief att or upon the Five_and_twentieth day of December in the Yeare
of our Lord One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_five .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,75.12

Soe help mee God . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,75.13

And bee it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if such
Sheriff Goaler or Keeper of Prison being duely su~moned to appeare
before the said Justice or Justices of the Peace shall without just
Cause to bee allowed by such Justice or Justices of the Peace refuse to
appeare or to take One of the said Two before mentioned <P_VII,76> Oaths
soe to bee given and administred to them respectively by the said
Justice or Justices of the Peace as aforesaid such Sheriff Goaler or
Keeper of Prison shall forfeit and pay to such Prisoner soe about to bee
discharged & released from Prison and thereby detained the Value of such
Debt or Debt~ for which hee or she shall bee imprisoned to bee recovered
by Action of Debt in any of His Majesties Court~ of Record And if any
such Sheriff Goaler or Keeper of Prison shall forswear and perjure
himselfe and shall bee thereof lawfully convicted such Sheriff Goaler or
Keeper of Prison shall incurr and suffer such Penalties as are now in
Force and may by Law bee inflicted upon Persons convicted of Perjury .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,76.14

And bee it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That such Prisoner
as shall take the Benefitt of this Act according to the Forme of the
said Two first mentioned Act~ as is hereby required and shall take the
Oath in the said first recited Act mentioned shall alsoe before such
Justice or Justices of the Peace by whom such Oath is to bee given and
administred likewise take an Oath <paren> which such Justice or Justices
of the Peace is and are hereby impowered to administer <$$paren> to this
Effect , STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,76.15

videl~t I A. B. doe sweare That on the Five_and_twentieth day of
December in the Yeare of our Lord One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_&_five
I was actually a Prisoner in the Custody of the Goaler or Keeper of the
Prison of C. in the County of D. att the Suit of I. S. without any
Consent or p~curement and without any Fraud or Collusion whatsoever .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,76.16

Soe help mee God . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,76.17

And if any Prisoner who shall take the Benefitt of this Act and shall in
pursuance of the same take the Oaths for any the Purposes hereby or by
any the before mentioned Act~ appointed shall forsweare himselfe or
herselfe then shall such Person being thereof lawfully convicted beyond
and over and above the Penalties which may by Law now in Force bee
inflicted upon Persons convicted of Perjury suffer Imprisonment for the
space of Seven yeares without Bail or Mainprize .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,76.18

And it is declared and enacted by the Authority aforesaid That takeing
the Oaths and giving to the Creditors such Notice as is by this present
Act required in all other thing~ for the Release and Discharge of any
poor Prisoner from Prison shall bee observed and performed in the same
Forme and Method as is mentioned and directed by the said Two first
mentioned Act~ of Parliament . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,76.19

Provided always neverthelesse That this Act shall not extend to any
Person or Persons in Execution for any Fine on him her or them imposed
for any Offence by him her or them co~mitted . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,76.20

Provided alsoe That noe Person shall bee discharged out of Prison or
have any Benefitt or Advantage by force or virtue of this Act who shall
bee really and bona fide indebted in more than the Su~m of One_hundred
Pound~ Principal Money for Debt or Damages or shall stand charged with
any Debt to His Majestie . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,76.21

Provided always and bee it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid
That notwithstanding the Discharge of the Person of such Prisoner as
aforesaid upon takeing the Oaths aforesaid all and every Judgement and
Judgement~ had and taken against him or her alone or with any other
Person or Persons shall stand and bee good and effectual in the Law to
all Intent~ and Purposes against the Land~ Tenement~ Hereditament~ Good~
and Chattels onely of the said Prisoner soe as aforesaid discharged And
that it shall and may bee lawfull to and for such Creditor or Creditors
of such Prisoner or Prisoners soe discharged as aforesaid his her or
their Executors Administrators or Assignes to take out any new Execution
against the Land~ Tenement~ Hereditament~ Good~ and Chattells of such
Prisoner or Prisoners <paren> his or her Wearing Apparel Bedding for his
or her Family and Tools necessary for his or her Trade or Occupac~on
onely excepted <$$paren> for the Satisfaction of his her or their said
Debt in such Sort Manner and Forme as hee she or they might have done if
the Person or Persons of such Prisoner or Prisoners had never been taken
in Execution Any Act Statute Law or Custome to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,76.22

And bee it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That upon any
Actions of Escape or other Suit brought or to bee brought against any
Justice of the Peace Sheriff Goaler or Keeper of Prison for any thing
done in obedience to this Act itt shall and may bee lawfull to and for
such Justice of the Peace Sheriff Goaler and Keeper of Prison to plead
the General Issue and give this Act and the said Two first mentioned
Act~ and the Proceeding~ thereon in Evidence which shall bee a good &
sufficient Discharge and shall save harmlesse every such Justice of the
Peace Sheriff Goaler or Keeper of Prison pleading the same
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,76.23

And if the Plaintiff in any such Action shall bee nonsuited or Verdict
passe against him the Defendant shall have Double Cost~ to bee taxed by
the Court where such Action is brought . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,76.24

And further Bee it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if any
Prisoner who hath been discharged by virtue of any of the Act~ of
Parliament herein before mentioned or who shall bee discharged by virtue
of this Act shall happen to bee arrested again for any Debt contracted
before such his Discharge if such Prisoner shall shew a Duplicate of his
or her Discharge under the Hand~ and Seales of the Justices of the Peace
by whom hee or she was discharged or of any two of them and the Officer
refuseing to sett att Liberty him or her soe arrested and shewing such
Duplicate then and in such Case upon Petition to either of the Two Lord~
Chief Justices of the King~ Bench and Co~mon Pleas or Lord Chief Baron
of the Exchequer for the time being or to any one of <P_VII,77> his
Majesties Justices of the Court~ of King~ Bench or Co~mon Pleas for the
time being or to any Justice or Justices of the Peace of the Place or
County where such Prisoner shall bee under Arrest or in Custody the said
Lord~ Chief Justices or Lord Chief Baron or Justices of the said Court~
or Justices of the Peace or any one or more of them shall and may su~mon
before him or them such Parties as hee or they shall think fitt and upon
hearing and examining the Matter in a su~mary way shall and may sett att
Liberty and discharge such Prisoner upon his or her giving a Warant of
Attorney to appeare and file Co~mon Bail to every such Action and to
plead thereunto . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,77.25

And bee it alsoe enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if any Prisoner
who hath been or shall bee discharged by virtue of any of the Act~
before mentioned or by virtue of this Act shall att any time hereafter
be arrested or sued for any Debt contracted before such his or her
Discharge hee or she may plead the General Issue and give this Act and
the said Two first mentioned Act~ and the Proceeding~ thereon had in
Evidence . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,77.26

Provided always That noe Man being under Forty Yeares of Age shall
dureing the present Warr with France bee discharged from his
Imprisonment or have any Benefitt or Advantage by means or virtue of
this Act or any thing therein contained unlesse such Man or Person doe
and shall before his Discharge voluntarily list himselfe a Soldier under
some Officer or Officers of His Majesties Fleet or Army or in his Place
or Stead procure one able Man to list himselfe under His Majesties
Service Any thing herein before contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,77.27

Provided that nothing in this Act shall extend to release or discharge
any Person or Persons who have co~mitted any Felony or Robery and for
which any Action hath been brought to recover Damages for the same
though the Damages be under One_hundred Pound~ .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,77.28

<P_VII,97>

<heading>

CHAPTER XX . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.31

AN ACT FOR GRANTING TO HIS MAJESTY AN ADDITIONALL DUTY UPON ALL FRENCH
GOODS AND MERCHANDIZE . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.32

<$$heading>

Wee Your Majesties most dutifull and loyall Subjects the Commons
assembled in Parliament have cheerfully and unanimously given and
granted and doe hereby give and grant unto Your Majesty the additionall
and other Rates Impositions Dutyes and Charges upon the severall sorts
of Goods and Merchandize to bee imported into the Kingdome of England
Dominion of Wales or Towne of Berwick upon Tweed during such Tyme and in
such Manner and Forme as herein after followeth STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.34

And doe humbly pray Your Majesty that it may bee enacted And bee itt
enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the same That there
shall bee answered and paid to His Majesty and His Heires and Successors
for the severall Goods and Merchandizes hereafter menco~ned over and
above all Impositions Dutyes and Charges already imposed and payable
upon and for the same in the Booke of Rates of Merchandize by Act of
Parliament established and the Direction therein contained or otherwise
the further Rates and Duties following STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.35

<paren> that is to say <$$paren> For every Tun of French Wine imported
from and after the Twenty_eighth Day of February
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_six for the Terme of One_and_twenty
Yeares and from thence to the End of the next Session of Parliament and
noe longer Five_and_twenty Pounds above the Duties already charged
thereupon without any Deduction STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.36

and soe proportionable for a greater or lesser Quantity .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.37

For every Tun of French Brandy of Single Proofe imported after the
Twenty_eighth day of February One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_six for
the Terme of One_and_twenty Yeares and from thence to the End of the
next Session of Parliament and noe longer Thirty Pounds
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.38

And for every Tun of French Brandy of Double Proofe imported as
aforesaid Sixty Pounds over and above the Dutyes already charged
thereupon without any Deduction STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.39

and soe proportionably for a greater or lesser Quantity .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.40

For every Tun of French Vinegar imported after the said Twenty_eighth
Day of February One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_six for the Terme of
One_and_twenty Yeares and from thence to the End of the next Session of
Parliament and noe longer Fifteene Pounds over and above the Duties
already charged thereupon without any Deduction STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.41

and soe proportionably for any greater or lesser Quantity .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.42

For all other Goods of the Growth Product or Manufacture of France
imported after the said Twenty_eighth Day of February
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_six for the Terme of One_and_twenty
Yeares and from thence to the End of the next Session of Parliament and
noe longer Five_and_twenty Pounds per_Centum ad Valorem over and above
the Duties already charged thereupon without any Deduction
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.43

and soe proportionably for a greater or lesser Quantity .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,97.44

Provided alwayes and bee itt enacted , That the severall Rates and
Impositions hereby imposed upon the respective Goods and Merchandizes
aforesaid shall bee collected and paid according to the respective Rates
and Proportions herein expressed and bee raised levyed collected and
paid unto His Majesty dureing the respective Tymes before mentioned in
the same Manner and Forme and by such Rules Meanes and Wayes and under
such Penalties and Forfeitures as are mentioned and expressed in one Act
of Parliament made in the Twelfth Yeare of the Reigne of <P_VII,98> King
Charles the Second intituled A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage
and Poundage and other Summes of Money payable upon Merchandize exported
and imported and the Rules Directions and Orders thereunto annexed or
any other Lawes now in force relateing to the Collection of His
Majesties Customes which said Act and Acts and every Article Rule and
Clause therein contained shall stand and bee in force for the Purposes
aforesaid dureing the Continuance of this Act .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,98.45

And whereas a very usefull and profitable Invention or Mystery hath
beene lately found out for the better and more speedy makeing and
knitting of Worsted and Silke Stockings Wastcoates Gloves and other
wearing Necessaries whereby great Quantities are wrought off in a little
tyme His Majesties Dominions abundantly supplyed and great Quantities
exported into Foreigne Nations to the Increase of His Majesties Customes
and the Improvement of Trade and Commerce And whereas severall of the
Frames or Engines for the makeing and knitting of such Stockings and
other weareing Necessaries have beene of late exported out of this
Kingdome whereby the said Commodities have beene made in Foreigne Parts
which were heretofore made in this Kingdome onely to the great
Discouragement of the Woollen Trade in generall and the great detriment
of the said Mystery and the Impoverishment of many Familyes who have
beene thereby maintained For the Prevention of which Inconveniencies for
the future bee it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That from and after
the First Day of May One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_six noe Person or
Persons whatsoever shall load or putt on board any Shipp or Vessell any
such Frame or Frames or any Part or Parcell thereof in order to bee
exported beyond the Seas upon payne that the Person or Persons offending
herein shall not onely forfeite or loose such Frame and Frames Parts or
Parcells of Frames which shall bee soe loaden and putt on board in order
to be exported beyond the Seas as aforesaid but also the Summe of Forty
Pounds of lawfull Money of England for such Frame or Part or Parcell
thereof STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,98.46

the one Moiety thereof to His Majesty His Heires and Successors
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,98.47

the other Moiety thereof to the Person or Persons who shall informe and
sue for the same to bee recovered by Action of Debt Bill Plaint or
Information in any of His Majesties Courts of Record wherein noe
Essoigne Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed or more than one
Imparlance . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,98.48

And for the more effectuall preventing the Exportation of such Frames
Bee itt further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That all and every
Person and Persons whatsoever which from and after the said First Day of
May shall buy sell dispose of or remove from Place to Place any such
Frame or Engine or any Parts or Parcells thereof shall within Two Months
next after such Disposall or Removall thereof give Notice in Writeing to
the Master and Wardens of the Company of Frame-Worke-Knitters within the
City of London or to theire lawfull Debuty or Debuties for the tyme
being some or one of them to whom and what Place the same were soe sold
disposed or removed To the end that an Accompt may bee taken by the said
Master and Wardens or theire Deputy or Deputies thereof upon Paine that
every Person and Persons offending herein shall forfeite and pay for
every such Offence to the Uses aforesaid the Summe of Five Pounds of
like Money to bee recovered as aforesaid . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,98.49

<P_VII,210>

<heading>

CHAPTER XVI . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,210.52

AN ACT FOR ENLARGEING CO~MON HIGH-WAYS . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,210.53

<$$heading>

Whereas an Act made in the Thirteenth and Foureteenth Yeares of the
Reigne of King Charles the Second for enlargeing Common High-ways is
expired and that the ordinary Course appointed by the Laws and Statutes
of this Realme is not sufficient for the enlargeing of the High-ways of
this Kingdome Be it enacted by the King~ most Excellent Majesty by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lord~ Spiritual and Temporal and the
Co~mons in this present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the
same That the Justices of the Peace of any County City Riding Division
Liberty or Place or the major Part of them being Five att the least att
their Quarter Sessions shall have power to enlarge or widen any Highways
in their respective Counties Riding~ Divisions Liberties or Places so
that the Ground to be taken into the said Highways do not exceed Eight
Yard~ in Breadth & that the said Power do not extend to pull downe any
House or to take away the Ground of any Garden Orchard Court or Yard
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,210.55

And for the Satisfaction of the Persons who are Owners of or may be
interested in the said Ground that shall be laid into the said High-ways
the said Justices are hereby impowered to impannel a Jury before them
and to administer an Oath to the said Jury that they will assesse such
Damages to be given and Recompence to be made to the Owners and others
interested in the said Ground Rent or Charge respectively for their
respective Interest~ as they shall think reasonable not exceeding
Five_&_twenty Yeares Purchase for Land~ so laid out and likewise such
Recompence as they shall think reasonable for the making of a new Ditch
and Fence to that side of the High-way that shall be so enlarged and
also Satisfaction to any Person that may be otherwise injured by the
enlargeing of the said High-ways STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,210.56

and upon Payment of the said Money so awarded or leaving itt in the
Hand~ of the Clerk of the Peace of the respective County for the Use of
the Owner or of others interested in the said Ground the Interest of the
said Persons in the said Ground-Rent or Charge shall be for ever
divested out of them STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,210.57

and the said Ground and all other Ground~ that shall be laid into any
High-way by virtue of this Act shall be esteemed and taken to be a
Publick High-way to all Intent~ and Purposes whatsoever
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,210.58

and the said Justices of the Peace for any County City Riding Division
Liberty or other Place or the major part of them being Five att the
least shall have power to order one or more Assessment or Assessment~ to
be made levied or collected upon all and every the Inhabitant~ Owners or
Occupiers of Land~ Houses Tenement~ or Hereditament~ in their respective
Parishes or Places that ought to repaire the same to such Person and
Persons and in such manner as the said Justices att such Sessions shall
direct and appoint STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,210.59

and the Money thereby raised shall be imployed and accounted for
according to the Order & Direction of the said Justices for and toward~
the purchasing of the Land to enlarge the said Highways and for the
making the said Ditches and Fences STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,210.60

and the said Assessment shall by order of the said Justices be levied by
the Overseers of the High-ways by Distresse and Sale of the Good~ of
Persons so assessed not paying the same within Ten Days after Demand
rendring the Overplus of the Value of the Good~ so distrained to the
Owner and Owners thereof <paren> the necessary Charges of making and
settling such Good~ being first deducted . <$$paren>
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,210.61

<P_VII,211>

Provided neverthelesse and be it enacted That no such Assessment or
Assessment~ made in any One Yeare for enlargeing of High-ways shall
exceed the Rate of Six Pence in the Pound of the yearely Income of any
Land~ Houses Tenement~ and Hereditament~ nor the Rate of Six pence in
the Pound for Personal Estates . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,211.63

And that no Person may be surprised by the Power contained in this Act
but may have timely Notice to appear to make their Complaint~ to the
said Justices Be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the Justices
of Peace of any County City Riding Division Liberty or Place or the
major part of them being Five att the least att their Quarter Sessions
att the Request of any Person for the Putting in Execution the Powers
contained in this Act for the enlargeing of High ways shall issue out
their Precept~ to the Owner or Owners of Ground or others interested in
the same that are to be laid into the said Highways to appeare att the
next Quarter Sessions or shew cause why the said High-ways should not be
enlarged Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding
. STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,211.64

Provided also and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if any
Order or Decree shall be made by the said Justices for the laying out of
Ground for the enlargeing of High-ways that the Owners or Proprietors of
the said Ground have hereby free Liberty within Eight Months after such
Order to cutt downe any Wood or Timber growing upon the said Ground or
upon the neglect thereof that the same shall be sold by Order of the
said Justices STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,211.65

and the Owners of such Wood or Timber shall receive the full of what
shall be made of such Wood or Timber <paren> the Charges of working the
same being first deducted . <$$paren> STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,211.66

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That it shall & may
be lawfull for any Person grieved by the Order or Decree of the said
Justices to appeal to the Judges of Assize att the next Assize onely to
be held for the County where such Decree or Order shall be made
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,211.67

and any of the said Judges are hereby impowered to reexamine affirme or
reverse the said former Order and Decree as in Judgement they shall
think fitt and if affirmed to award Cost~ against such Appellant~ for
their Vexation and Delay and to cause the same to be levied by Distresse
and Sale of the Appellant~ Good~ rendring the Overplus <paren> if any
such be <$$paren> to the said Appellant~ . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,211.68

Provided also and be it enacted That where any Co~mon High-way att any
Time hereafter shall be enclosed after a Writt of Ad quod Dampnum issued
and Inquisiton thereupon taken it shall and may be lawfull to and for
any Person or Persons injured or agrieved by such Inclosure to make
their Complaint thereof by Appeal to the Justices att the Quarter
Sessions to be held for the same County next after such Inquisition
taken who are hereby authorized and impowered to heare and determine
such Appeal and whose Determination therein shall be final
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,211.69

and if no such Appeal be made then the said Inquisition and Returne
entred and recorded by the Clerke of the Peace of such County att the
Quarter Sessions shall be forever afterward~ binding to all Persons
whatsoever without any further or other Appeal Any Law or Statute to the
contrary notwithstanding . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,211.70

And for the better convenience of travelling in such Part~ of this
Kingdome which are remote from Towns and where several High-ways meet Be
it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That it shall and may be
lawfull to and for his Majesties Justices of the Peace att their
respective Special Sessions to be held once in Foure Months by virtue of
an Act made in the Third and Fourth Yeares of the Reigne of King William
and Queen Mary intituled An Act for the better repairing & amending the
High-ways and for settling the Rates of Carriage of Good~ so often and
in such Cases as they shall think necessary to direct their Precept to
the Surveyors of the High-ways in any Parish or Place where Two or more
Crosse High-ways meet requiring them forthwith to cause to be erected or
fixed in the most convenient Place where such Ways joyn a Stone or Post
with an Inscription thereon in large Letters containing the Name of the
next Markett Towne to which each of the said joyning High-ways lead~ who
is to be reimburst according as the said Act for the repairing of
High-ways direct~ STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,211.71

And in case any Surveyor or Surveyors shall by {HELSINKI:be} the Space
of Three Months after such Precept to him or them directed and delivered
neglect or refuse to cause such Stone or Post to be fixed as is
aforesaid every such Offender shall forfeit the Su~m of Ten Shilling~ to
be levied by Warr=t=. under the Hand and Seale of any Justice of the
Peace {TEXT:"of_the_peace"_repeated} of Riding Division or Liberty where
such Parish or Place shall be such Warr=t=. to be directed to the
Constable of such Parish or Place requiring him to distraine the Good~
of such Offendor and sell the same rendring to him the Overplus <paren>
if any be <$$paren> and to imploy such Su~m so levied in and toward~
such Stone or Post as is aforesaid and in case any Part of the said Su~m
shall remaine after such Stone or Post erected then to imploy such
remaining Su~m in amending the same crosse High-ways and not otherwise .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,211.72

<P_VII,454>

<heading>

CHAPTER III . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,454.75

AN ACT TO PROHIBIT THE EXPORTATION OF ANY CORN MALT MEALE FLOUR BREAD
BISCUIT OR STARCH FOR ONE YEARE FROM THE TENTH DAY OF FEBRUARY
ONE_THOUSAND_SIX_HUNDRED_NINETY_EIGHT . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,454.76

<$$heading>

Whereas the Price of Corn at this time within the Kingdom of England
Dominion of Wales and Towne of Berwick upon Tweed is become very great
and in some parts thereof excessive which tends to the Impoverishment of
many of His Majesties good Subjects especially of poor Manufacturers and
other of the meaner Condition And by reason the Corn in severall other
parts of Europe is scarcer and dearer than in England it is likely that
severall Persons for their private Advantage or Lucre will export or
carry great Quantities of Corn from this Kingdom or the Dominion or
Towne aforesaid to Forreigne Parts whereby the Price of Corn here will
be further inhanced to the Detriment of His Majesties good Subjects and
the Destruction of many of them if a timely Remedy in this behalfe be
not provided Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty
by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of
the same That no Person or Persons whatsoever from and after the Tenth
Day of February in the Yeare of our Lord
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_eight and before the Tenth Day of
February which shall be in the Yeare of our Lord
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_nine shall directly or indirectly export
transport carry or convey or cause or procure to be exported transported
carried or conveyed out of or from the said Kingdom of England Dominion
of Wales and Towne of Berwick upon Tweed or any of them or load or lay
on board or cause or procure to be laden or laid on board in any Ship or
other Vessell or Boat in order to be exported or carried out of the
Kingdom Dominion or Towne aforesaid to or for any Forreigne Parts or to
or for the Kingdom of Scotland or load or putt or cause to be loaded or
putt on any Horse or Cart or otherwise to be carried to the said Kingdom
of Scotland any Wheat Rye Miscellany Barley or other Corn whatsoever or
any Meal Malt Starch or Flower thereof or any Bread or Biscuit
whatsoever <paren> other than such as are especially allowed to be
shipped or carried out by this Act <$$paren> under the Pains and
Forfeitures hereinafter mentioned <paren> that is to say <$$paren> That
all the Corn Meal Flour Biscuit Malt Starch and Bread that shall be soe
exported shipped or laid on board or loaded to be exported or carried
out contrary to this Act shall be forfeited And that every Offender and
Offenders therein shall forfeite the Sum of Twenty Shillings for every
Bushell of Corn Malt Meal or Flower and Twelve Pence for every Pound
Weight Troy of Bread Biscuit or Starch which shall be soe exported
shipped or putt on board to be exported contrary to this Act
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,454.78

And moreover the Ship or Vessell upon which such Corn Meal Flour Biskett
Malt Starch or Bread shall be soe exported or shipped to be soe exported
and all her Guns Tackle Apparell and Furniture shall be forfeited the
One Moiety of all which Penalties and Forfeitures shall be to the Kings
Majesty His Heires and Successors STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,454.79

and the other Moiety to <P_VII,455> him or them who will sue for the
same to be recovered by Action of Debt or of the Case Bill Suit Plaint
or Information in any of His Majesties Courts of Record at Westminster
or before the Justices of the Assize or of the Great Sessions in Wales
or by Information at any Generall Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the
County City Rideing or Place where the Offence shall be committed
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,455.80

and in such Suite no Essoigne Protection or Wager of Law shall be
allowed STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,455.81

And that the Master and Mariners of any such Ship or Vessell wherein any
such Offence shall be committed knowing such Offence and wittingly and
willingly aiding and assisting thereunto and being thereof duely
convicted in any such Court of Record as aforesaid or at the Generall
Quarter Sessions of the County City Rideing or Place where such Offence
shall be committed or where they shall be apprehended or arrested for
such Offence shall have Imprisonment by the space of Three Months
without Bail or Mainprise STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,455.82

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That it shall and
may be lawfull to or for any Person or Persons being a Commissioner or
Commissioners Officer or Officers of His Majesties Customs or being
lawfully authorized in this behalfe by the Commissioners of His
Majesties Treasury or any three or more of them for the time being or by
the Treasurer of the Exchequer for the time being to take and seize all
such Corn Meale Flour Biscuit Malt Starch and Bread not allowed to be
exported by this Act as he or they shall happen to soe find know or
discover to be laid on board in any Ship or other Vessell or Boate at
Sea or in any Port or in any navigable River or Water to the Intent or
Purpose to be exported transported or conveyed out of the Kingdom or
Dominion aforesaid or to be laden on any Horse Cart or other Carriage to
the Intent or Purpose to be carried or conveyed into Scotland and to
bring the same to the Kings Ware-House belonging to the Custom-House
next the Place where such Seizure shall be made to be proceeded against
and <paren> in case of Recovery <$$paren> to be divided according to
this Act . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,455.83

Provided alwaies That this Act or any thing therein contained shall not
extend to prohibit the Exportation or carrying out of such Corn Bread
Meal Malt Starch Flour or Biskuit as shall be necessary to be carried in
any Ship or other Vessell or Vessells in their Voyages from this Kingdom
or the Dominion aforesaid or in their Returne to the same only for the
Sustenance or Diet of the Commanders Masters Mariners Passengers or
others in the same Ships and not to be sold in any Forreigne Parts or
for the Victualling any of His Majesties Ships in any Forreigne Parts
Any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,455.84

Provided alsoe That this Act or any thing therein contained shall not
extend to any Corn Meal Malt Ground Malt Flour Starch or Biscuit which
shall be exported or shipped to be exported out of or from any the Ports
of this Kingdom or Dominion of Wales to the Forts Castles and Factories
in Africa unto such of His Majesties Islands or Colonies in America that
have usually been supplied with Corn or Meale or Starch from this
Kingdom or from the Dominion of Wales aforesaid for the Sustentation of
the Inhabitants of the said Islands or Colonies Forts Castles or
Factories or for the Benefitt of the English Fishery in those Parts only
soe as the Exporter doe before the shipping or laying on board the same
declare the Island or Colony Islands or Colonies for which the said Corn
or Meale or Starch is designed and doe become bound with other
sufficient Security in Treble the Value to the Commissioners or Officers
of His Majesties Customs respectively <paren> who have hereby Power to
take such Security in His Majesties Name and to His Majesties Use
<$$paren> that such Corn Meale or Flour or Starch shall not be landed or
sold in any Parts whatsoever other than the Islands or Colonies for
which the same shall be soe declared for the takeing of which Security
no Fee or Reward shall be demanded or received Any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,455.85

And the said Bond or Bonds if not prosecuted within Three Yeares shall
be void STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,455.86

Provided alsoe That this Act or any thing therein contained shall not
extend to any Malt to be transported out of or from the Port of
Southampton only unto the Islands of Jersey and Guernsey or either of
them for the only Use of the Inhabitants of those Islands soe as the
Exporter before the lading of such Malt or laying the same on board doe
become bound with other sufficient Security <paren> which the Customer
or Comptroller of the same Port hath hereby Power to take in His
Majesties Name and to His Majesties Use and for which Security no Fee or
Reward shall be given or taken <$$paren> that such Malt shall be landed
in the said Islands of Jersey and Guernsey or one of them the Danger of
the Seas only excepted for the Use of the Inhabitants there and shall
not be landed or sold in any other Parts whatsoever and soe as the whole
Quantity of Malt which betweene the said Tenth Day of February
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_eight and the said Tenth Day of February
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_nine shall be shipped at the said Port
for Jersey and Guernsey or either of them as aforesaid doe not exceed
Four_thousand Quarters Any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,455.87

And it is hereby provided and enacted by the Authority aforesaid That it
shall and may be lawfull for any Person or Persons to ship or putt on
board any Corn Meale Flour Bread Malt Starch or Biscuit to be carried
Coastwise <paren> that is to say <$$paren> from any Port Creeke or
Member of the Kingdom of England Dominion of Wales or the Towne of
Berwick upon Tweed to any other Post Creeke or Member of the same having
a Coast-Coquet or Sufferance for that purpose STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,455.88

and sufficient Security being first given for the landing and
discharging the same in some other Port Member or Creeke of the Kingdom
Dominion or Towne aforesaid and returning a Certificate in Six Months as
is required by Law in Cases where Goods are carried Coastwise and not
otherwise Any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,455.89

<P_VII,456>

Provided alwaies and be it enacted That this Act or any thing therein
contained shall not extend or be construed to hinder or obstruct any
Person or Persons whatsoever in the Carriage of Corn Graine or Malt in
any Boats or Vessells upon any Navigable River or Rivers to their
Ordinary Marketts or any other Place or Places within the said River or
Rivers within this Realme or the Dominion aforesaid soe as the same be
not shipped or put on any Boat or Vessell in order to be shipped for
Exportation And that in such Islands or Places within any of the
Counties of England and Wales where the Inhabitants have usually carried
by Water their Corn Graine or Malt to any Markett or Marketts within
England or Wales without takeing forth any Coast-Cocquetts and thereupon
giveing Bonds and returning Certificates as aforesaid such Inhabitants
may lawfully carry by Water such their Corn Graine and Malt to such
Marketts without being obliged by this Act or any thing herein contained
to take forth any such Coast-Cocquetts or to give such Coast-Bonds or to
returne Certificates thereupon as aforesaid And that for such Corn
Graine and Malt of the Growth of the Isle of Wight as shall be carried
from thence to any of the ordinary Marketts in the County of Southampton
or Towne of Southampton and County of the same or of the County of
Sussex in any open Boat the Officers of His Majesties Customs shall not
demand or take any Fee or Reward whatsoever for the Coquett Cast-Bond or
Certificate in that respect to be given STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,456.91

Provided alwaies and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That in
case His Majesty at any time or times before the said Tenth Day of
February One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_nine shall find the Price of
Corn to decrease in the Publick Marketts and for that reason <paren> in
His Royall Discretion <$$paren> shall judge it to be most for the
Benefitt and Advantage of his Kingdom to permitt the Exportation of Corn
that then it shall be lawfull to and for His Majesty by His Royall
Proclamation or Proclamations to be issued by and with the Advice of His
Privy Councill from time to time to permitt and suffer all and every
Person and Persons Natives and Forreigners <paren> but not any
particular Persons <$$paren> at any time or times before the said Tenth
Day of February One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_nine to export or carry
out of the Kingdom of England Dominion of Wales and Towne of Berwick
upon Tweed Wheat Barley Malt Rye Miscellany Oats and all other Corn and
Graine or any Kinds and Quantities thereof as to His Majesty shall seeme
meete and as in such Proclamation or Proclamations shall be publickly
expressed and declared either to and for the Kingdom of Scotland and all
other Forreigne Parts whatsoever or any of them Any thing herein or in
any other Act or Acts of {HELSINKI:or} Parliament contained to the
contrary notwithstanding . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,456.92

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the
Commissioners of the Customes for the time being shall and they are
hereby required to give a full and true Accompt in Writing to both
Houses of Parliament at the begining of the next Session thereof of all
Corn and Graine of what Nature or Kind soever that shall before that
time be exported to any Place whatsoever by virtue or in pursuance of
any the Liberties or Powers hereby given or granted for that purpose .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,456.93

<heading>

CHAPTER IV . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,456.95

AN ACT TO PROHIBIT THE EXCESSIVE DISTILLING OF SPIRITS AND LOW WINES
FROM CORNE AND AGAINST THE EXPORTING OF BEER AND ALE AND TO PREVENT
FRAUDS IN DISTILLERS . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,456.96

<$$heading>

Whereas it is found by Experience that the drawing distilling and
makeing of Brandies or Spiritts from Malt is one Cause of the present
dearnesse of Corne especially of Barley in this Realme and by reason of
the great Scarcity of Corne in Forreigne Parts and the Restraints which
are or may be made there of distilling Spiritts from Corne great Demands
are and may be made of Spiritts drawne from malted Corne in this Kingdom
to supply the occasions of those Forreigne Parts which must needs tend
to a further enhanceing of the Price of Corne here and prove a great
Grievance to many His Majesties good Subjects if a speedy Remedy be not
provided be it therefore enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by
and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of
the same That no Person or Persons whatsoever from and after the last
Day of January in the Yeare of our Lord
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_eight and before the First Day of
February which shall be in the Yeare of our Lord
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_nine shall directly or indirectly draw
distill or make or cause or procure to be drawne distilled or made
within the Kingdom of England Dominion of Wales and Towne of Berwick
upon Tweed any {SIC:and} Brandy Aqua Vitae Spiritts or Low Wines
whatsoever other than such Quantities as are allowed by this Act and
under such Restrictions and in such Manner and Forme as are herein
prescribed from any Malt Corne or Graine or from any Wash or Liquors
produced or to be produced from any Malt Corne or Graine whatsoever
under the Penalties and Forfeitures herein after mentioned
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,456.98

<paren> that is to say <$$paren> That all the Brandy Aqua Vitae Spiritts
and Low Wines soe made or drawne shall be forfeited and that every
Offender and Offenders therein shall forfeite and pay the Sum of Ten
Shillings for every Gallon of Brandy Aqua Vitae Spiritts or Low Wines
which shall be drawne distilled or made contrary to this Act and
moreover that all the Stills Backs Casks and other Utensills and
Vessells imployed in the distilling drawing makeing or keeping the same
or any part thereof shall be forfeited the moiety of all which Penalties
and Forfeitures shall be to the Kings Majesty His Heires and Successors
and the other moiety to him or them that shall discover informe or sue
for the same STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,456.99

and the said Penalties and Forfeitures shall and may be recovered in the
same Manner and by the same Meanes as any Penalties and Forfeitures by
any <P_VII,457> of the Laws and Statutes for the Excise now in force for
any Offence or Offences against the same are or may be recovered
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,457.100

and that all Servants and others who shall be wittingly or willingly
aiding or assisting in the makeing of the said Spiritts or Low Wines
contrary to this Act and being thereof duely convicted in any of His
Majesties Courts of Record at Westminster or at the Generall Quarter
Sessions of the County City Rideing or Place where such Offence shall be
committed or where such Person or Persons shall be apprehended or
arrested for such Offence shall suffer Imprisonment by the space of Six
Months without Bail or Mainprize . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,457.101

Provided alwaies That it shall and may be lawful for any Person or
Persons drawing Spiritts Brandy or Low Wines from any Forreigne
Materialls or any English Materialls other than such as are prohibited
by this Act to make use of a reasonable Quantity of Yeast for the
Fermentation of their Wash in order to the distilling of the same Any
thing in this or any other Act to the contrary notwithstanding
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,457.102

And whereas it is found by experience That His Majesty hath been very
much defrauded of His Duties upon Low Wines and Spiritts by many
Distillers and other Persons who keepe or sett up private and concealed
Warehouses Storehouses Cellars or other Places or private or concealed
Stills Backs or other Vessells for the makeing preparing or keeping Wash
Low Wines Spiritts or other Materialls fitt for Distillation and by
Private Pipes and Stopcocks and other Private Conveyances have
Communication betweene their Private and Publick Backs and other
Vessells by which they doe privately convey their Wash or other Liquors
fitt for Distillation from one Back or other Vessell to another by
meanes whereof the Officers can@ @not take and keepe a true and distinct
Account of such Wash and other Liquors fitt for Distillation nor of the
Low Wines and Spiritts made or drawne from the same And whereas the
Gaugers and Officers of Excise are not sufficiently impowered by Law
upon Suspicion or Knowledge of such Frauds to enter the Houses or Places
where the same are practised without Consent of the Possessors thereof
or upon Entry and Discovery of such Frauds can@ @not find out or
discover the Person or Persons concerned therein by reason that the true
Owner or Owners of such Warehouses Storehouses Cellars or other Places
Stills Backs or other Vessells Spiritts Low Wines Wash or other
Materialls fitt for Distillation will not appeare or Claime any Interest
therein but frequently disowne the same Be it therefore enacted by the
Authority aforesaid That every Distiller having and keeping any Private
Pipe or Stopcock or other Private Conveyance by which any Wash or other
Liquors fitt for Distillation may be conveyed from one Back or Vessell
to another or from any such Back or other Vessell to their Still or
Stills or into any other Place shall before the Eight_and_twentieth day
of February One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_eight take up or demolish
every such Pipe Stopcock or other Private Conveyance and shall alsoe
stop up every Hole in every such Back or Washbatch by which any Wash or
other Liquors fit {HELSINKI:fill} for Distillation may be conveyed into
or out of such Back or Washbatch or any of them and that no Distiller
from and after the said Eight_and_twentieth Day of February shall have
or keepe any Private Pipe Stopcock or other Private Conveyance by which
any Wash or other Liquors fitt for Distillation may be conveyed from one
Back or other Vessell to another or from any such Back or other Vessell
to his or her Still or Stills or into any other Place nor shall have or
keepe any Hole in any such Back or Washbatch by which any Wash or any
other Liquors fit {HELSINKI:fill} for Distillation may be conveyed into
or out of such Back or Washbatch or any of them on Paine to forfeite for
every such Pipe Stopcock Conveyance and Hole the Sum of One_hundred
Pounds STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,457.103

And for the better discovering of all such Pipes Stopcocks and other
Private Conveyances aforesaid Be it further enacted That from and After
the said Eight_and_twentieth Day of February it shall and may be lawfull
to and for the Gaugers and Officers of Excise or any of them in the Day
time and in the Presence of a Constable or other lawfull officer
{HELSINKI:missing_"officer"} for the Peace <paren> who are hereby
required to be aiding and assisting therein <$$paren> on Request first
made and Cause declared to breake up the Ground in any Distilling House
or the Ground near or adjoyning {SIC:adjoyning_or} any Wall Partition or
other Place to search for any such Pipe Stopcock or any other private
Conveyance and upon finding such Pipe or other Conveyance to breake up
the Ground House Wall or other Partition or Place through or into which
any such Pipe or other Conveyance shall lead and to breake up or cutt
any such Pipe or other Conveyance and to turne any Cock or Cocks to try
and examine whether such Pipe or other Conveyance may or can convey any
Wash or other Liquors fitt for Distillation out of one Back or Vessell
into another or from any such Back or Vessell into any Still or Stills
or into any other Place . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,457.104

Provided alwaies That in case upon such Search no such Pipe or other
Private Conveyance shall be found such Gaugers and Officers of Excise
shall make good the Ground Wall House or other Place soe broken up as
aforesaid or make reasonable Satisfaction to the Owner or Owners thereof
to be adjudged by Two of the next Justices of the Peace whereof one to
be of the Quorum STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,457.105

or the Party injured shall be at liberty to bring his Action for the
Damages by him sustained STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,457.106

and what shall be adjudged by the said Justices or recovered upon such
Action shall be paid out of His Majesties Revenue of Excise by the
Commissioners thereof for the time being STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,457.107

and if any Distiller or any other Person or Persons whatsoever shall
oppose obstruct or hinder any such Gauger or Officer in the due
Execution of the Powers hereby given and granted every such Distiller
and other Person shall forfeite and loose for every such Offence the Sum
of One_hundred Pounds STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,457.108

Provided neverthelesse and it is hereby declared That it shall and may
be lawfull to and for any Distiller to keepe and make use of any Pipe
Stopcock or other Conveyance above Ground which are Publick and in open
<P_VII,458> View from one End thereof to the other for the letting his
Wash out of his Publick Coolers into his Publick Backs or Washbatches
and for conveying his Wash or Worts out of such Publick Back or
Washbatch into his Publick Stills Any thing in this Act or any other Law
or Statute to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,458.109

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That in case the
Gaugers or Officers of Excise or any of them shall know or have cause to
suspect any such Private or concealed Still Back or other Vessell
Spiritts Low Wines Wash or other Materialls preparing for Distillation
to be sett up or kept in any House or Place and shall make Affidavit
before one or more Justice or Justices of the Peace for the County or
Place where he shall soe know or suspect such Private or concealed Still
Back or other Vessell Spiritts Low Wines or Materialls preparing for
Distillation are or shall be soe sett up or kept and shall in such
Affidavit declare the Grounds of such his Knowledge or Suspition then
and in such case it shall and may be lawfull for such Officer or
Officers in the Day time and in the Presence of a Constable or other
lawfull Officer of the Peace <paren> who are hereby required to be
aiding and assisting therein <$$paren> by Warrant from such Justice or
Justices of the Peace before whom such Affidavit shall be made to be
directed to such Officer or Officers of Excise <paren> which Warrant the
said Justice or Justices of the Peace are hereby authorized and required
to grant <$$paren> to breake open the Door or any Part of such House or
Place where he or they shall soe know or suspect such Private or
concealed Still Back or Vessell Spiritts Low Wines or Materialls for
Distillation are soe sett up or kept and to enter into such House or
Place and to seize all such Stills Backs or other Vessells and also all
such Spiritts Low Wines Wash or other Materialls for Distillation that
shall be found therein and to detaine and keepe the same in such House
or other Place where he or they shall find the same soe kept private or
concealed STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,458.110

and in case the same shall not within Twenty Daies next after such
Seizure be claimed by the true and lawfull Owner thereof then the said
Stills Backs and other Vessells Spiritts Low Wines and Materialls for
Distillation shall be absolutely forfeited STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,458.111

and shall and may be sold at the next generall Day of Sale to be
appointed by the Commissioners of Excise or their Officer or Officers
respectively after the said Twenty Daies are expired
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,458.112

one Moiety of the Proceed thereof <paren> all necessary Charges being
first deducted out of the whole <$$paren> to be paid to the Use of His
Majesty His Heires and Successors and the other Moiety to the Party or
Parties who shall soe discover and seize the same
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,458.113

and in case such Stills Backs and other Vessells Spiritts Low Wines and
Materialls for Distillations shall within the said Twenty Daies be
claimed by any Person or Persons whatsoever the Person or Persons soe
claiming the same shall forfeite and loose for every such Warehouse
Storehouse or other Place in which any such Still Back or other Vessell
shall be found and alsoe for every such Still Back and other Vessell
found therein the Sum of Two_hundred Pounds STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,458.114

Provided alwaies That in case upon such breaking open any such Door or
House no such Private or concealed Back Still or other Vessell Spiritts
Low Wines Wash or other Materialls or Distillation shall be found such
Gauger and Officers of Excise shall make good the House or Place soe
broken up as aforesaid or make reasonable Satisfaction to the Owner or
Owners thereof to be adjudged by Two of the next Justices of the Peace
whereof one to be of the Quorum STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,458.115

or the Party injured shall be at liberty to bring his Action for the
Damages by him sustained STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,458.116

and what shall be adjudged by the said Justices or recovered upon such
Action shall be paid out of His Majesties revenue of Excise by the
Commissioners thereof for the time being STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,458.117

and if any Distiller or any other Person or Persons whatsoever shall
oppose obstruct or hinder any such Gauger or Officer soe authorized as
aforesaid in the due execution of the Powers hereby given and granted
every such Distiller or other Person shall forfeite and loose the Sum of
Two_hundred Pounds all which said Penalties shall be recovered and
levied by the same Meanes and Methods as any Fine or Penalty imposed by
any Law of Excise now in force is recoverable One Moiety of which said
Forfeitures shall be to His Majesty His Heires and Successors and the
other Moiety to him or them that will discover informe or sue for the
same as aforesaid STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,458.118

And whereas many Distillers on pretence of rectifying of Spiritts doe
mix Spiritts with Wash and other Liquors and afterwards distill the same
whereby His Majesties Duties on Low Wines are avoided and not duely
answered and paid as by the former Acts is directed and appointed for
Prevention whereof be it enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid
That all Spiritts made or drawne by any Distiller from any Mixture of
Spiritts with any kind of Wash or other Liquor <paren> except common
Water <$$paren> shall be deemed and taken to be Low Wines and shall be
chargeable with the Duties already sett and imposed on Low Wines drawne
from Forreigne Materialls . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,458.119

Provided alwaies and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That in
such House and Houses and other Edifices which were used as publick or
open Distilleries for the drawing or distilling of Spiritts or Low Wines
from Wort or Drink brewed from malted Corne during the Yeare ended on
the Thirtieth Day of September One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_eight
or during any part thereof <paren> and in no other House or Place
whatsoever <$$paren> it shall and may be lawfull to and for the Owners
and Occupiers of the said Houses and Distilleries respectively at any
time or times betweene the last Day of January
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_eight and the First Day of February
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_nine to draw distill and make or
cause to be drawne distilled and made any Spiritts or Low Wines from
Drink or Wort brewed from malted Corne soe as the whole Quantity of Low
Wines or Spiritts of the first Extraction which betweene the said last
Day of January One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_eight and the said
First Day of February One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_nine shall be
drawne distilled or made in every such Distillery respectively from any
Malt Corne or Graine or from the <P_VII,459> Produce thereof doe not in
the whole exceede halfe the Quantity of Low Wines or Spiritts of the
first Extraction which in the Yeare already ended as aforesaid were
drawne distilled or made within the same House or Distillery
respectively from Drink or Wort brewed with malted Corne and soe as the
Quantity of Low Wines or Spiritts of the first Extraction which in the
First Second Third and every other Kalendary Month of the Yeare reckoned
from the said last Day of January
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_eight {HELSINKI:an} shall be drawne
distilled or made in every such Distillery respectively from Malt Corne
or Graine or from the Produce thereof doe not exceed halfe the Quantity
of Low Wines or Spiritts of the first Extraction which in the like First
Second Third and every other Calendary Month of the Yeare ended as
aforesaid were drawne distilled or made within the same House or
Distillery respectively from Drink or Wort brewed with Malted Corne
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,459.120

And in Case any Doubt or Controversy shall arise concerning the Quantity
of Spiritts or Low Wines which were drawne or distilled in any House or
Distillery within or during the said Yeare ended on the said Thirtieth
Day of September One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_eight or any Month
of the same from Drink or Worts brewed from malted Corne or concerning
the exceeding of halfe the Quantity or Proportion in the Yeare to be
reckoned from the said last Day of January
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_eight or in any Month thereof then
the same shall be determined by the Accounts or Vouchers returned into
the Head Office of the Excise containing the Quantities of such Low
Wines or Spiritts of the first Extraction made in every such House or
Distillery within or during the Yeare already ended as aforesaid whereby
His Majesties Duties were charged or chargeable or by the Entries of the
same to which all Persons concerned <paren> upon reasonable Request
<$$paren> shall have free accesse without Fee or Charge Any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,459.121

And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the Commissioners of
the Excise or any Three or more of them upon Request to them made shall
make forth and deliver in Writing under their Hands gratis to the Owners
or Occupiers aforesaid or such as they shall appoint a true Account of
the Quantities of Low Wines or Spiritts of the first Extraction charged
in the said Vouchers as were made in every respective Distillery in each
respective Month of the Yeare ended at the Thirtieth Day of September
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_eight as aforesaid from Drink or
Worts brewed with malted Corne STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,459.122

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That no Person or
Persons whatsoever from and after the last Day of February in the Yeare
of our Lord One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_eight and before the
First Day of February which shall be in the Yeare of our Lord
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_nine shall directly or indirectly
export transport carry out convey or cause or procure to be exported or
transported carried or conveyed out of or from the said Kingdome of
England Dominion of {HELSINKI:or} Wales or Towne of Berwick upon Tweed
or any of them or load or lay on board or cause or procure to be loaden
or laid on board in any Ship Vessell or Boat in order to be exported or
carried out of the Kingdom Dominion or Towne aforesaid for any Forreigne
Parts any Beere Ale or any Wash or Worts drawne from Corne or any Ale or
Beere from which Spiritts may be extracted under the Pains and
Forfeitures herein after mentioned STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,459.123

that is to say For every Barrell of Beere Ale Wash or Worts soe exported
the Sum of Five Pounds STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,459.124

and soe in proportion for any greater or lesser Quantity
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,459.125

One Moiety thereof to His Majesty STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,459.126

and the other Moiety to the Informer to be recovered as other Penalties
by this Act are directed to be recovered STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,459.127

Provided alwaies That this Act or any thing therein contained shall not
extend to prohibite the Exportation or carrying out of such Beere or Ale
as shall be necessary to be carried in any Ship or other Vessell or
Vessells from this Kingdom or the Dominion aforesaid or in their Returne
to the same only for the Sustenance or Drink of the Commanders Masters
Marriners Passengers or others in the same Ships and not to be sold in
Forreigne Parts or for the Supply of any of His Majesties Ships in
Forreigne Parts Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,459.128

Provided alsoe That nothing in this Act contained shall extend to any
Beere or Ale which shall be exported or shipt to be exported out of
{TEXT:missing_"of"} or from any of the Ports of this Kingdom or Dominion
of Wales unto such of His Majesties Colonies in America Persia or the
East-Indies that have been usually supplyed with such Liquors from this
Kingdom or from the Dominion of Wales aforesaid or for the Sustentation
of the said Islands and Colonies Forts Castles and Factories therein
only soe as the Exporters before the shipping or laying on board the
same for the Islands or Colonies for which the said Liquor is designed
doe give sufficient Security in Treble the Value to the Commissioners or
Officers of His Majesties Customs respectively who have hereby Power to
take such Security in His Majesties Name and to His Majesties Use that
such Liquors shall not be landed in any Parts whatsoever other than the
Islands and Colonies for which the same shall be soe declared for
takeing which Security no Fee or Reward shall be demanded or received
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,459.129

And the said Bond or Bonds or other Securities if not prosecuted within
Three Years shall be void STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,459.130

Provided alwaies That nothing in this Act contained shall extend to
prevent or hinder Charles Bennett Distiller from drawing or distilling
Spiritts or Low Wines from Worts or Drink brewed from malted Corne from
the last Day of January One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_eight to the
First Day of February One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_nine <P_VII,460>
alwaies soe as the whole Quantity of Low Wines or Spiritts of the first
Extraction which betweene the said last Day of January
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_eight and the said First Day of February
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_nine shall be drawne distilled or made
in his now Distillary from any Malt Corne or Graine or from the Produce
thereof doe not in the whole exceed halfe the Quantity of Low Wines or
Spiritts of the first Extraction by him drawne and extracted in the
Yeare already ended on the Thirtieth of September
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_eight and soe as the said Charles
Bennett doth observe and performe in all things else as all other
Distillers are by this Act obliged to observe and performe .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,460.131

<P_VII,586>

<heading>

CHAPTER IV . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,586.134

AN ACT FOR THE FURTHER PREVENTING THE GROWTH OF POPERY .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,586.135

<$$heading>

Whereas there has beene of late a much greater Resort into this Kingdom
than formerly of Popish Bishops Priests and Jesuits and they doe very
openly and in insolent Manner affront the Laws and daily endeavour to
pervert His Majesties naturall borne Subjects which has beene occasioned
by Neglect of the due Execution of the Laws already in Force For
preventing the further Growth of Popery and of such treasonable and
execrable Designes and Conspiracies against His Majesties Person and
Government and the Established Religion as have lately as well as
frequently heretofore been brought to Light and happily defeated by the
wonderfull Providence of God Be it enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spirituall and
Temporall and Commons in this present Parliament assembled and by
Authority of the same That from and after the Five_and_twentieth Day of
March One_thousand_and_seaven_hundred all and every Person and Persons
who shall apprehend and take one or more Popish Bishop Priest or Jesuite
and prosecute him or them soe apprehended and taken untill he or they be
convicted of saying Mass or of exerciseing any other Part of the Office
or Function of a Popish Bishop or Priest within these Realmes shall have
and receive from the Sheriffe or Sheriffs of the County where such
Conviction shall be made <paren> without paying any Fee for the same
<$$paren> for every such Offender soe convicted the Summe of One_hundred
Pounds within Four Months after such Conviction and Demand thereof made
by tendring a Certificate to the said Sheriffe or Sheriffs under the
Hand or Hands of the Judge or Justices before whom such Conviction shall
be made certifying the Conviction of such Popish Bishop Priest or Jesuit
and also that such Popish Bishop Priest or Jesuit Popish Bishops Priests
or Jesuits was or were taken by the Person or Persons claimeing the said
Reward STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,586.137

And in case any Dispute shall happen to arise betweene the Persons soe
apprehending any Popish Bishop Priest or Jesuit touching their Right and
Title to the said Reward that then the said Judge or Justices soe
respectively certifying as aforesaid shall in and by their said
Certificate direct and appoint the said Reward to be paid unto and
amongst the Parties claimeing the same in such Share and Proportion as
to the said Judge or Justices shall seeme just and reasonable
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,586.138

And if it shall happen any such Sheriffe or Sheriffs shall dye or be
removed before the Expiration of Four Months after such Conviction and
Demand made of the said Reward <paren> not being paid as aforesaid
<$$paren> that then the next succeeding Sheriffe or Sheriffs of the said
County shall pay the same within Two Months after Demand and Certificate
brought as aforesaid STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,586.139

And if Default of Payment of the said Summe or Summs of Money shall
happen to be made by any Sheriffe or {HELSINKI:of} Sheriffs such
Sheriffe or Sheriffs soe makeing Default shall forfeite to the Person or
Persons to whom such Money is due as aforesaid Two_hundred Pounds to be
recovered by him or them or his or their Executors or Administrators in
any of His Majesties Courts of Record at Westminster by Action of Debt
Bill Plaint or Information wherein but One Imparlance and no Essoigne
Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed with full Costs of Suite by
him or them expended in the Recovery of the same
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,586.140

And it is hereby further enacted That all Sheriffs their Successors
Executors or Administrators upon produceing such respective Certificates
or a Duplicate or Duplicates thereof shall have the Moneys contained in
such Certificate paid to them by the Lord Treasurer or Commissioners of
His Majesties Treasury for the time being out of the Revenue of the
Crowne . STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,586.141

And for a further Remedy against the Growth of Popery over and beyond
the good Laws already made Be it further enacted by the Authority
aforesaid That if any Popish Bishop Priest or Jesuit whatsoever shall
say Masse or Exercise any other Part of the Office or Function of a
Popish Bishop or Priest within these Realmes or the Dominions thereunto
belonging or if any Papist or Person makeing Profession of the Popish
Religion shall keepe Schoole or take upon themselves the Education or
Government or Boarding of Youth in any Place within this Realme or the
Dominions thereto belonging and such Person or Persons being thereof
lawfully convicted that then every such Person shall on such Conviction
be adjudged to perpetuall Imprisonment in such Place or Places within
this Kingdome as the King by Advice of His Privy Councill shall appoint
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,586.142

<P_VII,587>

And be it alsoe further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That from and
after the Nine_and_twentieth Day of September which shall be in the
Yeare of our Lord One_thousand_seaven_hundred if any Person educated in
the Popish Religion or professing the same shall not within Six Months
after he or she shall attaine the Age of Eighteene Yeares take the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy and alsoe subscribe the Declaration sett
downe and exprest in an Act of Parliament made in the Thirtieth Yeare of
the Reigne of the late King Charles the Second intituled An Act for the
more effectuall preserveing the Kings Person and Government by disabling
Papists from sitting in either House of Parliament to be by him or her
made repeated and subscribed in the Courts of Chancery of Kings Bench or
Quarter Sessions of the County where such Person shall reside every such
Person shall in respect of him or herselfe only and not to or in respect
of any of his or her Heires or Posterity be disabled and made incapable
to inherit or take by Discent Devise or Limittation in Possession
Reversion or Remainder any Lands Tenements or Hereditaments within this
Kingdome of England Dominion of Wales or Towne of Berwick upon Tweed And
that during the Life of such Person or untill he or she doe take the
said Oaths and make repeate and subscribe the said Declaration in Manner
as aforesaid the next of his or her Kindred which shall be a Protestant
shall have and enjoy the said Lands Tenements and Hereditaments without
being accountable for the Profitts by him or her received during such
Enjoyment thereof as aforesaid STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,587.144

but in case of any wilfull Wast committed on the said Lands Tenements or
Hereditaments by the Person soe haveing or enjoying the same or any
other by his or her Lycence or Authority the Party disabled his or her
Executors and Administrators shall and may recover Treble Damages for
the same against the Person committing such Wast his or her Executors or
Administrators by Action of Debt in any of His Majesties Courts of
Record at Westminster STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,587.145

And that from and after the Tenth Day of Aprill which shall be in the
Yeare of our Lord One_thousand_seaven_hundred every Papist or Person
makeing Profession of the Popish Religion shall be disabled and is
hereby made incapable to purchase either in his or her owne Name or in
the Name of any other Person or Persons to his or her Use or in Trust
for him or her any Mannors Lands Profitts out of Lands Tenements Rents
Termes or Hereditaments within the Kingdome of England Dominion of Wales
and Towne of Berwick upon Tweed STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,587.146

And that all and singuler Estates Termes and any other Interests or
{HELSINKI:of} Profitts whatsoever out of Lands from and after the said
Tenth Day of Aprill to be made suffered or done to or for the Use or
Behoofe of any such Person or Persons or upon any Trust or Confidence
mediately or immediately to or for the Benefitt or Releife of any such
Person or Persons shall be utterly void and of none Effect to all
Intents Constructions and Purposes whatsoever STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,587.147

Provided alwaies That nothing in this Act contained shall be construed
to extend to any Popish Priest for saying Masse or officiating as a
Priest within the Dwelling House of any Forreigne Minister resideing
here soe as such Priest be not one of His Majesties naturall borne
Subjects not naturalized within any of His Kingdoms or Dominions and soe
as the Name of such Priest and the Place of his Birth and the Forreigne
Minister to whom he shall belong be entred and registred in the Office
of the Principall Secratary of State STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,587.148

And whereas by an Act made in the Third Yeare of King James the First
intituled An {HELSINKI:And} Act to prevent and avoid Dangers which may
grow by Popish Recusants whosoever shall be convicted of sending or
causing to be sent any Child or any other Person under their Government
into Parts beyond the Seas out of the Kings Obedience to the Intent that
such Child or Person soe sent should be educated in the Romish Religion
contrary to the said Act is to forfeite One_hundred Pounds One Halfe to
the Kings Majesty and the other Halfe to him that shall sue for the same
For the greater Incouragement and Reward of those who shall discover
such Offenders Be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the said
Summe of One_hundred Pounds shall be to the sole Use and Benefitt of him
or her who shall discover and convict any Person soe offending to be
recovered in such Manner as in the said recited Act is enacted Any thing
in the said Act to the contrary notwithstanding
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,587.149

And to the end that the Protestant Children of Popish Parents may not in
the Life times of such their Parents for want of fitting Maintenance be
necessitated in complyance with their Parents to imbrace the Popish
Religion contrary to their owne Inclinations Be it enacted by the
Authority aforesaid That from and after the said Five_and_twentieth Day
of March One_thousand_seaven_hundred if any such Parent in order to the
compelling such his or her Protestant Child to change his or her
Religion shall refuse to allow such Child a fitting Maintenance suitable
to the Degree and Ability of such Parent and to the Age and Education of
such Child then upon Complaint thereof made to the Lord High Chancellor
of England or Lord Keeper of the Great Seale or Commissioners for the
Great Seale for the Time being It shall be lawfull for the said Lord
Chancellor Lord Keeper or Commissioners to make such Order therein as
shall be agreeable to the Intent of his Act .
STAT-1697-E3-H,VII,587.150

