<BEGIN_stat-1607-e2-h>

<P_IV,1026>

<heading>

CHAPTER VIII . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.4

AN ACTE TO MAKE AWAYE THE BENEFITE OF CLERGIE FROM SOME KINDE OF
MANSLAUGHTER . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.5

<$$heading>

To the ende that stabbinge and killinge men on the suddaine , done and
co~mitted by manie inhumaine and wicked p~sons in the tyme of theire
rage drunkennesse hidden dislpeasure , or other passion of minde ,
contrarie to the co~mandement of Almightie God and the co~mon Peace and
Tranquilitie of this Realme , may from henceforthe be restrained ,
through feare of due punishment to be inflicted on suche cruell and
bloodie Malefactors , whoe heretofore have bene thereunto imboldened by
presuming on the benefit of Cleargie ; Be it therefore enacted by the
King~ moste excellent Majestie , the Lord~ Spirituall and Temporall ,
and the Co~mons in this p~sente Parliament assembled , That everie p~son
and p~sons which after one moneth nexte ensuinge the end of this p~sent
Session of Parliament , shall stabbe or thruste any p~son or persons
that hathe not then any weapon drawne , or that hathe not then firste
striken the partie which shall soe stabbe or thruste , soe as the person
or persons soe stabbed or thruste shall thereof die within the space of
sixe moneths then next followinge , although it can@ @not be proved that
the same was done of malice forethoughte , yet the partie soe offendinge
, and beinge thereof convicted by verdicte of twelve men , confession or
otherwise , accordinge to the Lawes of this Realme , shall be excluded
from the benefit of his or theire Cleargie , and suffer Deathe as in
case of Wilfull Murder . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.7

Provided alwaies , That this Acte or any thinge therein conteyned ,
shall not extende to any person or p~sons which shall kill any person or
persons se defendendo , or by misfortune , or in any other manner then
as aforesaide ; nor shall extende to any person or persons which in
keepinge and preservinge the Peace , shall chaunce or co~mitt
Manslaughter , soe as the saide Manslsughter be not co~mitted wittingly
willinglie and of purpose , under p~texte and colour of keepinge the
Peace ; nor shall extende to any person or p~sons which in chastisinge
or correcting his Childe or Servant , shall besides his or theire intent
and purpose , chaunce to co~mit Manslaughter ; STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.8

This Acte to contynue untill the end of the firste Session of the next
Parliament . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.9

<heading>

CHAPTER IX . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.11

AN ACTE TO RESTRAINE THE INORDINATE HAUNTINGE AND TIPLINGE IN INNES
ALEHOUSES AND OTHER VICTUALLINGE HOUSES . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.12

<$$heading>

Whereas the ancient true and principall use of Innes Alehouses and
Victuallinge Houses , was for the Receipte Reliefe and Lodginge of
wayfaring people travellinge from place to place , and for such Supplie
of the wants of such people as are not able by greater Quantities to
make theire p~vision of Victuals , and not meant for entertainment and
harbouringe of lewde and idle people to spende and consume theire money
and theire tyme in lewde and drunken manner ; Be it therefore enacted by
the King~ moste excellent Majestie , the Lordes Spirituall and Temporall
, and Co~mons in this p~sent Parliament assembled , and by the
authoritie of the same , That if after fortie dayes next ensuinge after
the end of this p~sent Session of Parliament any Inne keeper Victualler
or Alehouse keeper within this Realme of England or the Dominion of
Wales , doe p~mitt or suffer any p~son or p~sons inhabitinge and
dwellinge in any Citie Towne Corporate Market Towne Village or Hamlett
within this Realme of England or Dominion of Wales , where any such Inne
Alehouse or Tiplinge house is or shall be , to remaine and contynue
drinkinge or tiplinge in the saide Inne Victuallinge House Tiplinge
house or Alehouse , other then such as shal@ @be invited by any
Travailer , and shall accompanie hym onelie duringe his necessarie abode
there , and other then labouringe and handicraftsmen in Cities and
Townes Corporate and Markett Townes , upon the usuall workinge daies ,
for one houre at dynner tyme , to take their Diet in an Alehouse ; and
other then Labourers and Workmen , which for the followinge of theire
worke by the day or by the greate in any Cittie Towne Corporate Market
Towne or Village , shall for the tyme of theire saide contynuynge in
worke there , sojourne lodge or victuall in any Inne Alehouse or other
Victuallinge house , other then for urgent and necessarie occasions to
be allowed by two Justices of Peace , that then everie such Inne keeper
Victualler or Alehouse keeper shall for everie such offence forfeit and
lose the so~me of tenne shilling~ of currant Money of England , to the
use of the Poore of the Parishe where such offence shall be co~mitted ;
the same offence being viewed and seene by any Mayor Bayliffe or Justice
of Peace within their sev~all limits , or proved by the Oathe of Two
Witnesses , to be taken before any Mayor Bayliffe or any other Head
Officer , or any one or more Justice or Justices of the Peace , who by
vertue of this Acte shal@ @be authorised to minister the saide Oathe to
any p~son or p~sons that can or will justifie the same , beinge within
the limits of theire saide Co~mission . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.14

And be it further enacted by the authoritie aforesaide , That if any
Innekeep~ {SIC:Inneekeep~} Alehouse or Victualler shall at any tyme
utter or sell lesse then one full Ale quart of the best Beere or Ale for
a penie , and of the Small two quarters for one pennie , that then
everie suche Inne keeper Alehouse keeper or Victualler shall forfeite
for everie such offence beinge duelie proved in manner above limitted ,
the so~me of Twentie Shilling~ of lawfull Money of England , to the use
abovesaide ; All and everie the saide Penalties to be levied by the
Constables or Churchwardens of the Parish or Parishes where the offence
or offences shall be co~mitted , by waye of distresse to be taken and
deteined for the saide forfeitures , STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.15

and for default of satisfacc~on within sixe dayes nexte ensuinge , the
same then to be p~sentlie apprised and solde , STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.16

and the surplusage or remainder over and above to be delivered to the
partie of whome the distresse was taken , STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.17

and for want of sufficient distresse the partie or parties offendinge to
be by the Mayor Bayliffe or other Head Officer or Justice or Justices
aforesaide , co~mitted to the co~mon Gaole , there to remaine untill the
said Penaltie or Penalties be truelie paide . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1026.18

<P_IV,1027>

And be it further enacted by the authoritie aforesaide , That if the
Constables or Churchwardens doe neglecte theire duetie in levyinge , or
do not levie the saide severall Penalties , or in default of Distresse
or Distresses , from tyme to tyme doe neglecte to certifie the same
Default of Distresse , by the space of twentie dayes then nexte ensuinge
to the Maior Bailiffe and other Head Officer or Justice of the Peace
within whose Jurisdicc~on the Offence is co~mitted , then everie p~son
and p~sons so offendinge shall forfeit for everie such Default the so~me
of Fortie shilling~ of currant Mony of England to the use of the Poore
of the Parishe where suche Offence shal@ @be co~mitted , to be levied by
waie of Distresse of the Offendors Goods , by Warrant from any one or
more Justice or Justices of the Peace Mayor Bayliffe or other Head
Officer within the limits of their Jurisdicc~ons respectivelie , under
his or theire Hande and Seal , to be taken and detained for the saide
Forfeitures , for the space of sixe dayes then next ensuinge ; within
whiche tyme if payment be not made , the same Goods to be presentlie
apprised and sold , and the surplusage and remainder over and above
<paren> if any be <$$paren> to be delivered to the partie of whome the
Distresse was taken ; STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1027.20

and for wante of such sufficient Distresse , the Constables Churchwarden
or Churchwardens so offendinge to be by the Mayor Bayliffe or other Head
Officer Justice or Justices of Peace co~mitted to the common Goale ,
there to remaine until the saide Penaltie or Penalties be truelie paide
, for all which Penalties which so shall be levied by the saide
Constables or Churchwardens , they the said Constables and Churchwardens
shall be accomptable to theire Successors and other the Parishioners ,
in suche sorte as they usuallie be in other Churche reckoning~ or
Accompt~ ; STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1027.21

and for all Forfeitures to be levied by reason of any neglect of the
Constables or Churchwardens , those shall be accomptable , who by force
of any Warrant or Precept doe levie the same , or upon the inlargement
of persons co~mitted , doe receive the same . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1027.22

And be it further enacted , That all other Lawes and Statutes touchinge
Innekeepers Victualers and Alehousekeepers shall still remaine in theire
forme force and be put in due execuc~on : STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1027.23

This Acte to continue to the end of the firste Session of the next
Parliament . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1027.24

Provided alwaies and be it enacted by the authoritie of this p~sent
Parliament , That the Correcc~on and Punishment of such as shall offend
againste this Acte , or any parte thereof , within either of the two
Univ~sities of this Realme , or the p~cinct~ or Liberties of the same ,
shall be done upon the Offenders , and Justice shall be ministred in
this behalfe accordinge to the intent and true meaninge of this Lawe ,
by the Governours Magistrates Justices of the Peace or other principall
Officers of either of the same Univ~sities , to whome in other cases the
Administration of Justice and Correcc~on and Punishment of Offenders by
the Lawes of this Realme and theire severall Charters doth belonge or
appertaine , and that no other within theire Liberties for any Matter
concerninge this Lawe contrarie to theire severall Charters doe
intermeddle , and that all Penalties and Summes of Money to be forfeited
or lost by force of this Acte within either of the Univ~sities , or the
Liberties or p~cinct~ of the same , shall be levied by the Officers or
Ministers of either of the saide Univ~sities to be from tyme to tyme in
that behalfe appointed by the Vicechauncellours thereof for the tyme
beinge respectivelie , and that all Powers and Authorities either of
Imprisonment or otherwise before given or appointed by this Acte , shall
by the Governors Magistrates and principall Officers abovesaide of
either of the saide Univ~sities , be duelie executed and done within
either of the saide Univ~sities , and the Liberties and p~cinct~ of the
same , accordinge to the true intent and meaninge of this Acte .
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1027.25

<P_IV,1028>

<heading>

CHAPTER XI . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1028.28

AN ACTE TO RESTRAYNE ALL P~SONS FROM MARRIAGE UNTIL THEIR FORMER WYVES
AND FORMER HUSBANDES BE DEADE . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1028.29

<$$heading>

Forasmuch as divers evil disposed p~sons beinge maried , runne out of
one Countie into another , or into places where they are not knowen ,
and there become to be maried , havinge another husband or wife livinge
, to the greate dishonour of God and utter undoinge of divers honest
mens children and others ; Be it therefore enacted by the King~ Majestie
, with the consent of the Lordes Spirituall and Temporall , and of the
Co~mons in this p~sent Parliament assembled , That if any p~son or
p~sons within his Majesties Domynions of England and Wales , beinge
maried , or which hereafter shall marie , doe at any tyme after the ende
of the Session of this p~sent Parliament , marrye any p~son or p~sons ,
the former husband or wife beinge alive , that then everie such offence
shal@ @be Felonie , and the p~son or p~sons so offendinge shall suffer
death as in cases of Felonie ; STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1028.31

And the partie and parties so offendinge shall receive such and the like
p~ceedinge triall and execution in such Countie where suche p~son or
p~sons shal@ @be apprehended , as if the offence had bene co~mitted in
such Countie where such p~son or p~sons shall be taken or apprehended .
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1028.32

Provided alwaies , That this Acte nor any thinge therein conteyned ,
shall extende to any p~son or p~sons whose Husband or Wife shal@ @be
continuallie remayninge beyond the Seas by the space of seven yeeres
together , or whose Husband or Wife shall absent hym or her selfe the
one from the other by the space of seaven yeares together , in any part~
within his Majesties Dominions , the one of them not knowinge the other
to be livinge within that tyme . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1028.33

Provided also and be it enacted by the Authoritie aforesaide , That this
Acte nor any thinge herein contayned shall extend to any p~son or p~sons
that are or shal@ @be at the tyme of such mariage divorced by any
sentence had or hereafter to be had in the Eccl~iasticall Courte , or to
any person or p~sons where the former Mariage hathe bene or hereafter
shall be by sentence in the Eccl~iastical Courte declared to be voide
and of no effect ; nor to any p~son or p~sons for or by reason of anye
former Mariage had or made , or hereafter to be had or made within age
of consent . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1028.34

Provided also , That no Attainder for this Offence made Felonie by this
Acte , shall make or worke any corruption of Blood Losse of Dower or
disinherison of Heire or Heires . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1028.35

<heading>

CHAPTER XII . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1028.37

AN ACTE AGAINST CONJURATION WITCHCRAFTE AND DEALINGE WITH EVILL AND
WICKED SPIRITS . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1028.38

<$$heading>

Be it enacted by the King our Sov~aigne Lorde the Lordes Spirituall and
Temporall and the Comons in this p~sent Parliament assembled , and by
the authoritie of the same , That the Statute made in the fifte yeere of
the Raigne of our late Sov~aigne Ladie of moste famous and happie
memorie Queene Elizabeth , intituled An Acte againste Conjurations
Inchantment and Witchcraft~ , be from the Feaste of St. Michaell the
Archangell nexte co~minge , for and concerninge all Offences to be
co~mitted after the same Feaste , utterlie repealed .
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1028.40

And for the better restrayninge the saide Offenses , and more severe
punishinge the same , be it further enacted by the authoritie aforesaide
, That if any p~son or persons , after the saide Feaste of Saint
Michaell the Archangell next co~minge , shall use practise or exercise
any Invocation or Conjuration of any evill and wicked Spirit , or shall
consult covenant with entertaine employ feede or rewarde any evill and
wicked Spirit to or for any intent or purpose ; or take up any dead man
woman or child out of his her or theire grave , or any other place where
the dead bodie resteth , or the skin bone or any other parte of any dead
person , to be imployed or used in any manner of Witchcrafte Sorcerie
{COM:helsinki_has_"Soreerie"_here} Charme or Inchantment ; or shall use
practise or exercise any Witchcrafte Inchantment Charme or Sorcerie ,
wherebie any p~son shal@ @be killed destroyed wasted consumed pined or
lamed in his or her bodie , or any parte thereof ; that then everie such
Offendor or Offendors , theire Ayders Abettors and Counsellors , being
of any the saide Offences dulie and lawfullie convicted and attainted ,
shall suffer pains of deathe as a Felon or Felons , and shall loose the
priviledge and benefit of Cleargie and Sanctuarie .
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1028.41

And further , to the intent that all manner of practise use or exercise
of Witchcrafte Inchantment Charme or Sorcerie should be from henceforth
utterlie avoyded abolished and taken away , Be it enacted by the
authoritie of this p~sent Parliament , That if any p~son or p~sons shall
from and after the saide Feaste of Saint Michaell the Archangell next
co~minge , take upon him or them by Witchcrafte Inchantment Charme or
Sorcerie to tell or declare in what place any treasure of Golde or
Silver should or might be founde or had in the earth or other secret
places , or where Good~ or Thing~ loste or stollen should be founde or
become ; or to the intent to p~voke any person to unlawfull love , or
wherebie any Cattell or Goods of any p~son shall be destroyed wasted or
impaired , or to hurte or destroy any p~son in his or her bodie ,
although the same be not effected and done ; that then all and everie
such p~son & p~sons so offendinge , and beinge thereof lawfullie
convicted , shall for the said Offence suffer Imprisonment by the space
of one whole yeere , without baile or maineprise , and once in everie
quarter of the saide yere , shall in <P_IV,1029> some Markett Towne ,
upon the Markett Day , or at such tyme as any Faire shal@ @be kepte
there , stande openlie upon the Pillorie by the space of sixe houres ,
and there shall openlie confesse his or her error and offence ;
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1029.42

And if any p~son or p~sons beinge once convicted of the same offences as
is aforesaide , doe eftsoones p~petrate and co~mit the like offence ,
that then everie such Offender , beinge of any the saide offences the
second tyme lawfullie and duelie convicted and attainted as is
aforesaide , shall suffer paines of death as a Felon or Felons , and
shall loose the benefitt and priviledge of Clergie and Sanctuarie :
Savinge to the wife of such person as shall offend in any thinge
contrarie to this Acte , her title of dower ; and also to the heire and
successour of everie such person his or theire titles of Inheritance
Succession and other Rights , as though no such Attaindor of the
Ancestor or Predecessor had bene made ; Provided alwaies , That if the
Offendor in any the Cases aforesaide shall happen to be a Peere of his
Realme , then his Triall therein to be had by his Peeres , as it is used
in cases of Felonie or Treason , and not otherwise .
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1029.43

<P_IV,1058>

<heading>

CHAPTER XXIX . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1058.46

AN ACTE TO ENCOURAGE THE SEAMEN OF ENGLAND TO TAKE FISHE , WHEREBIE THEY
MAY ENCREASE TO FURNISHE THE NAVIE OF ENGLAND .
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1058.47

<$$heading>

For the better increase of Seamen , to be readie at all tymes to serve
in the King~ Majesties Navie and the Navie of England , of which the
Fishermen of England have ever bene the chiefest Seminarie and Nurserie
, which in this latter Age have greatlie decayed ; Bee it enacted by the
King~ moste excellent Majestie the Lordes Spirituall and Temporall and
the Co~mons in this p~sent Parliament assembled and by the authoritie of
the same , That no Lycence or Lycences heretofore made or graunted , or
hereafter to be made or graunted , to any sicke or infirme person or
p~sons to eate Fleshe , during the tyme of his her or theire Sicknesse
or Infirmitie , by force of the Statute of Anno quinto Regine Elizabeth
, shall from the Feaste of Saint Michael next co~minge be any sufficient
Warrant to any such person or persons to eate any Beefe Veale Porke
Mutton or Bacon in the tyme of Lent , or upon any day now observed as a
Fishe day ; but that the saide sicke or infirme person or persons shall
, for dressinge or eatinge of such Beefe Veale Porke Mutton or Bacon ,
incurre the danger and penaltie comprised therefore in the saide Statute
, notwithstandinge any suche Licence heretofore granted , or hereafter
to be granted to the contrarie . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1058.49

And be it further enacted by the authoritie aforesaide , That no Butcher
or other person , whether he be licenced or not licenced to kill Fleshe
, shall from henceforth at any tyme in the tyme of Lent kill or dresse
to the intent to put to sale any Oxe or Oxen Beeves Beevets Hogges
Calves Rammes Ewes or Weathers , except Oxen or Beeves for victualling
of Shippes into forreine part~ , and except all Fleshe to be killed
three dayes next before Easter yeerelie , upon paine to forfeit and
loose the same Oxen Beeves Beevets Hogges Calves Rammes Ewes and
Weathers so killed and dressed contrarie to this Statute , or the value
of them . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1058.50

And be it further enacted , That all Justices of the Peace , Mayors
Bailiff~ Head Officers and Constables , as@ @well of Cities and Townes
Corporate as in everie Countie of this Realme , shall have power and
authoritie by force of this Acte , yeerelie in this tyme of Lent , to
enter into all Howses of Victuallers and common victuallinge Houses
within theire Jurisdictions , where such Offences shall be suspected to
be co~mitted , and findinge any such Oxen Beeves Beevets Hogges Calves
Rammes Ewes or Weathers killed or dressed , or any parte or parcell of
the same , contrary to this Statute , shall take and seize the same as
forfeited , and shall give and distribute the same to Prisoners and
other poore Folkes by theire discretion . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1058.51

And because the greatest Disorder and Libertie in eating of Fleshe upon
Fish daies and Dayes prohibited by the Lawe , is co~monlie founde to be
in Tavernes co~mon Innes Tabling Houses Cookes Houses Ale Houses and
Tipling Houses : Be it therefore enacted , That everie Taverner
Innekeeper Keeper of everie co~mon Tabling House co~mon Cooke co~mon
Typler or Alehouse Keeper , offendinge at any tyme hereafter in the
dressinge of any Fleshe Victuall contrarie to the saide Statute of Anno
quinto Elizabeth , or contrarie to this Statute , shall not onelie
forfeit all the saide Fleshe so dressed , but also the penaltie imposed
by the same Statute of Anno quinto Elizabeth , for everie Offence to be
co~mitted after the Feaste of Saint Michael the Archangell next co~minge
; the one halfe of all which Forfeitures , <paren> except such
Forfeitures as shal@ @be founde and taken by the Justices of Peace
Mayors Bailiff~ Head Officers and Constables , accordinge to the tenor
of this Acte <$$paren> , shall be to our Sov~aigne Lorde the Kinge ; and
the other halfe to such person or p~sons as shall sue or informe for the
same in any Court of Recorde , by Action of Debte Bill Plainte or
Information , wherein no Essoyne Protection or Wager of Lawe shall be
allowed to the Defendant . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1058.52

<P_IV,1060>

<heading>

CHAPTER XXXI . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1060.55

AN ACTE FOR THE CHARITABLE RELIEFE AND ORDERINGE OF P~SONS INFECTED WITH
THE PLAGUE . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1060.56

<$$heading>

Forasmuch as the Inhabitant~ of divers Cities Boroughes Townes Corporate
and of other Parishes and Places beinge visited with the Plague are
founde to be unable to relieve the poorer sorte of such People so
infected , who of necessitie muste be by some charitable course provided
for , leste they should wander abroad and thereby infecte others ; And
Forasmuch as divers persons infected with that Disease , and other
inh~itinge in Houses and Places infected , as well poore People and
unable to relieve themselves that are carefullie provided for , as
others which of themselves are of Abilitie , beinge co~manded by the
Magistrate or Officer , of or within the Place where the Infection shal
be , to keepe theire Houses or otherwise to seperate themselves from
Companie for the avoidinge of further infection , doe notwithstandinge
very dangerouslie and disorderlie misdemeane themselves : Be it
therefore enacted by the Authoritie of this present Parliament , That
the Mayor Bayliff~ Head Officers and Justices of Peace of everie Citie
Borough Towne Corporate and Places priviledged , where any Mayor and
Bayliff~ Head Officers or Justices of Peace are or shall bee , or any
two of them , shall have Power and Authoritie from tyme to tyme to taxe
and assesse all and everie Inhabitant , and all Houses of Habitation
Land~ Tenement~ and Hereditam=t=~ , within the saide Citie Borough Towne
Corporate and Places priviledged , or the Liberties or Precinct~ thereof
, at such reasonable Taxes and Payment~ as they shall thinke fit for the
reasonable Reliefe of such persons infected , or inhabitinge in Houses
and Places infected , in the same Cities Boroughes and Townes Corporate
and Places priviledged , and from tyme to tyme to levie the same Taxes
of the Goods of everie person refusinge or neglectinge to pay the saide
Taxes , by Warrant under the Hand and Seale of the Mayor and Bayliff~
and Head Officers aforesaide , or two suche Justices of Peace , to be
directed to any p~son or p~sons for the Execution thereof ;
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1060.58

And if the Partie to whome such Warrant is or shal@ @be directed shall
not finde any Goods to levie the same , and the Partie taxed shall
refuse to pay the same Taxe , That then upon Returne thereof , the saide
Mayor Bayliff~ Head Officers or Justices of Peace or any two of them
shall by like Warrant under theire Hands and Seales cause the same
person so taxed to be arrested and co~mitted to the Gaole without Baile
or Maineprise untill he shall satisfie the same Taxac~on and the
Arrerages thereof : STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1060.59

And if the Inhabitant~ of any such Citie Burrough Towne Corporate or
Place priviledged , shall finde themselves unable to relieve theire
saide poore infected persons and others as aforesaide , that then upon
Certificate thereof by the Mayor Bayliffe Head Officers and other the
saide Justices of Peace , or any two of them , to the Justices of Peace
of the Countie of or neere to the saide Citie Borough Towne Corporate or
priviledged place so infected , or any two of them , to be made , the
saide Justices of or neere the saide Countie , or any two of them ,
shall or may taxe and assesse the Inhabitant~ of the Countie within five
miles of the saide place infected , at such reasonable weekelie Taxes
and Rates as they shall thinke fit to be levied by Warrant from any such
two Justices of Peace of or neere the Countie by sale of Goods , and in
Default thereof , by Imprisonment of the Bodie of the Partie taxed as
aforesaide : STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1060.60

<P_IV,1061>

And if any such Infection shal@ @be in any Borough Towne Corporate or
priviledged Place where there are or shal@ @be no Justices of Peace , or
in any Village or Hamlett within any Countie , that then it shall and
may be lawfull for any two Justices of Peace of the saide Countie
wherein the saide Place infected is or shal@ @be , to taxe and assesse
the Inhabitant~ of the saide Countie , within five miles of the saide
Place infected , at such reasonable weekelie Taxes and Rates as they
shall thinke fit for the reasonable Reliefe of the saide places infected
, to be levied by warrant from the saide Justices of Peace of the same
Countie by sale of Goods , and in default thereof by Imprisonment of the
Bodie of every partie so taxed as aforesaide : STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.62

The same Taxes made by the saide Justices of Peace of the Countie for
the reliefe of such Cities Boroughes Townes Corporate and Places
priviledged where there are no Justices of Peace , to be disposed as
they shall thinke fit , And where there are Justices of Peace , then in
such sorte as to the Mayor Bayliff~ Head Officers and Justices of Peace
there , or any two of them , shall seeme fitt and convenient : All which
Taxes and Rates made within any such Citie Borough Towne Corporate or
Place priviledged , shall be certified at the next Quarter Sessions to
be holden within the same Citie Borough Towne Corporate or Place
priviledged ; And the saide Taxes and Rates made within any parte of the
saide Countie , shall in like sorte be certified at the next Quarter
Sessions to be holden in and for the saide Countie :
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.63

And that if the Justices of Peace at such Quarter Sessions respectivelie
, or the more part of them , shall thinke it fit the saide Taxe or Rate
should contynue , or be inlarged or extended to any other part~ of the
Countie , or otherwise determined , then the same to be so enlarged
extended or determined increased or taxed and levied in manner and forme
aforesaid , as to the said Justices at the Quarter Sessions respectively
shal@ @be thought fit and convenient ; STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.64

and everie Constable and other Officer that shall wilfullie make default
in levyinge such Money as they shall be co~manded by the saide Warrant
or Warrant~ , shall forfeite for everie such Offence Ten shilling~ , to
be imployed on the charitable uses aforesaide .
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.65

And be it further enacted , That if any person or p~sons infected , or
beinge or dwellinge in any House infected , shall be by the Mayor
Bayliff~ Constable or other Head Officer of any Citie Borough Towne
Corporate priviledged Place or Market Towne , or by any Justice of Peace
Constable Headboroughe or other Officer of the Countie , <paren> if any
such Infection be out of any Citie Borough Towne Corporate priviledged
Place or Market Towne , <$$paren> co~manded or appointed as aforesaide ,
to keepe his or theire House for avoidinge of farther Infection , and
shall notwithstandinge wilfullie and contemptuouslie disobey such
Direction and Appointment , offeringe and attemptinge to breake and goe
Abroade and to resiste , or goinge Abroade and resistinge , such Keepers
or Watchmen as shall be appointed as aforesaide , to see them kepte in ,
that then it shall be lawfull for such Watchmen , with violence to
enforce them to keepe theire Houses ; STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.66

And if any hurte come by such enforcement to such disobedient persons ,
that then the saide Keepers Watchmen and any other their Assistant~
shall not be impeached therefore ; STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.67

And if any infected person as aforesaide so co~manded to keepe House ,
shall contrarie to such Co~mandement wilfullie and contemptuously goe
abroade , and shall converse in companie , havinge any infectious sore
upon hym uncured , that then such person and persons shal@ @be taken
deemed and adjudged as a Felon , and to suffer Paines of Death as in
case of Felonie ; STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.68

but if such person shall not have any such sore found about hym , then
for his saide Offence to be punished as a Vagabond in all respect~
should or ought to be by the Statute made in the nyne_and_thirtieth
yeere of the Reigne of our late Sov~aing Ladie Queene Elizabeth for the
punishment of Rogues and Vagabond~ , and further to be bounde to his or
theire good behaviour for one whole yeere . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.69

Provided , That no Attainder of Felonie by vertue of this Acte shall
extend to any Attainder or Corruption of Blood , or forfeiture of any
Goods Chattels Land~ Tenement~ or Hereditament~ .
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.70

And be it further enacted by the authoritie aforesaide , That it shall
be lawfull for Justices of Peace Mayors Bayliff~ and other Head Officers
aforesaide to appointe , within the severall Limitt~ , Searchers
Watchmen Examiners Keepers and Buriers , for the persons and places
respectivelie infected as aforesaide ; and to minister unto them Othes
for the p~formance of their Offices of Searchers Examiners Watchmen
Keepers and Buriers , and give them other directions , as unto them for
the present necessitie shall seeme good in theire discretions .
STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.71

And this Acte to continue no longer then untill the ende of the firste
Session of the next Parliament . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.72

Provided alwaies and be it enacted by authoritie of this p~sent
Parliament , That no Mayor Bayliff~ Head Officers or any Justices of
Peace shall , by force or p~text of any thinge in this Acte conteined ,
doe or execute any thinge before mentioned , within either the
Universities of Cambridge or Oxforde , or within any Cathedrall Church ,
or the Liberties or Precinct~ thereof , in this Realme of England , or
within the Colledges of Eaton or Winchester ; But that the
Vicechauncellor of either of the Universities for the tyme beinge ,
within either of the same respectivelie , and the Bishop and Deane of
everie such Cathedrall Church , or one of them , within such Cathedrall
Church , and the Provost or Warden of either of the saide Colledges
within the same , shall have all such power and authoritie , and shall
doe and execute all and everie such Acte and Act~ Thinge and Thing~ in
this Acte before mentioned , within theire severall Precinct~ and
Jurisdictions abovesaide , as whollie absolutelie and fullie to all
Intent~ and Purposes as any Mayor Bailiff~ Head Officers or Justices of
Peace within theire severall Precinct~ and Jurisdictions may elswhere by
force of this Acte doe and execute . STAT-1607-E2-H,IV,1061.73

