<BEGIN_stat-1593-e2-h>

<P_4,852>

<heading>

CHAPTER VI . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,852.4

AN ACTE AGAISTE NEWE BUYLDING~ . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,852.5

<$$heading>

For the reformynge of the great Mischiefes and Inconveniences that
daylie growe and increase by reason of the pesteringe of Houses with
div~se Famylies , Harboringe of Inmates , and convertinge of great
Houses into sev~all Ten~t~ or Dwellinges , and erectinge of newe
Buylding~ within the Citties of London Westm~ and other Places nere
therunto adjoyninge , wherby great Infection of Sicknes & dearthe of
Victualles and Fewell hathe growen and ensued , and manye idle vagrante
and wicked p~sons have harboured themselfes there , and div~se remote
places of the Realme have bene disapointed of Workmen and dispeopled ;
The w=ch= Enormyties and Defect~ her Majestie of her Wisdome Princely
Considerac~on and Care of her Subject~ , by her Highnes P~clamac~on
dated at Nonsuche the seaventh daie of Julie in the xxij=th= yere of her
Majesties Raigne , did intend to reforme , untill some good order might
be p~vided in Parliament : Be it enacted by the aucthoritie of this
p~sent Parliament , That noe p~son or p~sons of what Estate Degree or
Condic~on soever , shall fromhensforth make and erecte anye newe
Buildinge or Buildinges House or Houses for habitac~on or dwellinge ,
within either of the saide Citties , or within thre myles of anye of the
Gates of the said Cittie of London , Excepte it be to enlarge his or
their House or Houses that so shall builde the same , or to add some
other Buylding~ to his or their Houses , or in their Gardens for the
more ease or pleasure of the Buylder ; or that suche newe House or
Ten~te shal@ @be fytt for the Habitac~on or Dwellinge of suche a person
as heretofore hath bene assessed to or for the Subsidie to her Majestie
at Five poundes in Good~ or Thre poundes in Landes at the last
Assessement next before the saide newe Building~ , or shal@ @be judged
by the Two next Justic~ of Peace , by writinge under their Hand~ and
Seales to be p~sented at the next Quarter Sessions , to be fytt and able
to be assessed in the Subsidie , accordinge to that rate if before that
tyme he hath not bene so assessed ; or except anye suche newe Buildinge
shal@ @be made for anye Hospitall for Relief of the Pore ; upon payne to
forfeit for ev~ye suche Offence quarterlie , the so~me of Fyve poundes .
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,852.7

And further be it enacted , That noe p~son or p~sons , of what Estate
Degree or Condic~on soever , shall at any tyme hereafter converte or
devide any Dwellinge House or other Buylding~ , nowe erected and builded
or hereafter to be erected and builded within the Citties and Places
aforesaide , or any of them , into div~se and sev~all Habitac~ons or
Dwelling~ for sev~all and div~se Famylies ; excepte everie sev~all House
soe devided shal@ @be fytt for the Habitac~on or Dwellinge of suche a
p~son as heretofore hathe bene assessed to or for the Subsidie to her
Majestie at Fyve Poundes in Goodes or Thre Pound~ in Landes , at the
Subsidie next before such Devision , or by twoe Justices of Peace next
adjoy~ing , by Writinge under their Handes and Seales to be p~sented at
the next Quarter Sessions , shal@ @be thought fytt and able to be
assessed in the Subsidie according to that Rate ; upon payne to forfeyte
for everie suche Offence , yf any other p~son under that value shall
inhabite suche House , the some of Fyve Poundes for everie Moneth ; to
be paide by that p~son that shall p~mytt the House devided to be
inhabited . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,852.8

And be it enacted also , That everie p~son being not of suche value
w=ch= shall herafter dwell or inhabite in anye suche House so to be newe
builded converted or devided as aforesaide , shall forfeyte for everie
Moneth that he or she shall dwell or inhabite in the same , the some of
Fyve Poundes . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,852.9

And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforesaide , That noe p~son
or p~sons inhabitinge & dwelling within the Citties and Places
aforesaide , shall after Twentie Daies next ensuynge this Session of
Parliament , receyve or take into his or their House or Houses any
Inmate or Undersitter or Inmates or Undersitters ; upon payne to
forfeyte for everie monethe that he she or they shall have & kepe or
willinglie suffer in his her or their House or Houses anye suche Inmate
or Undersitter , cont=a=rie to the true meaninge of this Acte , the some
of Fyve Poundes as is aforesaide : Provided , That this Braunche of this
Acte , or any thinge therin conteyned , shall not extend to any p~son or
p~sons for takinge or receyvinge into his her or their House or Houses
any p~son or p~sons w=ch= is or shal@ @be assessed in the Subsidie at
Fyve Poundes in Goodes or Thre Poundes in Landes or Fees , or shal@ @be
thought able and fytt to paye suche a Rate in Subsidie as is aforesaide
. STAT-1593-E2-H,4,852.10

And Whereas div~se Comons Waste Groundes and Great Fieldes nere
adjoyninge to the Citties aforesaid w=ch= have bene heretofore used for
trayninge and musteringe of Souldiors , and for recreac~on comforte &
health of the People inhabitinge the saide Citties and Places , and for
the use and ex~cise of Archerie , have of late yeres bene inclosed and
<P_4,853> converted into sev~alties and to other private uses : Be it
enacted by the aucthoritie aforesaide , That it shall not be laufull to
any p~son or p~sons to inclose or take in any parte of the Co~mons or
Waste Groundes scituate lienge or beinge within thre Myles of any of the
Gates of the saide Cittie of London , nor to sever or devide by any
Hedge Ditche Pale or otherwise , anye of the saide Fieldes lyinge within
thre Myles of any of the Gates of the saide Cittie of London as
aforesaide , to the let or hindraunce of the traynyng or musteringe of
Souldiors or of walkinge for recreac~on comforte and health of her
Majesties People , or of the laudable ex~cise of shotinge where there
hathe bene usuall ex~cise of shotinge and Mark~ have bene there sett ;
upon payne to forfeyt for everie Moneth that he or they or any of them
shall kepe anye parte of the saide Co~mons or Waste Groundes inclosed or
taken in for everie suche Inclosure , Five Poundes , and for ev~ye
Moneth that he or they shall kepe anye parte of anye of the same Fieldes
severed or devided for everie suche Offence Fyve Poundes : The one
moytie of all w=ch= Paynes Penalties and so~mes of Money to be forfeyted
by vertue of this Acte shal@ @be to the Churchewardens of all and ev~ye
Parishe and Parishes where the sev~all Offenc~ shal@ @be co~mitted , to
be ymployed by them , withe Consent of the more parte of the Parisheners
beinge Householders , to the use of the Pore of the Parishe or Parishes
, and th@ @other moytie to him or them that will sue for the same by
Acc~on of Debte Bill Playnte or Informac~on in any of the Quenes
Majesties Court~ of Recorde , in w=ch= Sute noe Essoyne Protecc~on Writt
of Priviledge or Wager of Lawe shal@ @be admytted or allowed .
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.11

And for the better Relief of the Pore in sev~all Parishes where any of
the Offenc~ aforesaide shal@ @be co~mytted , Be it also enacted , That
the Churchewardens of ev~ye sev~all Parishe <paren> if they shall not be
herin Offendors <$$paren> where anye of the Offences aforesaide shal@
@be co~mytted , and if they be Offendors then the Curate of the Parishe
withe twoe other honeste men of the same Parishe being Housholders ,
shall have full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this Acte to enter
into all and everie House and Houses and other place and places where
anye Offence shal@ @be co~mytted againste the true meaning of this Acte
, and there to distreyne for the moytie of all and everie suche so~me
and so~mes of Money as shal@ @be forfeyted by vertue of this Acte , and
the Distresse and Distresses to deteyne untill suche moytie of the so~me
and so~mes of Money so to be forfeyted shal@ @be trulie satisfied and
payed accordinge to the true intent and meaninge hereof .
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.12

Provided alwaies , That this Acte or any thinge therin conteyned shall
not extend to take awaye p~judice or impeache anye good Usag~ or
Customes , heretofore used in the Citties of London and Westm~ or eyther
of them , for the reformynge or punyshinge any of Offenc~ aforesaide ;
nor to any Lorde or Lordes havinge lib~tie to kepe a Leete for
punyshinge of any Th@ @offenc~ afore mencioned within the Jurisdicc~on
of his Leete , as they might have done before this Statute .
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.13

Provided also , That notwithstanding any thinge in this Acte conteyned
it shall and maye be laufull for ev~ye suche Marriner Sayler or
Shipwright , as shal@ @be allowed by the Lorde Admyrall and the Masters
and Companye of Trinitye House for the tyme beinge in Writing under
their Handes & Seales , to contynue his Habitac~on in any House that
hath bene buylte sithen the saide P~clamac~on nere to the Thames syde ,
serving onelie for the Habitac~on of suche Marriner Sayler or Shipwright
, and not to be used for any Victuallinge House , nor for any Storehouse
for anye Merchaundise , savinge suche as shall apperteyne to the arminge
or apparellinge of Shippes ; STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.14

And likewise that anye Marriner Sailor or Shipwright maie hereafter
builde any House , for suche purpose and for no other , on or nere the
Thames side , so as it be distant from the verie Wharfe or Bancke
thirtie Foote , soe as people may passe betwixte the saide Houses and
the saide Banke and the Thames ; And soe as in the newe building therof
ev~ye House hereafter to be builded maie be distant from any other House
above twentie Foote to avoide casualtie of Fier , and soe as also that
there be noe newe Landinge place or Staires made to take upp and laye to
Lande , or to laye from Lande in any Boate or Shippe , anye Wares or
m~chaundizes . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.15

And to avoide Doubt~ that maie arise by reason of this Acte , Be it
further enacted and declared by th@ @auctoritie aforesaide , That two
Justic~ of Peace inhabiting next to any of the Houses or Ten~t~
aforesaide , shall have full Power by vertue of this Acte , to decyde
and determyne whether ev~ye p~ticuler House or Ten~te before mencioned
be sufficient and convenient for Habitac~on of a man assessed or fytt to
be assessed to the Subsidie for her Majestie at Fyve Poundes in Goodes
or Thre Pound~ in Landes ; and whether the Inhabitante in any such House
or Ten~te be of value or substance to be assessed in the Subsidie
accordinge to the Rates aforesaid ; STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.16

And that a Myle shal@ @be reckoned and taken in this manner and noe
otherwise , STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.17

That is to saye , a Myle to conteyne Eight Furlong~ ,
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.18

and everie Furlonge to conteyne Fortie Lugg~ or Poles ,
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.19

and ev~y Lugg or Pole to conteyne Sixtene Foote and Halfe .
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.20

Be it further enacted , That for avoidinge of colorable contynuyng of
Inmates againste th@ @intenc~on of this Acte by p~tence of any Leases or
States made to them , the saide Inmat~ p~tending anye Leases shall
{COM:sic} at the next Leete or Courte to be helde in the Mannor or Place
where the Houses inhabited by Inmat~ are scituate , shall {COM:sic}
p~duce his or her Lease , and therof make good proofe before the
Stewarde of the Leete or Courte and the Jurie , w=ch= if he shall not
doe then the said Inmate to be forthwith removed as above is mencioned .
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.21

This Acte to endure for seaven yeres , and afterward~ untill th@ @end of
the Session of Parliament then next ensuynge . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,853.22

<P_4,857>

<heading>

CHAPTER VIII . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,857.25

AN ACTE AGAINSTE DECEITFULL MAKING OF CORDAGE . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,857.26

<$$heading>

Forasmuch as ys founde by co~men Experience that sundrie p~sons usinge
the Trade of making Cables Halsers and other kinde of Cordage within
this Realme , have of late for their private lucre and gayne used to
make the same of oulde caste and overworne Cables Halsors and Cordage ;
and yet have craftelye and deceytfullie uttered and soulde the same ,
beinge tarred , as newe good and stronge , & as made of newe and p~fecte
stuffe , coveringe and hydinge the false and corrupte makinge thereof by
tarringe of them@ @before the same putt to sale , by reason whereof not
onely div~se Shippes Vesselles & Goodes as@ @well of her Majesties as of
sundrie her Highnes Subjectes , but also the Lyves of div~se of her
saide Subjectes have bene loste p~ished and caste awaye : For Remedy
thereof , and for the avoydinge of suche great losses inconveniences and
daungers as myghte otherwise hereafter ensue , by suche corrupte false
and deceytfull makinge of Cables Halsers and other Cordage as ys
aforesaide , Be it enacted by the Quenes most Excellent Majestie the
Lordes Sp~uall & Temporall and the Co~mons in this p~sent Parliament
assembled , and by the Authoritie of the same , That yf any p~son or
p~sons shall after Fortie daies next after the ende of this Session of
Parliament , make or cause to be made any Cables of any olde and
overworn Stuffe w=ch= shall conteyne above seaven ynches in compasse ,
Then everie p~son soe offendinge shall forfeyte and lose fower tymes the
value of everie suche Cable so by him or her made or cause {COM:sic} to
be made as ys aforesaide ; STAT-1593-E2-H,4,857.28

And if any p~son or p~sons after the saide Fortie dayes next after th@
@end of this Session of Parliament shall tarre or cause to be tarred any
Halsers or other Cordage made within this Realme of suche olde and
overworn Stuffe as aforesaide , beinge of lesser Assise and not
conteyni~ge in compasse seaven ynches , and shall after by waye of
retayle sell or put to sale , or cause to be solde or put to sale , the
same beinge so tarred , that everie p~son soe offendinge shall forfeite
and lose the treble value of ev~ye Cable Halser and other Cordage beinge
of lesser Assise , and made of suche olde and overworn Stuffe as is
aforesaide , whiche shal@ @be so soulde or putt to sale beinge tarred as
aforesaide ; the one moytie of all whiche Forfeytures shal@ @be to the
Quenes Majestie her Heires and Successors , and the other moytie to
suche p~son or p~sons as will sue for the same by Acc~on of Debte Bill
Playnte or Informac~on , wherein noe Essoyne P~tecc~on or Wager of Lawe
shall be allowed : STAT-1593-E2-H,4,857.29

And Furthermore , That everie p~son w=ch= shall in any wise offende
againste the tenor and meaninge of this Acte , shal@ @be ymprisoned for
the same duringe her Majesties pleasure . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,857.30

<heading>

CHAPTER IX . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,857.32

AN ACTE TOUCHINGE BREDTH OF CLOTHES . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,857.33

<$$heading>

Whereas in the Parliament holden at Westm~ in the fyfte and sixt yeres
of the Raigne of our late Soveraigne Lorde Kinge Edwarde the Sixte , one
Statute was made , intituled An Acte for the true makinge of Wollen
Clothe , wherebie amonge other thing~ it was inacted , That all broade
Plunckett~ Azures Blewes and other coloured Clothe w=ch= after the Feast
of S=t= Michaell the Archaungell then next ensuynge shoulde be made
within the Shires of Wiltshire Glowcester or Som~sett , or elswhere of
like makinge , shoulde conteyne in lenghe , beinge thoroughe wett ,
betwixte fyve_and_twentye and eight_and_twentye yardes , yearde and
ynche of the Rule , and shoulde be seaven quarters within the List~ at
the leaste , and lysted accordinge to the auncient Custome , and beinge
well scowred thicked mylled and fullie dried , shoulde weighte
threscore_and_eight pounde the peece at the least , as by the saide Acte
amonge div~se Clauses Articles and P~visions conteyned in the same more
playnelie is exp~ssed ; sithence the makinge of w=ch= saide Statute ,
althoughe the makers of the said coloured Clothes have endevoured
themselves accordinge to their best skill and industrie to p~forme and
fulfill the saide recited Statute in everie of their Clothes as@ @muche
as in them did lye , as touchinge the bredthe of Clothes , and to th@
@end & purpose have allowed and doe allowe so muche Yearne and Stuffe to
ev~y suche Clothe as myght sufficientlie serve to make all the saide
coloured Clothes full out in lenghe bredthe and weight accordinge to the
saide Statute made in the fyfte and sixt yeres of Kinge Edwarde the Sixt
; Yet notwithstandinge manye tymes by reason of the div~se natures in
the Woolles , and by the greate div~sities in the spynnynge cardinge and
myllinge , manye of the saide coloured Clothes made within the saide
Countie of Som~sett , and elswhere of like makinge , doe not conteyne
full seaven quarters in bredthe , accordinge to the saide Statute made
in the fifte and sixt yeres of Kinge Edwarde the Sixte , and yet noe
defaulte touchinge the saide bredthe can justlie be imputed to the maker
therof , for that the saide Clothmakers , <paren> as Experience daylie
sheweth , <$$paren> can@ @not observe the saide former Statute in all
the saide Clothes , as touchinge the bredthe , althoughe they indevor
themselves never so muche thereunto ; w=ch= Clothes not conteyninge
their full Assize in bredthe as is aforesaid , are many tymes taken &
seised by the serchers of London when they come to their Markett at
Blackwell Hall , to the great losse and damage of the saide Clothemakers
, and to the great hindraunce of Clothe makinge within the saide Countye
: In Considerac~on whereof , albeyt it is not hereby intended to repeale
or make voide the saide former recited Statute otherwise then ys
hereafter exp~ssed , yet nevertheles be it enacted by the Quenes most
Excellent Majestie withe Th@ @assent of the Lordes Sp~uall and Temporall
and the Co~mons of this p~sent Parliament assembled , and by the
Authoritie of the same , That noe p~son or p~sons shal@ @be hereafter
chardged for any suche defaulte w=ch= hereafter shal@ @be in any of the
saide <P_4,858> broade Plunkett~ Azures Blewes or other coloured Clothes
, for want of bredthe of seaven quarters , so that the same Clothe doe
conteyne in bredthe , beinge throughlie wett , sixe quarters and an
halfe at the least within the List~ unwrought and lysted accordinge to
the auncient Custome ; Any Thinge in the saide former recited Statute
mencioned to the cont=a=rie in anye wise notwithstandinge .
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,858.35

Provided alwaies and be it enacted by the authoritie aforesaide , That
if any of the saide Clothes shall not conteyne Sixe Quarters and a Halfe
at the leaste within the List~ as is aforesaide , that then ev~y p~son
offendinge in that behalfe shall for everie suche Clothe be subjecte to
suche Paynes Penalties and Forfeytures as were , by force of the former
recited Statute of the Fyfte and Sixte yeres of Kinge Edwarde the Sixte
, to have bene forfeyted for want of Bredthe of Seaven Quarters within
the List~ . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,858.36

And be it nevertheles inacted by th@ @aucthoritie aforesaide , That if
anye of the saide brode Plunckett~ Azures Blewes or other coloured
Clothes , beinge well scowred thicked mylled and fullie dried , shall
conteyn in weight any lesse then threscore_and_eight poundes at the
leste , that then everie of the saide Clothiers therin offendinge shall
incurr doble suche Penaltyes and Forfeytures , for everie Pounde soe
wantinge of the saide Weight , and not weyinge after suche rate as ys
before exp~ssed in and by the saide Statute made in the Fyfte and Sixt
yeres of Kinge Edwarde the Sixte , ys lymitted and appoynted .
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,858.37

And be it nevertheles enacted by the authoritie aforesaide , That if
anye of the Clothes to be made w=th=in the Countie of Som~sett , or
elswhere of lyke makinge , called Plunkett~ Azures and Blewes , beinge
well scowred thicked mylled and fullie dried , shall conteyne in Weighte
anye lesse then threscore_and_eight poundes at the least , or yf any of
the saide Clothes shall conteyne in Lengh~e any more then xxvij=tie=
yeardes at the most , that then ev~y of the same Clothyers therin
offendinge shall incurr double suche Penaltyes and Forfeytures for ev~y
pounde so wantinge , as by the saide Statute of the Fyfte and Sixte
yeres of the Raigne of Kinge Edwarde the Sixte , are to suche Default~
lymitted and appoynted ; STAT-1593-E2-H,4,858.38

And for ev~y yarde that anye suche Clothe shall conteyne above
xxvij=tie= yard~ in Lengthe , and not weyinge after suche rate as ys
before expressed , the Maker of everie suche Clothe shall incurre dowble
the Penalties bye the Statute of the Fowrthe and Fyfte yeres of the
Reignes of Kinge Philipp & Quene Marie to suche Default~ lymitted and
appoynted . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,858.39

<heading>

CHAPTER X . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,858.41

AN ACTE TO REFORME ABUSES IN CLOTHES . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,858.42

<$$heading>

In theire moste humble and dutyfull wise shewen and beseechen your
Highnes your true and faithfull Subject~ the Clothiers Merchaunt~ and
Chapmen of your Countie of Devon and of the Counties adjoyninge , That
where in the Moneth of Januarie in the fower_and_thirtieth yere of your
Majesties most happie Raigne , as@ @well at the humble Suyte and
Petic~on of sundrie your saide Subjectes , as upon c~tificate of div~se
Justices in your Highnes saide Countie of Devon , and uppon Complaynte
of the States of Hollande , It pleased your Highnes , with th@ @advise
of your most Honorable Privie Counsell , by your Highnes P~clamac~on ,
for the Reformac~on of th@ @insufficiencies growen in the Clothes called
Devonshire Kersies or Dozens , <paren> a Co~modity heretofore in great
Request Priese and Estimac~on bothe amongest your naturall Subject~ and
in forreyn Nacions and Countries , <$$paren> but of late marvailouslie
<paren> and not without occasion <$$paren> discredited by the Invenc~ons
and newe Devises of the Weavers Tuckers and Artificers , to co~maunde
that the Lawes before that tyme made and standinge in force not repealed
for and concerninge the p~misses , shoulde be duely accomplished in all
Thing~ ; and that everie Officer shoulde diligentlie p~forme his Office
accordinglie , and that the weight of the saide Kersies or Dozens beinge
rawe , and wroughte with clean Stuffe without any deceitfull Addic~on
shoulde weigh fyftene pound~ and conteyne in the Markett at the least
betwene fiftene and sixtene yardes in Lengh~e , and that the same
shoulde be sewantly woven throughout of like sorted Yarne , forbiddinge
all other Deceipt~ in Weaving , and all dymynishinge and unreasonable
drawinge stretchinge and other Deceipt~ in Tuckers ; And that eche
Weaver shoulde weave his Shopm~ke in eche Dozen , and a Purrell in eche
ende thereof , and that Officers shoulde be appoynted in Markett Townes
to viewe weighe and trie the same Kersies whether they were in Lengh~e
Weight or Goodnes , according to the rate and p~porc~on set forthe in
the same P~clamac~on ; the same P~clamac~on to endure till the firste
daye of this p~sent Parliament , as by the same more at large maye
appere : STAT-1593-E2-H,4,858.44

Nowe moste gracious Soveraigne , Forasmuche as by the saide P~clamac~on
greate order and better makinge of the saide Clothes for Weight and
Lengh~e thereof hathe ensued , and to th@ @end that hereafter further
Discoverie and Restrainte of all Abuses and Deceipt~ cont=a=rie to the
former Lawes and Statut~ of this Realme may be p~vided for , to the
revivinge of the Reputac~on of so good p~fitable and necessarie a
Co~moditie ; It may please your Majestie with th@ @assent of the Lordes
Sp~uall and Temporall and the whole Co~monaltie assembled in this p~sent
Parliament and by th@ @aucthoritie of the same , That it maye be enacted
and established as followeth ; STAT-1593-E2-H,4,858.45

That is to saye , That from and after the firste daye of Julye nowe next
co~myng , eyche Kersey called Devonshire Kersey or Dozen w=ch= shal@ @be
made and woven within the saide Countie of Devon , or any other Countie
next adjoyninge therunto , beinge rawe unscowred untucked & unwett as yt
cometh from the Weavers Beame , and beinge made of cleane and p~fecte
Stuffe , That is to witt of Woolle shorne clensed and throughlye wasshed
or scowred after the shearinge and before the weavinge , without anye
Fraude Deceipte Pollicie or Devise , or any Stuffe thereunto
deceytfullye or unlaufullye added , in the workinge or after the
workinge thereof , for the increase of the Weight , shall weighe in the
Markett fyftene poundes or upward~ ; And that from and after the saide
first day of Julye <P_4,859> ev~ye rawe Devonshire Kersey or Dozen from
thenceforth to be woven and made in the saide Countie of Devon , or anye
of the other Counties adjoyninge , beinge a rudge washe Kersey , that is
to saye , beinge made of Fleece Wooll wasshed only on the Sheepes Back~
, and the Wooll not beinge clensed washed and scowred after it is shorne
and before it is woven , shall <paren> without any Fraude Deceipte
Pollicie Device or Addic~on of Stuffe whatsoever to increase the Weighte
thereof <$$paren> weighe in the Markett seventene poundes at the least
beinge rawe as it cometh of the Weavers Beame ; STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.46

And eiche and everie of the same Devonshire Kersies or Dozens so being
rawe and as it cometh forthe of the Weavers Loome , <paren> without
rackinge stretching streyning or other Devise to increase the Lengh
therof , <$$paren> shall conteyne in Lengthe betwene Fiftene and Sixtene
yeardes by the measure of yearde and ynche by the Rule , without w=ch=
Observac~on of Weight beinge rawe , they can@ @not fall out , <paren>
after they be well scowred thicked and fullie dried , <$$paren> to
conteyne the lengthe and weight exp~ssed and lymitted in the Statute of
the fourth and fyveth yeres of Phillipp and Marie , viz. Twelve yerdes
in lengh~e and Twelve pound~ in Weight , as hathe bene sufficientlie
made knowen and testified to your Highnes saide Privie Counsell before
the saide P~clamac~on : STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.47

And yf any Weaver shall worke or make any of the saide kindes of Kersies
of lesse Weight or Measure then ys before mencioned after their kinde ,
everie suche Offendor shall forfeite for ever~ quarter of a pounde in
Weight w=ch= anye of the saide rawe Kersies or Dozens w=ch= shal@ @be
broughte to any Markett or soulde or offered to be soulde , shall want
of their Weight aforesaide , Twelve pence , and for everie quarter of a
yarde w=ch= shal@ @be wantinge in lengh~e of either sorte of the saide
Kersies likewise beinge soulde or offerred to be soulde , Twelve pence ;
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.48

And that eche sorte of the saide Kersyes or Dozens shal@ @be sewantly
woven throughout of well and like sorted yarne , and that no Weaver
shall use any div~sitie in the bignes or goodnes of his yearne in any
parte of the saide Kersies , savinge onelye in the Lyst~ , nor use anye
other practise in edginge or weavinge of any the same Kersies or Dozens
, to make the same seme fyner nere the Edge or Liste then in other parte
of the same Clothe . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.49

And that it maye be further Inacted by the authoritie aforesaide , That
eiche Weavor shall weave his shopm~ke of some coloured Yarne in th@ @end
of everie Kersey , w=ch= he shall hereafter weave or make , and shall
also at eche end of everie of the same Kersies weave one Purrell
likewise of coloured Yarne of the bredthe of Thre Quarters of an Ynche
at the leaste , wherbye the deceitfull cuttinge and dymynishinge of
suche Clothes by Tuckers or Fullers heretofore used , may hencforthe be
p~vented ; STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.50

And if any Weaver shall use any Deceipte in mynglinge his Yearne , or
shall omytt his shopm~ke , or shall not weave in everie Kersey Two
Purrells , accordinge to the tenor of this Acte , he shall forfeyt and
lose for everie Offence to the cont=a=rie , Tenne Shilling~ .
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.51

And to th@ @end that the weight and goodnes of all the saide Kersies
called Dozens beinge rawe may be the better and more certenlie knowen ,
it may further be enacted , That noe Weaver nor any p~son whatsoever
shall offer or put to sale any of the same Rawe Kersies called Dozens ,
before the same have bene viewed weighed and marked in some Cittie Towne
Corporate or Marked Towne , and allowed by suche Officer , and marked
withe suche Mark~ as shal@ @be there in suche Cittie or Towne used and
appoynted for that purpose ; upon payne to forfeyt and loose for everie
Clothe soulde or offered to be soulde to the cont=a=rie , Tenne
Shilling~ , th@ @one Halfe of all w=ch= Forfeytures shal@ @be to the use
of your Highnes your Heires and Successors , and th@ @other Halfe to the
principall Officer or Magistrate of the Cittie Towne Corporate or
Markett Towne next adjoyninge to the dwellinge or workinge Place of
suche Weavers as shall offende in any of the p~misses , yf he the same
Officer or Magistrate shall firste make Seisure therof , or els to the
principall Officer of that Cittie Towne Corporate or Markett Towne where
the same shal@ @be soulde or offered to be soulde , to be recovered by
Acc~on of Debte Bill Playnte Informac~on with Cost~ , in anye Courte of
Recorde , wherin noe P~tection Wager of Lawe or Essoyne shal@ @be
allowed STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.52

And for the better Discoverie of the Offences aforesaide and the more
p~fecte accomplisshing of the p~misses , it may be also enacted , That
the principall Officer or Magistrate for the tyme beinge in everie
Cittie Towne Corporate or Markett Towne of the saide Countie , or of any
other of the Counties adjoyninge , where any suche Kersies called
Devonshire Kersies or Dozens nowe are or hereafter shal@ @be woven made
offered or put to sale , shall everie yere from henceforthe appoynte and
have in redynes at all tymes nedefull , two or more discreete p~sons
w=ch= shal@ @be speciall and knowen Officers and Searchers , w=ch= shall
attend and shal@ @be at his and their saide Office sworne , duringe his
and their contynuance in the saide Office trulye to viewe weyghe & marke
eiche Kerseye called a Dozen , in suche Cittie or Towne , or any of them
, made soulde or offered to be soulde or put to sale , and to p~sent
eche Offence or Defecte w=ch= shall there fall out cont=a=rie to the
true meaninge of this Statute ; STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.53

everie whiche Sercher or Officer so to be hereafter appoynted for this
purpose in any suche Cittie Towne Corporate or Markett Towne , shall by
force of this Acte have power and authoritie to enter in the daye tyme
into all Shoppes Warehouses Workehouses and other places convenient of
the same Cittie or Towne where he or they shal@ @be soe appoynted ,
there to viewe searche and see whether any Kersey or Dozen be made
soulde or offered to be soulde cont=a=rie to the true meaninge of this
Acte ; STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.54

And also to see what Paynes Penalties and Forfeytures shal@ @be growen
due to her Majestie by any Weaver Seller or Buyer within the Lib~ties
and p~cinct~ of the same Towne , takinge onlye of and for the weying and
markinge of everie Kersey , a Farthinge for his paynes , and so
accordinge to the nomber and noe more , w=ch= Farthinge uppon everie
Kersey is to be payde by the Seller of the same Kersey ;
STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.55

And if suche Serchers and Officers shall not be yerelie appointed and
attendante at all tymes reasonable and convenient , or shall neglecte
his or their dutyes in the true serche weighinge and markinge of the
saide Kerseis , or any of them , or shall marke anye one Kersey w=ch=
want~ of his weight as is aforesaide , That then and in everie suche
Case the Chief Magistrate of everie suche Cittie and Towne , shall
forfeyt and loose for everie suche Offence of their Sercher or Serchers
Twentie Shilling~ , STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.56

and for everie Market Daye they shall wante two or one at the least of
suche Serchers the so~me of Fourtie Shilling~ , to be levied as
hereafter is exp~ssed . STAT-1593-E2-H,4,859.57

