<BEGIN_stat-1585-e2-h>

<P_4,810>

<heading>

CHAPTER XII . STAT-1585-E2-H,4,810.4

AN ACTE TO AVOYDE HORSE STEALINGE . STAT-1585-E2-H,4,810.5

<$$heading>

Wheras through most Counties of this Realme Horstealinge is growen so
co~mon , as neither in Pastures or Closes nor hardlie in Stables the
same are to be in safety from stealinge , whiche ensueth by the redye
buyinge of the same , by Horscorsers and others in some open Fayres or
Markett~ farr distant from the Owner , and withe suche speede as the
Owner can@ @not by pursuyte possiblie helpe the same ; And sondrie good
Ordinaunc~ have heretofore bene made touchinge the manner of sellinge
and tolinge of Horses Mares Gilding~ and Coult~ in Fayres and Markett~ ,
whiche have not wrought soe good effecte for the repressinge or
avoydinge of Horsestealinge as was expected : Nowe , for a further
Remedy in that Behalfe , Be it enacted by the Authoritie of this p~sent
Parliament , That noe p~son after Twentie Dayes next after th@ @ende of
this Session of Parliament , shall in any Fayre or Markett sell gyve
exchange or put awaye anye Horse Mare Geldinge Coulte or Fillie ,
unlesse the Tole taker there , or <paren> where noe Tole ys payde
<$$paren> the Booke keeper Baylif or Cheef Officer of the same Fayre or
Markett , shall and will take upon him p~fecte knowledge of the p~son
that soe shall sell or offer to sell give or exchange any Horse Mare
Geldinge Coulte or Fillie , and of his true Xp~en Name Surname and place
of Dwellinge or Resyancye , and shall enter all the same his knowledge
into a Booke there kept for Sale of Horses ; STAT-1585-E2-H,4,810.7

or els that he soe sellinge or offeringe to sell give exchange or put
awaye anye Horse Mare Gildinge Coulte or Fillie , shall bringe unto the
Toltaker or other Officer aforesaide of the same Fayre or Markett , one
sufficient and credible p~son that can shall or will testifye and
declare unto and before suche Toltaker Booke keeper or other Officer ,
that he knowethe the partie that soe sellethe givethe exchaungeth or
puttethe awaye suche Horse Mare Gildinge Coulte or Fillie , and his true
Name Surname Mysterie and Dwellinge Place ; And there enter or cause to
be entered in the Booke of the saide Toltaker or Officer as@ @well the
true Xp~en Name and Surname Mysterie and Place of Dwellinge or Resyancye
, of him that soe selleth giveth exchangeth or putteth awaye suche Horse
Mare Gildinge Coulte or Fillie , as of him that so shall testifye or
avouche his kowledge of the same p~son , STAT-1585-E2-H,4,810.8

and shall also cause to be entred the verie true price or value that he
shall have for the same Horse Mare Gildinge Coulte or Fillie so soulde ;
STAT-1585-E2-H,4,810.9

And that noe p~son shall take upon him to avouche testifye or declare
that he knoweth the Partie , that so shall offer to sell give exchange
or put awaye any suche Horse Mare Gildinge Coulte or Fillie , unlesse he
doe indeede trulie knowe the same Partie , and shall trulie declare to
the Toltaker or other Officer aforesaide as@ @well the Xp~en Name
Surname Mysterie and Place of Dwellinge and Resiancy of himselfe , as of
him of and for whome he makethe suche Testimonye and Avouchement ;
STAT-1585-E2-H,4,810.10

And that noe Toltaker or other p~son kepinge anye Booke of Entrie of
Sales of Horses in Fayres or Markett~ , shall take or receve any Tole ,
or make Entrie of any Sale Gifte Exchange or puttinge awaye of any Horse
Mare Gildinge Coulte or Fillie , unlesse he knoweth the Partie that soe
selleth giveth exchangeth or putteth awaye any suche Horse Mare Gildinge
Coulte or Fillie , and his true Xp~en Name Surname Misterie and Place of
his Dwellinge or Resiancye , or the Partie that shall and will testifye
and avouche his knowledge of the same p~son so sellinge givinge
exchanginge or puttinge away suche Horse Mare Gildinge Coulte or Fillie
, and his true Xp~en Name Surname Mysterie and Place of Dwellinge or
Resiancy , and shall make a p~fecte Entrie into the saide Booke of suche
his knowledge of the p~son , and of the Name Surname Mysterie and Place
of the Dwellinge or Resiancy of the same p~son , and also true price or
value that shal@ @be bona fide taken or had for anye suche Horse Mare
Gildinge Coulte or Fillie , so soulde given exchaunged or put awaye so
farr as he canne understande the same ; and then give to the Partie , so
buyinge or takinge by Guyfte Exchaunge or otherwise suche Horse Mare
Gildinge Coulte or Fillie , requiringe and payinge Two Pence for the
same , a true and p~fecte Note in Writinge of all the full Content~ of
the same subscribed withe his Hande : on payne that everie p~son that
soe shall sell give exchange or put awaye anye Horse Mare Gildinge
Coulte or Fillie , without beinge knowen to the Tol taker or other
Officer aforesaide , or without bringinge suche a Voucher or Witnes ,
causinge the same to be entred as aforesaide , and everie p~son makinge
anye untrue Testymonye or Avouchement in the Behalfe aforesaide , and
everie Tol taker Booke keeper or other Officer of Fayre or Markett
aforesaide , offendinge in the p~misses contrarie to the true meanynge
aforesaide , shall forfeyte for everie suche Defaulte the so~me of Fyve
Pound~ ; STAT-1585-E2-H,4,810.11

but also that everie Sale Guyfte Exchange or other puttinge awaye of any
Horse Mare Gildinge Coulte or Fillie , in Fayre or Market not used in
all poynt~ accordinge to the true meaninge aforesaide , shal@ @be voyde
; Th@ @one halfe of all whiche Forfeytures to be to the Quenes Majestie
her Heires and Successors , and th@ @other halfe to him or them that
will sue for the same before the Justic~ of Peace , or in anye her
Majesties ordinarie Court~ of Recorde by Bill Playnte Acc~on of Debte or
Informac~on , in whiche noe Essoyne or P~tecc~on shal@ @be allowed .
STAT-1585-E2-H,4,810.12

<P_4,811>

And be it further enacted , That the Justic~ of Peace of everie Place
and Countie , as@ @well within Liberties as without , shall have
Authoritie in their Sessions , within the Lymitt~ of their Authoritie
and Co~mission , to enquire here and determyne all Offences againste
this Statute , as they maye doe any other Matter triable before them .
STAT-1585-E2-H,4,811.14

And be it further Inacted , That if anye Horse Mare Geldinge Coulte or
Fillie , after Twentie Dayes next ensuynge th@ @ende of this Session of
Parliament , shal@ @be stolen , and after shal@ @be soulde in open Fayre
or Markett , and the same Sale shal@ @be used in all Poynt~ and
Circumstaunc~ as aforesaide , that yet nevertheles the Sale of any suche
Horse Mare Geldinge Coulte or Fillie , within Sixe Monethes next after
the Fellonye done , shall not take awaye the P~pertie of the Owner from
whom the same was stolen , so as clayme be made within Sixe Monethes ,
by the Partie from whom the same was stolen , or by his Executors or
Admynistrators , or by any other by anye of their Appoyntment , at or in
the Towne or Parishe where the same Horse Mare Gelding Coulte or Fillie
shal@ @be founde , before the Maior or other Hedd Officer of the same
Towne or P~ishe , yf the same Horse Mare Geldinge Coulte or Fillie shall
happen to be founde in any Towne Corporate or Markett Towne , or else
before any Justice of Peace of that Countie nere to the Place where
suche Horse Mare Geldinge Coulte or Fillie shal@ @be founde , yf it be
out of Towne Corporat or Markett Towne , and so as proofe be made within
Fortye dayes then nexte ensuynge , by twoe sufficient Witnesses to be
p~duced and deposed before suche Head Officer or Justice , who by virtue
of this Acte shall have Authoritie to mynister an Othe in that Behalfe ,
that the P~pertie of the same Horse Mare Geldinge Coulte or Fillie so
claymed was in the Partie by or for whome suche Clayme ys made , and was
stollen from him within Sixe Monethes next before suche Clayme of any
suche Horse Geldinge Mare Coulte or Fillie ; STAT-1585-E2-H,4,811.15

but that the Partie , from whom the saide Horse Mare Geldinge Coulte or
Fillie was stolen , his Executors or Admynystrators , shall and maye at
all Tymes after , notwithstandinge any suche Sale or Sales in anye Fayre
or open Markett thereof made , have P~pertie and Power to have take
agayne and enjoye the saide Horse Mare Geldinge Coulte or Fillie , upon
payment , or readynes or offer to paye , to the Partie that shall have
the Possession and Interest of the same Horse Mare Geldinge Coulte or
Fillie , yf he will receyve and accepte it , so muche Money as the same
Partie shall depose and swere before suche Head Officer or Justice of
Peace , whoe by vertue of this Acte shall have Authoritie to mynister
and gyve an Othe in that behaulfe , that he paide for the same bona fide
, without Fraude or Collusion ; Any Lawe Statute or other Thinge to the
contrarie thereof in any wise notwithstandinge .
STAT-1585-E2-H,4,811.16

And be it further enacted by the Authoritie aforesaid , That after
Twentie daies after th@ @ende of this Session of Parliament , not onelie
all Accessaries before such Fellonye done , but also all Accessaries
after suche Fellonye , shal@ @be deprived and put from all Benefytt of
their Cleargie , as the Principall by Statute heretofore made is or
ought to be . STAT-1585-E2-H,4,811.17

