<BEGIN_stat-1543-e1-h>

<P_3,906>

<heading>

CHAPTER VIII . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.4

AN ACTE THAT PERSONES BEING NO CO~EN SURGEONS MAIE MYNISTRE MEDICINES
OWTWARDE . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.5

<$$heading>

Where in the parliament holden at Westm~ in the thirde yere of the King~
moste gracious reigne , amongest other thinges for the advoyding of
sorceryes witchecrafte and other inconveniences , it was enacted , that
no p~sone within the Citie of London , nor within seven myles of the
same , shoulde take upon him to exercyse and occupie as Phisician or
Surgeon , except he be first examyned approved and admytted by the
Bisshopp of London and other , undre and upon certaine peynes and
penalties in the same Acte mencioned ; STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.7

Sithens the making of whiche saide Acte the Companie and Felowship of
Surgeons of London , mynding oonelie theyre owne lucres , and nothing
the profite or ease of the diseased or patient , have sued troubled and
vexed divers honest p~sones as@ @well men as woomen , whome God hathe
endued with the knowledge of the nature kinde and operac~on of certeyne
herbes rotes and waters , and the using and mynistering of them to suche
as been pained with customable diseases , as Womens brestes being sore ,
a Pyn and the Web in the eye , uncoomes of hand~ scalding~ burning~ sore
mouthes the stone strangurye saucelin and morfew , and suche other lyke
diseases , and yet the saide p~sones have not takin any thing for theyre
peynes and cooninng , but have mynistred the same to the poore people
oonelie for neighbourhode and Goddes sake and of pitie and charytie ;
and it is nowe well knowen that the surgeons admytted wooll doo no cure
to any p~sone , but where they shall knowe to be rewarded with a greater
soome or rewarde than the cure extendeth unto , STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.8

for in cace they wolde mynistre theyre coonning to sore people
unrewarded , there shoulde not so manye rotte and perishe to deathe for
lacke of helpe of Surgerye as dailie doo , STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.9

but the greatest parte of Surgeons admytted been muche more to be blamed
than those p~sones that they trouble , STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.10

for althonghe the most parte of the p~sones of the saide crafte of
Surgeons have small cooning , yet they wooll take greate soomes of money
and doo litle therfore , STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.11

and by reasone therof they doo often tymes impaire and hurte theyre
patient~ rather thenne doo them good : <font> In considerac~on <$$font>
wherof and for the ease comforte socour helpe relief and healthe of the
King~ poore Subject~ inhabytaunt~ of this his Realme , nowe peyned or
diseased , or that hereafter shal@ @be peyned or diseased , Be it
ordeyned establisshed and enacted by th@ @auctorytie of this p~nt
parliament , that at all tymes from hensforthe , it shal@ @be lefull to
everye p~sone being the King~ Subject having knowledge and experience of
the nature of herbes rotes and waters or of the operac~on of the same by
speculac~on or practyse , within any parte of the Realme of Englande ,
or within any other the King~ Domynions , to practyse use and mynistre
in and to any outwarde sore uncoom wounde appostemac~ons outwarde
swelling or disease , any herbe or herbes oyntement~ bathes pultes and
emplasters , according to theyre cooning experience and knowlege in any
of the diseases sores and maladies aforesaide and all other lyke to the
same , or drinkes for the stone strangurye or agues , without sute
vexac~on trouble penaltie or losse of theyre good~ .
STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.12

The foresaide Statute in the foresaide thirde yere of the King~ most
gracious reigne , or any other Acte ordin=a=nce or statute to the
contrarye hereof heretofore made in any wise notwithstanding .
STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.13

<heading>

CHAPTER IX . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.15

AN ACTE FOR THE PRESERVAC~ON OF THE RYVER OF SEVERNE .
STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.16

<$$heading>

Where divers persones as@ @well inhabytauntes fermers and dwellers nere
unto the streme of Severne and unto the crykes and pilles of the same ,
from Kingrode upwarde towarde the Citie and Towne of Gloucestre ,
conveyeth and carieth graine and corne out of the Realme of Englande ,
unto the parties beyonde the Sea , where graines are verye deare , and
nowe of late tyme have made picard~ and other greate botes with
fore_mastes of the burden of xv toon and so to xxxvj toonne ,
STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.18

and by reasone wherof wheate rye beanes barley malte and other kynde of
graines , by stealthe are conveyed into the utter parties beyonde the
Sea , so that therby the King~ Majestie is not oonelie deceyved of his
subsidie and custome for the same , but it causeth at suche tymes wheate
graine and other kynde of corne as is aforesaide to be at hiegh prices ,
STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.19

and by the same meanes , th@ @inhabytaunt~ within the saide Citie or
Towne of Bristoll , are often and sundrye tymes destitute and skant maie
have graine or corne to serve the King~ obedient Subject~ there dwelling
and inhabyting ; STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.20

and allso by reasone of having of the saide greate botes and vessells ,
often tymes divers Shipps , as@ @well of the parties beyonde the Sea as
other of Englishe Shipps lying in Kingrode and Hungrode , being port~ or
havens of the Citie or Towne of Bristoll aforesaide distaunte fyve myles
or therabout from the saide towne of Bristoll , awayting and tarying
there the cooming of the saide greate botes with corne and graine downe
Severne , who there dischardgeth the graine and corne aborde the saide
Shipps at Kingrode , by reason wherof the saide Shipps and other Vessels
there tarying for the receipte of the saide graine and corne , doo then
cast out theyre balast of Stones and other robull of balast of theyre
saide Shipps and Vessells , into the saide rodes and havens of Hungrode
and Kingrode , and there lodith the saide graine and corne in the Shipps
and Vessells , to the greate distrucc~on , and in contynuaunce to th@
@uttre undoing of the saide rodes and havens ; STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.21

so that the mouthe and hole channel of the saide havens is so heaped and
quarred with Stones robull of balastes of the Shippes and Botes there
arryving , that greate Shipps whiche useth the course of merchaundyse to
the saide towne of Bristoll from the partes beyonde the Sea and fro the
saide towne laden with merchaundyse unto the utter parties , maie
scantlye or savelye coome unto the Kinges saide portes and towne of
Bristoll and the ryver of the same , and so from the saide porte and
towne of Bristoll unto the saide Severne , without greate daunger and
p~ill , STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.22

and by that meanes Shippes of greate bourden are lyke to be distroyed
and utterlye to be caste awaie , STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.23

and if redresse be not the so so~ner had therein it wil@ @be to the
uttre distrucc~on of the haven and porte of the saide towne of Bristoll
, whiche saide towne of Bristoll is chieflie mainteyned by course of
merchaundyse : STAT-1543-E1-H,3,906.24

<P_3,907>

Wherfore it maie please the Kinges Majestie the Lordes sp~uall and
temporall and the Co~mons in this p~nt parliament assembled and by
auctorytie of the same , to enacte make and ordeyne , that after the
laste daie of Julye next cooming , no maister or maisters owner or
owners of Shipp or Shipps or of any other Bote or Vessell , or any other
p~sone or p~sones , do caste or unlode theyre balaste or robull at or in
the saide rode called Kingrode and Hungrode , nor in any of them , ne in
any other place from the rode of Kingrode unto the towne of Bristoll ,
nor in no parte of the haven therof but on the lande oonelie above the
full Sea merke ; STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.26

upon peyne that everye suche owner maister of Shipp or of other Bote or
Vessell and of everye other p~sone or p~sones casting and laying theyre
balast or robull in the streme at the place or in the ryver aforesaide ,
to forfaite at everye tyme so offending foure poundes , the oone haulfe
therof to be to our Soveraigne Lorde the King , and th@ @other haulfe
therof to the partie that will sue for the same in any of the Kinges
Courtes of Recorde , as@ @well within Courtes of Recorde within Cities
and Townes Corporate before the Mayre Aldermen Shirieff~ and Bailief~
according to theyre corporac~on , as elswhere in any of the King~ Court~
of Recorde , by Bill plainte acc~on of debte informac~on or otherwyse ;
in the whiche action the defendaunte shall not wage his lawe , neyther
yet no protecco~n or essoine to be allowed . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.27

And further that it maie be enacted by th@ @auctorytie aforesaide , that
no p~sone or p~sones from hensforthe shall enbote or lade or cause to be
enboted or laden , any Wheate Malte Beanes or any other kinde of Graine
or Corne whatsoever it shal@ @be , in any picarde bote or other Vessell
at any creke pille banke or elswhere upon the Severne streme betwene the
Keye of the Citie of Gloucestre , and the saide Citie or Towne of
Bristoll by Water of Severne , to th@ @intent to be transported into the
utter parties beyonde the Sea out of the King~ Domynion , before the
saide Owner or lader of the saide picarde bote or other Vessell , hathe
been with the King~ Customers of the saide Porte and Towne of Bristoll
aforesaide , and there by himself and oone sufficient suertie with him
bounden unto the King~ Customers of the saide Porte and Towne of
Bristoll aforesaide , in suche reasonable soomes of Money to th@ @use of
our saide Soveraigne Lorde the King as shall amounte to the double value
of the saide Graine or Corne there to be laden or to be enboted ;
STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.28

upon condico~n that the saide Owner or Maister of the saide picarde or
bote or other Vessell , shall not repaire nor transporte the saide Corne
or Graine nor no parte therof into any utter parties beyonde the Sea out
of the King~ Domynion , before the saide Maister owner therof shall
coome and bring the saide Graine and Corne unto the keye of the saide
Towne of Bristoll , STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.29

and there to be viewed or sene the content~ therof ,
STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.30

and the content~ therof to be declared unto the King~ Customers and to
the Maire of the saide Towne for the tyme being , if there be any suche
lisence or lawfull cause for to convey or transporte Graine or Corne
into the parties beyond the Sea out of the saide Kinges Domynion , there
to be measured and mette by the common measure of the saide Towne : And
after the saide obligac~on withe condic~on so made sealed and delivered
unto the saide customer , STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.31

thenne the saide customer shall delivre a sufficient cocket unto the
partye owner or owners or Maister so bounden to convey the saide Graine
or Corne unto the Keye of Bristoll , upon paine that everye picarde bote
or other Vessell so laden with Graine or other kind of Corne , to be
caryed or transported into the utter parties of beyonde the Sea out of
the King~ Domynion , to be forfaicted as@ @well the saide Corne and
Graine so laded , as the saide bote so laden contrarye unto this p~nt
acte , wherof the King our Soveraigne Lorde to have three part~ therof ,
and the partie that will sue for the same the fourthe parte , before the
King~ moste honorable Counsaill according to the Kinges Proclamac~on in
that behaulf made and p~vided . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.32

And further be it enacted by auctorytie aforesaide , that if it shall
appeare upon the measuring therof , unto the Maire of the saide Towne of
Bristoll and to the King~ Customers then for the tyme being , that there
is more Corne or graine loded to be transported into the parties beyonde
the Sea within any of the saide Vessells botes pyckardes or trowes over
and above foure quarters , than it shal@ @be lefull unto the saide maire
and customers there for the tyme being , to cause the owner or conveyer
therof unto the saide towne of Bristoll , to make sale of suche corne
and graine as shal@ @be brought over and above the content~ of the saide
cocket or lycence , and over and above foure Quarters besyde the cocket
or lycence , according as the pryces of suche graine and corne are
co~monlie woorthe and solde in the open market of the saide towne of
Bristoll : STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.33

The saide common meater to have for the measuring of everye waie of
corne twoo pence ; on peyne of everye p~son being owner of the saide
graine or corne or having the chardge of the same denyeng the measuring
of the saide graine at the saide Key of Bristoll to lose and forfaicte
for everye tyme so denyeng fyve pounde , STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.34

the oone haulf therof to be to our saide Soveraigne Lorde the King , and
th@ @other haulf therof to be to the partie that will sue for the same
in any Courte of Recorde , by action of debte informac~on or otherwyse ;
in the whiche action the defendaunte shall not wage his lawe nor
protecc~on nor essoine allowed . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.35

And be it allso enacted by auctorytie abovesaide , that no p~sone or
p~sones , after the firste daie of Auguste next cooming , doo caste or
unlade out of any maner of Ship crayer or any other Vessell , being
within any Haven rode chanell or ryver flowing or rooning to any Porte
Towne or to any Citie boroughe or towne within this Realme or any other
the King~ Domynions , any maner of Balaste rubbishe gravell or any other
wracke of filthe , but oonelie upon the Lande above the full Sea Marke ,
upon peyne that everye p~sone and p~sones offending this Acte , to lose
and forfaicte for everye tyme so offending fyve poundes , the oone haulf
to the King our Soveraigne Lorde and th@ @other haulf therof to suche
p~sone and p~sones as will sue for the same by Bill plainte originall
writ or informac~on , in any the King~ Court~ of Recorde
STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.36

in whiche Acc~on or Sute no Wager of Lawe shal@ @be admitted nor any
Essoine or Protecc~on allowed . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,907.37

<P_3,909>

<heading>

CHAPTER XII . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,909.40

AN ACTE FOR THE PAVING OF CERTAIN LANES AND STRETES IN LONDON AND WESTM~
. STAT-1543-E1-H,3,909.41

<$$heading>

Forasmuche as the Streate called Whyte Crosse Strete and the Streate
called Cheswell Streate leading frome Whyte Crosse Streate unto the
Hieghe waie leading to Moregate , the Lane called Golding Lane and the
Streate called Grub Streate in the Parishe of Saincte Gyles without
Crepulgate , the Streate called Goswell Streate in the Parishe of
Saincte Botulphes without Aldersgate , the Lane called Long Lane being
in the Parishe of Saincte Botulphe without Aldersgate , and Saincte
Sepulchres without Newgate , the Streate called Saincte Johns Strete
leading from the Barres of Smithfelde up to the Ponde at the Corner of
the Wall extending along the Hieghe waie leading to Islington , and
allso the Streate from the saide Barres to Cowcrosse , the lane called
Water Lane in Fletestrete in the Parishe of Saincte <P_3,910> Byyde and
Saincte Dunstone leading downe to Thames , the waie leading without
Temple Barres Westwarde , by and to Clement~ Inne Gates , and Newe Inne
Gates , to Drewrye Place in the Countie of Midd~ , and allso oone litle
Lane streatching from the saide waie to the Signe of the Bell at Drewrye
Lane ende , and the Common hiegh waie leading throughe a certaine Place
called Petye Fraunce , from the Barres of the Weste ende of Totehill
Streate of Westm~ in the Countie of Midd~ unto the uthremoste Parte of
the West ende of the saide Place called Petie Fraunce ; the Streate or
hieghe waie leading from Bisshopps Gate to and above Shortdiche Churche
, and the Bridge called Stronde Bridge , and the waie leading from the
same Bridge towardes Temple Barre , and the waie called Foskewe Lane
from the garden and tenement of the Bisshopp of Lichefelde and the
gardens and tenement~ called the Bell and Proctoures downe to Stronde
Bridge , be verye foule and full of Pyttes and Sloughes , verye p~illous
and noyous as@ @well for all the King~ Subject~ thorowe and by them
repayring and passing as@ @well on Horsebacke as on Fote , as allso with
Carriace , and verye necessarye to be kepte cleane for the advoyding of
corrupte Savoures and occasion of Pestilence : For the amendement and
reformac~on wherof it maie please the Kinges Hieghnes with th@ @assent
of the Lord~ sp~uall and temporall and of his Commons in this his hieghe
Courte of Parliament assembled and by auctorytie of the same , that it
maie be ordeyned establisshed and enacted that all and everye p~sone and
p~sones bodies politicque and corporate , whiche now have or at any tyme
herafter shall have , any Land~ tenement~ or other hereditament~ in Fee
Simple Fee Tayle for terme of Lief for terme of Yeres or by reasone of
the Wardeship of any heyre during the Nonage of the same heyre , or by
execuc~on by Writ of Elegit , or for any Estatute estaple , lyeng and
being adjoining to the forsaide Streates lanes and waies or any of them
, shall on this syde the Feaste of Saincte Michaell th@ @archaungell
whiche shal@ @be in the Yere of our Lorde God
a_thousande_fyve_hundred_and_foure_and_fourtie , well and sufficientlye
pave or cause to be paved with good paving Stones all and everye parte
of the saide Streates lanes and other the Premisses before expressed ,
everye Man suche parte and quantitie of the same Lanes streates and
waies unto the middes of them and everye of them in lengthe and bredthe
, as his or theyre Landes and tenement~ doo lye or extende ; in lyke
maner and forme as the Streates and Lanes within the Citie of London be
paved , with Causeys or Cannells in the middes of the same Stretes lanes
and waies as shal@ @be thought moste necessarye and convenient ; upon
peyne everye p~sone in his owne defaute to forfaicte for everye Yarde
square of the same Streates lanes and waies and everye of them not
sufficientlie paved before the feaste of Saincte Michaell , twelve pence
: STAT-1543-E1-H,3,910.43

And that and everye suche p~sones , having or whiche hereafter shall
have , Land~ or Tenement~ in Fee Simple Fee Tayle or for tearme of Lief
or otherwyse as is aforesaide , adjoyning or lying to and next eyther
syde of the same Streates lanes and waies or any of them theyre Heyres
assignes or successoures , after and frome the saide feaste of Saincte
Michaell , shall yerelie repaire and mainteyne the same Pavement~ and
everye of them over againste his saide Land~ and Tenement~ well and
sufficientlye from tyme to tyme as often and whan as neade shall
reaquire at all tymes hereafter with paving Stone , upon peyne to
forfaicte for everye Yarde square not sufficientlye paved twelve pence ,
as often as any suche defaute of any p~sone shal@ @be p~nted before the
Justices of Peace within the saide Countie of Midd~ , for that parte of
the saide Streates lanes and waies being within the said Countie of
Midd~ and before the Mayre and the Aldremen or Justices of Peace within
the Citie of London for that whiche is within the Liberties of the saide
Citie . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,910.44

And be it enacted by th@ @auctorytie aforesaide , that the saide
Justices of Peace within the saide Countie of Midd~ for the tyme being ,
shall have full power and auctorytie to enquire in everye Quarter
Sessions to be kepte after the saide feaste of Saincte Michaell by the
othes of twelve men of the saide Countie , as@ @well of them that have
not paved suche parte or porc~on of the saide Streates lanes waies and
everye of them being within the saide Countie over againste and along
unto the myddes of the same Streates lanes and waies as theyre Land~ and
Tenement~ doo lye or extende , as allso of suche p~sones as have been
remysse and negligent in amending and repayring of the same Stretes
lanes and waies frome tyme to tyme as neade shall require according to
the meaning of this Acte . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,910.45

And be it allso enacted by th@ @auctorytie aforesaide , that the
Justices of Peace within the saide Countie of Midd~ for the tyme being
within theyre Jurisdicc~on , shall have full power and auctorytie by
theyre discreac~ons to amerce and set fynes upon suche p~sones as shal@
@be remisse negligent or make defaute in the obs~ving of the tenour of
this Acte ; STAT-1543-E1-H,3,910.46

And if the saide Justices of Peace within the saide Countie of Midd~ or
the Maire and Aldremen and Justices of Peace of the saide Citie of
London , at any theyre Quarter Sessions after the saide feaste of Sainte
Michaell to be holden and kepte within the saide Countie of Midd~ , by
the Justices of Peace of the same Countie , or the Maire Aldremen and
Justices of Peace of the saide Citie of London at any theyre Quarter
Sessions or Enquestes of Wardencie kepte within the saide Citie of
London , be negligent and remisse on theyre parties to chardge by the
othe of twelve men suche p~sones to fynde and present the saide
Defaultes and Negligences of all p~sones offending contrarie to the
meaning of this Acte , thenne the saide Justices of Peace within the
saide Countie of Midd~ being p~nt at the same Quarter Sessions , to lose
and forfaicte for everye tyme so neglecting the same Charge , an_hundred
Shilling~ ; STAT-1543-E1-H,3,910.47

And in lykewyse the Maire Aldremen and Justices of Peaxe of London , to
lose and forfaicte for everye lyke defaulte and neglecting an_hundred
Shilling~ . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,910.48

And be it further enacted by the saide auctorytie , that the Clercke of
peax of the saide Countie of Middlesex for the tyme being , shall from
tyme to tyme certifie into the Kinges Eschequier as@ @well all suche
fynes and forfaictures so assessed within the saide Countie , lost and
forfaicted befor the saide Justices in Midd~ to the use of the Kinges
Hieghnes and his heyres , STAT-1543-E1-H,3,910.49

and the Barons of the saide Eschequier to make out processe by distresse
to be taken and levied upon the saide land~ and tenement~ , or otherwyse
by theyre discreac~ons as@ @well for the saide fynes assessed , as allso
for the saide forfaictures and penalties before lymited ;
STAT-1543-E1-H,3,910.50

And if the Clerke of peaxe within the saide Countie of Midd~ be remisse
and negligent in making suche certificat or doing the duetie according
to this Acte , thenne the same Clerke to lose and forfaicte for everye
suche defaulte fyve poundes , the oone haulf therof to be to the use of
the Kinges Hieghnes and th@ @other haulf to any of the Kinges subjectes
that wooll sue for the same , in any of the Kinges Courtes , by bill
action informac~on or otherwyse wherein no wager of lawe essoine or
protecc~on shall lie for the defendaunte . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,910.51

<P_3,911>

And further be it enacted by th@ @auctorytie aforesaide , that the Maire
Aldremen and Justices of Peace within the saide Citie of London and
Suburbes of the same or foure of them , wherof the Maire to be oone , by
vertue of this Acte shall have full power and auctorytie from tyme to
tyme to set fynes and amerciament~ of all and singlre p~sone and p~sones
for not paving and repayring of any of the saide Streates lanes or
hieghe waies within the saide Cities and Liberties of the same , whiche
nowe be paved or hereafter shal@ @be by force of this Acte paved ;
STAT-1543-E1-H,3,911.53

And the same fynes and amerciament~ to be levied by distresse plainte or
action within the saide Citie by the Chamberleyne of the saide Citie for
the tyme being , to the use of the Maire and Co~mynaltie of the saide
Citie and theyre successoures , as other fynes and amerciament~ for any
other matter or cause within the saide Citie hathe been used and
accustomed . STAT-1543-E1-H,3,911.54

Provided allwaies that if any th@ @inhabytaunt~ of suche land~ and
tenement~ doo sufficientlie repaire and pave before theyre mansions and
dwelling places the saide Streates lanes and hiegh waies , that thenne
everye suche inhabytaunte by force of this Acte shall defalke abbate and
reteyne in his hand~ , as@ @muche of rent due to his lessour as he canne
prove to have expended in and about the same paving and repayring , and
the lessour for so muche money as suche soome dothe amounte unto , to
have no action reentre nor other remedye for oone paiment of the same ,
ooneles it shal@ @be otherwyse agreed betwene them .
STAT-1543-E1-H,3,911.55

