<BEGIN_stow-1580-e2-h>

<P_543>

After the solemnitie of the coronation , the Lords & commons streight
proceeded to the Parliame~t . In which it was inquired out of the death
of the Duke of <font> Glocester <$$font> , & how hee had bin murdered at
<font> Caleis <$$font> by the Duke of <font> Norffolke <$$font> , vpon
y=e= Kings commaundement . STOW-1580-E2-H,543.3

King <font> Henrie <$$font> created hys eldest sonne Prince of <font>
Wales <$$font> , Duke of <font> Cornewal <$$font> , and Earle of <font>
Chester <$$font> , duke of <font> Aquitaine <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-H,543.4

In this Parliament it was ordained that the statutes made in the
Parliament holden in the 21. yere of king <font> Richard <$$font> at
<font> Westminster <$$font> , and after proroged vnto <font>
Shrewesburie <$$font> , with all the circu~stances to be adnulled ,
reuoked , made voyde , and vtterly blotted out . STOW-1580-E2-H,543.5

Also that the Parliament holde~ at <font> Westminster <$$font> , in the
xj. yere of K. <font> Richard <$$font> be holden firme and stable .
STOW-1580-E2-H,543.6

Also that the Lords & other perso~s which were iudged forth in the
Parliament holden the 21. yere of King <font> Richard <$$font> , &
their heires that be deade , shoulde be wholy restored to their
possessions without any suing liuerie thereof to be made , excepted that
the Lords and other that haue nothing of y=e= issues receiued in y=e=
mean time . STOW-1580-E2-H,543.7

The K. gaue to the E. of <font> Northumberland <$$font> y=e= Isle of
<font> Man <$$font> , to be holde~ of the K. by seruice , to beare the
sword w=e= which he entred into <font> England <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-H,543.8

And to the E. of <font> Westmerland <$$font> he gaue the Cou~tie of
<font> Richmond <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,543.9

Also Iudgement was giuen against the Appellauntes of the Duke of <font>
Glocester <$$font> in this maner : STOW-1580-E2-H,543.10

The Lords in this present Parliament by the Kings assent , iudge that
the Dukes of <font> Aumerle <$$font> , <font> Surrey <$$font> , and
<font> Excester <$$font> now present and were appellantes , shal lose
theyr names of Dukes , and honors from he~ceforth , togither with the
dignities of Dukes , & that the <font> Marques Dorset <$$font> , that is
present , lose hys name of Marques , & the E. of <font> Glocester
<$$font> which is prese~t , lose his name for him and his heires , as
y=e= aboue named persons do theirs , & that al the castels , possessions
or manors which they had of the~ that belonged to those whom they
appelled fro~ y=e= day of y=e= arrest of the D. of <font> Glocester
<$$font> , & the other Lords , or after at any time , simply , & without
fauour or mercie , they shal lose the~ : STOW-1580-E2-H,543.11

& that al other castels , possessio~s , manours , Lordships , dominions
& liberties , which they helde of the King's gift , <P_544> that day or
after shold rest in the kings grace from y=e= houre , and that all
letters patents and Charters , whiche they or any of them , had of y=e=
said names , Castels , Dominions , possessions and liberties shold be
surrendered vp , into y=e= Chancerie there to be canceled , and that
they stand in state whiche they had in name and possession before the
saide daye of the sayde arrest . STOW-1580-E2-H,544.12

The King to shew to all men in all Countries about by what right and
title he had taken vpon him the crowne and realme , sent Ambassadours to
<font> Rome <$$font> , <font> Iohn Treneuant <$$font> Byshop of <font>
Hereforde <$$font> , <font> Iohn Cheyne <$$font> Knighte , and <font>
Iohn Cheyne <$$font> Esquire . STOW-1580-E2-H,544.13

Into <font> Fraunce <$$font> he sent <font> Walter Tricklowe <$$font>
Byshop of <font> Durham <$$font> , <font> Thomas Percy <$$font> Erle of
<font> Worcester <$$font> , and <font> William Heron <$$font> . Into
<font> Spaine <$$font> <font> Iohn Trenor <$$font> Bishop of <font>
Saint Dauids <$$font> , and sir <font> William Par <$$font> Knight :
Into <font> Almaine <$$font> the Bishoppe of <font> Bangor <$$font> with
other . STOW-1580-E2-H,544.14

The <font> Scots <$$font> in time of the Parliament taking occasion by
the absence of the Northren Lordes , and bycause the same tyme the North
parts were sore oppressed by a great Pestilence , entred as enimies into
those parts , STOW-1580-E2-H,544.15

and toke the Castell of <font> Warke <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-H,544.16

and kept the same a certain time , STOW-1580-E2-H,544.17

but at le~gth spoyled and vtterly ruinated it , STOW-1580-E2-H,544.18

and many other mischieues they did in the Country .
STOW-1580-E2-H,544.19

<font> Thomas Maubery <$$font> duke of <font> Norffolk <$$font> which
was exiled , dyed at <font> Venice <$$font> , in his returne from <font>
Ierusalem <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,544.20

Also the Duches of <font> Glocester <$$font> dyed ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,544.21

and hir sonne & heire <font> Humfrey <$$font> dyed of the pestilence
when hee was sent for forth of <font> Irelande <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-H,544.22

The King helde his feast of Christmasse in his Castel of <font> Windsor
<$$font> , where <font> Iohn Holland <$$font> late Duke of <font>
Excester <$$font> & Erle of <font> Huntington <$$font> , <font> Thomas
Holand <$$font> late Duke of <font> Surrey <$$font> & Earle of <font>
Kente <$$font> , <font> Edwarde <$$font> late Duke of <font> Aumerle
<$$font> , and Earle of <font> Rutlande <$$font> , sonne to the Duke of
<font> Yorke <$$font> , <font> Iohn Mountacute <$$font> Erle of <font>
Salisburie <$$font> , <font> Thomas Spencer <$$font> , sir <font> Ralph
Lymley <$$font> , sir <font> Thomas Blunt <$$font> , sir <font> Benedict
Cely <$$font> Knights , with other that fauoured King <font> Richarde
<$$font> , conspired against King <font> Henrie <$$font> , and appointed
priuily to murder him , vnder the colour of Iusting and <P_545> other
pastimes pretended . STOW-1580-E2-H,545.23

And the time approching of theyr purpose , they sent messengers to
<font> London <$$font> with letters to the Duke of <font> Aumerle
<$$font> , that he shoulde not fayle to come at y=e= day appointed with
his company , to helpe to do the feate whervnto he was sworne :
STOW-1580-E2-H,545.24

but his minde being altered , hee bare the letters streighte to his
Father the Duke of <font> Yorke <$$font> , who caused a number of his
men forthwith to carrye his son to the King , where he shewing his
letters , the King woulde not beleeue them : STOW-1580-E2-H,545.25

but the same morning came the Maior of <font> London <$$font> to the
Court , STOW-1580-E2-H,545.26

and informed him of the matter , whervpon the King made no tariance ,
but got him forth toward <font> London <$$font> , in companye of the
Maior and other . STOW-1580-E2-H,545.27

But before the King coulde gette <font> London <$$font> on his backe ,
his enimies were come to <font> Windesore <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,545.28

and entred the Castell with an armed band of 400. me~ , on the fourth
of Ianuarie at night , where understanding that the King was escaped
theyr hands , being sore amazed , they withdrewe from <font> Windesore
<$$font> , vnto <font> Sunning <$$font> , a certaine manour neare to
<font> Reading <$$font> , where the Queene wife to King <font> Richarde
<$$font> then lay , where they persuaded hyr houshold , that King <font>
Richarde <$$font> was escaped out of <font> Pomfrete <$$font> Castel ,
and they would go to him : STOW-1580-E2-H,545.29

from thence they went to <font> Wallingforde <$$font> , and after to
<font> Abingdon <$$font> , mouing the people to take armes vppon them ,
and to goe meete their King <font> Richarde <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-H,545.30

After this they came to <font> Farindon <$$font> , in the vale of <font>
White Horsse <$$font> in <font> Barkeshire <$$font> , and the same daye
to <font> Circester <$$font> on the xij. day late in the euening ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,545.31

and there harbored , with a greate number of men of armes and many
Archers : STOW-1580-E2-H,545.32

ther {HELSINKI:they} they bruted that K. <font> Richard <$$font> was
escaped forth of prison , and that hee was there with them ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,545.33

and to make their words to haue the more credite , they had got a
Chaplaine of King <font> Richardes <$$font> called <font> Madeleine
<$$font> , so like to hym in all proportion and fauor , that one could
vnneth be descerned from the other : STOW-1580-E2-H,545.34

many times <paren> sayth mine aucthour <$$paren> I haue seene him in
<font> Ireland <$$font> ride with the King his Master ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,545.35

so faire a Priest and goodly a person , he had not lightly seene .
STOW-1580-E2-H,545.36

They put him in armoure with a Crowne on his Helmet , so as all men
mighte take <P_546> him for King <font> Richard <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-H,546.37

On the morrow being Wednesday , the people of that towne misliking of
their proceedings , fought against them , STOW-1580-E2-H,546.38

and at length toke the chiefest of them STOW-1580-E2-H,546.39

and ledde them to the Abbay there , STOW-1580-E2-H,546.40

and put them in a fayre chamber , vnder safe custody .
STOW-1580-E2-H,546.41

And on the Thursday the said Lordes fearing the people , imagined howe
to escape out of theyr handes , STOW-1580-E2-H,546.42

and caused some of their seruauntes to sette fire on certaine houses in
the Towne , thinking that therevppon the people woulde departe from them
, and seeke to staunche the fire : STOW-1580-E2-H,546.43

but it chaunced contrarie , STOW-1580-E2-H,546.44

for the people turned into a maruellous rage against them ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,546.45

ranne vppon them with great violence , STOW-1580-E2-H,546.46

and drew them into the market place , STOW-1580-E2-H,546.47

and there they beheaded the Duke of <font> Excester <$$font> , the Duke
of <font> Surrey <$$font> , and the Earle of <font> Salisburie <$$font>
, the thirde day after the Epiphanie : STOW-1580-E2-H,546.48

their seruauntes that were with them were by and by taken , and as
prisoners bound and brought to <font> Oxforde <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,546.49

and on Monday following were beheaded in the Castell there , to the
number of .xxvj. persons . STOW-1580-E2-H,546.50

Also Sir <font> Thomas Blount <$$font> Knight , was beheaded with them .
STOW-1580-E2-H,546.51

The weeke nexte following , was beheaded <font> Thomas Spencer <$$font>
Earle of <font> Glocester <$$font> at <font> Bristow <$$font> :
STOW-1580-E2-H,546.52

and about the same time was beheaded <font> Iohn Holland <$$font> Earle
of <font> Huntington <$$font> brother to King <font> Richard <$$font> on
the mothers side , at <font> Plasby <$$font> in <font> Essex <$$font> :
STOW-1580-E2-H,546.53

not long after was sir <font> Barnarde Brocas <$$font> beheaded at
<font> London <$$font> , and a Prieste named <font> Iohn Maudelen
<$$font> , that was like King <font> Richarde <$$font> , and another
Priest called <font> Willian Feribe <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,546.54

The Bishoppe of <font> Carlile <$$font> was impeached and condemned to
conspiracie , STOW-1580-E2-H,546.55

but was pardoned . STOW-1580-E2-H,546.56

The sixth day of Februarie King <font> Henrie <$$font> caused y=e= blank
Charters , made to King <font> Richard <$$font> , to be brent , at the
standert in <font> Cheape <$$font> of <font> London <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-H,546.57

King <font> Richard <$$font> was imprisoned in <font> Pomfrait <$$font>
Castel , where xv. dayes and nightes they vexed him with continuall
hunger , thirste and colde , and finally bereft his life , with suche a
kinde of death as neuer before that time was knowen in <font> Engla~d
<$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,546.58

He dyed the xiiij. day of Februarie ; whose body was <P_547> brought to
the Tower of <font> London <$$font> , and so through the Cittie to
<font> Powles <$$font> Church bare_faced , where he stoode three dayes
for all beholders , and had seruice , where King <font> Henrie <$$font>
was present . STOW-1580-E2-H,547.59

From thence he was carryed to <font> Langley <$$font> , and there buried
in the church of y=e= Friers <font> Preachers <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-H,547.60

Vpo~ his death the famous and excellente Poet <font> Iohn Gower <$$font>
, wrote certaine verses , which may be englished thus .
{COM:verse_omitted} STOW-1580-E2-H,547.61

The King with a great armye went into <font> Scotlande <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,547.62

spoyled the Country STOW-1580-E2-H,547.63

and returned to <font> Yorke <$$font> , wher two Knights , the one a
<font> Frenchman <$$font> , the other an <font> Italian <$$font> ,
chalenged to fighte within listes against sir <font> Iohn Cornewall
<$$font> , and <font> Iames of Artois <$$font> , which two straungers
were ouercome in battaile , STOW-1580-E2-H,547.64

and sir <font> Iohn Cornewal <$$font> , obtaining the Kings fauour ,
maried the kings sister , that had bin wife to sir <font> Iohn Holland
<$$font> Earle of <font> Huntingdon <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,547.65

The <font> Welchmen <$$font> taking occasion by the Kings absence when
he was in <font> Scotlande <$$font> . beganne to rebel , by the settyng
on of <font> Owe~ Glendouerdew <$$font> son to <font> Griffyth Vicha~
<$$font> an esquier of <font> Wales <$$font> , & so called <font>
Glendour <$$font> , bicause his dwelling was in a place called <font>
Gle~dordwy <$$font> , for <font> Glyn <$$font> in <font> Welch <$$font>
is a vale , and <font> Dor <$$font> is water , bycause the place was in
a dale , at the side of y=e= water <P_548> or Riuer of <font> Dew
<$$font> in the Parish of <font> Corwen <$$font> , in the Countie of
<font> Merioneth <$$font> in <font> Northwales <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-H,548.66

He serued King <font> Richarde <$$font> , at the tyme of his oppression
by <font> Henrie <$$font> Duke of <font> Lancaster <$$font> at Flint
Castell . STOW-1580-E2-H,548.67

The first cause of this stirre was about a peece of land in controuersie
betwixte him and the Lord <font> Reignolde Gray <$$font> of <font>
Ruthiue <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-H,548.68

for when he saw his cause not fauoured , firste hee began to spoyle the
landes of the sayde Lord Gray , whereof the king being certified , went
with an army into <font> Wales <$$font> : STOW-1580-E2-H,548.69

but the <font> Welchmen <$$font> fledde to the mountaines ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,548.70

the King brente the Countrey , STOW-1580-E2-H,548.71

slew the people with whom he mette , STOW-1580-E2-H,548.72

and returned with a great pray of Cattaile . STOW-1580-E2-H,548.73

<heading>

IOHN WAKEL : WILLIAM EBBOT , STOW-1580-E2-H,548.75

THE ,28. OF SEPTEMBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,548.76

SIR IOHN FRAUNCIS GOLDSMITH , STOW-1580-E2-H,548.77

THE .28. OF OCTOBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,548.78

<$$heading>

<font> Geffrey Chawcer <$$font> , the most excellent Poet of <font>
Englande <$$font> , deceased the xxv. of October , who was buried at
<font> Westminster <$$font> , where of late at the charges of one
maister <font> Bridgeham <$$font> , is made ouer him a faire monument ,
on the Southside of the Quire : STOW-1580-E2-H,548.80

his workes for the most part are published in print by sir <font> Iohn
Thinne <$$font> Knight , and somewhat increased by my trauell in the
last impression . STOW-1580-E2-H,548.81

Not long after deceased the like famous Poet , <font> Iohn Gower
<$$font> , who lyeth buried in <font> Sainte Marie Oueries <$$font>
Church in <font> Southwarke <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,548.82

He new_builded a great part of that Church , STOW-1580-E2-H,548.83

and co~piled three famous bookes . The first in Latine , Vox Clama~tis
. The second in French Speculum Meditantis : The third in Englishe
Confessio Amantis , which last booke is in Print , the other hard to
come by : STOW-1580-E2-H,548.84

of the first I haue seen three very faire copies , STOW-1580-E2-H,548.85

but of the seconde I neuer sawe any one . STOW-1580-E2-H,548.86

The Emperour of <font> Constantinople <$$font> , came into <font>
Englande <$$font> , to requyre ayde agaynste the <font> Turkes <$$font>
, whome the King wyth sumptuous preparation mette at <font> Blacke Heath
<$$font> , vpon <font> Saint Thomas <$$font> daye the Apostle ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,548.87

and brought him to <font> London <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-H,548.88

and paying for the charges of his lodging , presented him with giftes
worthy for one of so high degree . STOW-1580-E2-H,548.89

<P_549>

{COM:misnumbered_as_559_in_original}

Soone after came newes , that the King of <font> Leto <$$font> had slain
in battayle <font> Bassacke <$$font> the sonne of the noble <font>
Balthazardan <$$font> , & destroyed <font> Ierusalem <$$font> , and all
the Countrey rounde aboute . STOW-1580-E2-H,549.92

And bycause he had by Gods grace so ouercome contrarye to his opinion ,
he became christened and 60000. men of his secte .
STOW-1580-E2-H,549.93

The Emperour of <font> Constantinople <$$font> , hearing this , was very
gladde , STOW-1580-E2-H,549.94

and departed out of <font> Englande <$$font> , being honored by the King
with precious giftes . STOW-1580-E2-H,549.95

The fiue_and_twentith day of Iuly , <font> Isabel <$$font> late wife to
K. <font> Richarde <$$font> , not yet twelue yeares of age , departed
from <font> Douer <$$font> towardes <font> Caleis <$$font> , and so into
<font> Fraunce <$$font> to hyr Father . STOW-1580-E2-H,549.96

Owen Glendouerdew w=e= his <font> Welchmen <$$font> did much harme to
the <font> Englishmen <$$font> STOW-1580-E2-H,549.97

and returned . STOW-1580-E2-H,549.98

There was founde in the Kings Bedde_clothes , an yron with three sharp
pikes , slender and round standing vpright , layde there by some
Traytour , that when the Kyng should haue layde him downe , he might
haue thrust himselfe vpon them . STOW-1580-E2-H,549.99

This time was vsed exceeding pride in garmentes , gownes with deepe and
broade sleeues , commonlye called poke sleeues , STOW-1580-E2-H,549.100

the seruauntes ware them as well as theyr maisters whiche mighte well
haue bene called receptacles of the Diuel , STOW-1580-E2-H,549.101

for what they stole , they hidde in their sleeues , whereof some hung
downe to the feete , and at leaste to the knees , ful of cuttes and
iagges , whervpon were made these verses . STOW-1580-E2-H,549.102

<P_566>

<heading>

HENRY BARTON : WILLIAM GROOME , STOW-1580-E2-H,566.105

THE 28. OF SEPTEMBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,566.106

SIR IOHN WOODCOCKE MERCER , STOW-1580-E2-H,566.107

THE 28. OF OCTOBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,566.108

<$$heading>

This yeare , all the Weares in <font> Thamis <$$font> from the Towne of
<font> Stanes <$$font> in the Weast , vnto the water of <font> Medway
<$$font> in the East , by the Maior and communaltie of <font> London
<$$font> , were destroyd , and the trunckes brent , for the which ,
great plea and discord followed betweene <font> Thomas Arundell <$$font>
Archbishop of <font> Canterbury <$$font> , and other Lords and Knightes
of the one party , and the Maior and communaltie on the other partie ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,566.110

but the Citizens preuayled by vertue of their Charter and Statutes .
STOW-1580-E2-H,566.111

A Parliamente beganne , whiche lasted nigh one whole yeare ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,566.112

for after the Knightes of the Parliament had long delayde to graunt to
the King a subsedie , yet in the ende being ouercome , they granted the
taske demanded . STOW-1580-E2-H,566.113

The Priestes and the Friers that liued of almes , were forced euery one
to pay halfe a marke . STOW-1580-E2-H,566.114

<font> Henry Percy <$$font> Earle of <font> Northumberland <$$font> , &
the L. <font> Bardolfe <$$font> , by the counsell of <font> Dauid
Fleming <$$font> , fled into <font> Wales <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,566.115

for he had declared to them , that the <font> Scottes <$$font> had
conspired to deliuer them vnto their owne King , in exchange for other
prisoners , STOW-1580-E2-H,566.116

and for this doing of <font> Dauid Fleming <$$font> , the trayterous
<font> Scottes <$$font> slew him , STOW-1580-E2-H,566.117

and reysed such a ciuill warre amongst the~selues , that in the ende
they were constreyned to request truce for a yeare , which when they had
obteyned , the <font> Scottes <$$font> sente <font> Iames <$$font> , the
sonne of <font> Robert <$$font> King of <font> Scottes <$$font> , being
but nine yeares olde , towardes <font> France <$$font> , there to be
brought vp , and to be instructed in the pleasant eloquence of the
<font> French <$$font> tongue , whome certayne marriners of <font> Cley
<$$font> in <font> Norffolke <$$font> tooke on the Seas , and with him a
Bishop , and the Earle of <font> Orkney <$$font> , to whome his Father
had committed him : STOW-1580-E2-H,566.118

and they brought him into <font> England <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,566.119

and deliuered him to the King , who forthwith burst out into a laughter
, STOW-1580-E2-H,566.120

and sayde , surely the <font> Scottes <$$font> mighte haue sente him to
me , STOW-1580-E2-H,566.121

for I can speake <font> French <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,566.122

The Bishop escaped and fledde , STOW-1580-E2-H,566.123

but the Earle of <P_567> <font> Orkeney <$$font> , and the sayde <font>
Iames <$$font> the yong ladde , was sent to the <font> Tower <$$font> of
<font> London <$$font> , where he remayned prisoner till the second
yeare of <font> Henry <$$font> the sixth , whiche was aboue eighteene
yeares . STOW-1580-E2-H,567.124

The <font> Frenchmen <$$font> came to help <font> Owen Glendouerdew
<$$font> with 38. Shippes , whereof 8. were taken , full of armed men
, STOW-1580-E2-H,567.125

the rest escaped into <font> Wales <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-H,567.126

but not long after were taken fiftene Shippes laden with Wine and Ware .
STOW-1580-E2-H,567.127

Whilest the Parliament yet continued , the Duke of <font> Yorke <$$font>
was restored to his olde dignitie , whome many men thought to haue bin
dead in prison . STOW-1580-E2-H,567.128

<font> Edmond Holland <$$font> Earle of <font> Kent <$$font> , married
the Duke of <font> Millaynes <$$font> daughter in the Priory of <font>
Saint Mary Ouery <$$font> in <font> Southwarke <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-H,567.129

<heading>

NICHOLAS WOOTTON : GEFFREY BROOKE STOW-1580-E2-H,567.131

THE 28. OF SEPTEMB . STOW-1580-E2-H,567.132

SIR RICHARD WHITTINGTON MERCER , STOW-1580-E2-H,567.133

THE 28. OF OCTOBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,567.134

<$$heading>

<font> Iohn Couentry <$$font> , and <font> Iankin Carpenter <$$font> ,
executors to this <font> Richard Whittington <$$font> , with his goodes
builded <font> Whittington Colledge <$$font> in <font> London <$$font> ,
and a great part of the Hospitall of Saint <font> Barthelmew <$$font> in
<font> Smithfielde <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,567.136

He builded the Library of the Grey Friers , and the East end of the
<font> Guild Hall <$$font> in <font> London <$$font> , with diuers small
conduites , called Bosses , and the Weast Gate of <font> London <$$font>
called <font> Newgate <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,567.137

Also <font> Iankin Carpenter <$$font> , one of the executors to the
Worshipfull Knight Sir <font> Richard Whittington <$$font> aforenamed ,
of his owne costes and charges , caused to be paynted aboute the
Cloyster of <font> Saint Paules <$$font> Church in <font> London
<$$font> , a most excellent monument , or remembrance of Death , the
originall patterne whereof , was sometime deuised by <font> Machabre
<$$font> , a Doctor of <font> France <$$font> , and therefore called
<font> The Daunce <$$font> of <font> Machabre <$$font> , which Daunce
was richly paynted about <font> Saint Innocents <$$font> Cloyster in
<font> Paris <$$font> , with Metres in <font> French <$$font> ,
signifying the speeches of Death to all estates , and their seuerall
answeres againe to Death , all whiche being translated into English by
<font> Iohn Lidgate <$$font> , Monke of <font> Bury <$$font> , was as
aforesayde richly paynted in the sayd Cloyster of <font> Saint Paules
<$$font> Church , <P_568> and therefore commonly called <font> The
Daunce of Paules <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,568.138

<font> Henry Pay <$$font> , and other with him of the fiue Portes , with
fifteene Shippes , tooke an_hundred_and_twentie Shippes , which lay at
ancker in the Sea of <font> Briteine <$$font> , laden with Iron , Salt ,
Oyle , and <font> Rochell <$$font> Wine . STOW-1580-E2-H,568.139

This Sommer , through corruption of the ayre , so great a Plague was
shedde vpon mens bodyes , as was not seene the like in many yeares in
this land , so that men might say {COM:verse_omitted}
STOW-1580-E2-H,568.140

For at <font> London <$$font> in short while it consumed aboue
thirtie_thousand men and women , STOW-1580-E2-H,568.141

and in the Countrey Townes great mortalitie fell among the husbandmen ,
so that great households dyed cleane vp , STOW-1580-E2-H,568.142

and the houses were emptied . STOW-1580-E2-H,568.143

About the fifteenth day of August deceassed Sir <font> Roberte Knowles
<$$font> Knight , at his Manour of <font> Sconethorp <$$font> in <font>
Norffolke <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-H,568.144

he was brought to <font> London <$$font> , and there honourably buried
in the white Friers Church which he had newly reedifyed and builded .
STOW-1580-E2-H,568.145

This Sir <font> Robert Knowles <$$font> had bin a most valiant Captayne
in the warres of <font> France <$$font> , during the raigne of <font>
Edward <$$font> the third , and <font> Richard <$$font> the second ,
whose force the Realme of <font> France <$$font> both felt and feared ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,568.146

so did the Dukedome of <font> Briteine <$$font> , and all the people
from hence to <font> Spayne <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,568.147

Of him in his life were made Verses in Latin , which may be englished
thus , {COM:verse_omitted} STOW-1580-E2-H,568.148

This Sir <font> Robert Knowles <$$font> founded in the Towne of <font>
Pontfract <$$font> a Colledge to the honor of the <font> Holy Trinitie
<$$font> , with an Hospital ioyned therevnto . In the which Colledge
was placed a Mayster , and 6. or 7. Priestes , and in the Hospitall
13. poore men and women . STOW-1580-E2-H,568.149

He was once minded to haue made this Colledge at his Manour of <font>
Sconethorp <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-H,568.150

but at the request of <font> Constance <$$font> his wife <paren> a woman
of meane birth , <P_569> and somtime of a dissolute life afore hir
mariage <$$paren> he turned his purpose , STOW-1580-E2-H,569.151

and made it in the very place of <font> Pontfraite <$$font> , wher she
was borne , enduing the same with 180. pound lande by yeare .
STOW-1580-E2-H,569.152

He also builded the faire new greate bridge at <font> Rochester <$$font>
, ouer the riuer of <font> Medeway <$$font> , with a Chappel and a
chauntrie at the East end therof . In the which chappel was sometime a
table hanging , wherein was noted the benefactours to that Bridge , as
followeth . {COM:a_list_of_names_omitted} STOW-1580-E2-H,569.153

All these had giuen money or landes towards the building and repayring
of the sayde Bridge . STOW-1580-E2-H,569.154

<font> Iohn Warner <$$font> a Merchaunt of <font> Rochester <$$font> ,
made the newe <P_570> coping of <font> Rochester <$$font> Bridge :
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.155

and <font> William Warham <$$font> Archbyshop of <font> Canterburie
<$$font> , made the yron pikes and bars aboute the same coaping .
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.156

This sommer <font> Henrie <$$font> Prince of <font> Wales <$$font>
besieged the Castel of <font> Abrustwich <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.157

but not long after <font> Owen Glendouerdew <$$font> entred into it ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.158

and placed new keepers . STOW-1580-E2-H,570.159

<heading>

HENRIE PONTFRACT : HENRIE HALTON , STOW-1580-E2-H,570.161

THE .28. OF SEPTEMBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,570.162

SIR WILLIAM STONDON GROCER , STOW-1580-E2-H,570.163

THE .28. OF OCTOBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,570.164

<$$heading>

In Nouember a Parliamente being called at <font> London <$$font> , a
taxe of money was leuied of the whole Realme . STOW-1580-E2-H,570.166

This yeare was a sore and sharpe Winter , and suche aboundance of Snow ,
which continued , December , Ianuarie , Februarie and March , so that
almoste all small Byrdes dyed through hunger and colde .
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.167

Whiles the King helde a great Counsell at <font> London <$$font> with
the nobles of the Realme , <font> Henrie <$$font> Earle of <font>
Northumberlande <$$font> , and <font> Thomas <$$font> Lorde Bardolfe
came againe into <font> England <$$font> , who after long iournying ,
when they came to the Towne of <font> Thriske <$$font> , they caused to
bee proclaymed , that who so woulde haue libertie , shoulde take vp
armour and weapon and follow them , whervpon much people resorted to
them : STOW-1580-E2-H,570.168

but sir <font> Thomas Rockley <$$font> Sherife of <font> Yorkeshire
<$$font> , with other Knightes of that Countrey went against them ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.169

and at <font> Bramham <$$font> Moore nere to <font> Hasewold <$$font> ,
fought with them a great battayle , STOW-1580-E2-H,570.170

and slew the Earle , whose head was streyght wayes cutte off .
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.171

The Lord <font> Bardolph <$$font> was sore wounded and taken aliue ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.172

but dyed shortly after . STOW-1580-E2-H,570.173

This battayle was fought on the xviij. day of February .
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.174

The Erles head was put on a stake , and caryed openly through the Citie
of <font> London <$$font> , and set on <font> London <$$font> Bridge ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.175

The Bishop of <font> Bangor <$$font> was taken with the Lordes , but
pardoned of his lyfe , bycause he was not founde in armour .
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.176

The King wente to <font> Yorke <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-H,570.177

and there condemned such as transgressed , STOW-1580-E2-H,570.178

confiscated their goods , STOW-1580-E2-H,570.179

pacified the Countrey , STOW-1580-E2-H,570.180

hanged the Abbot of <font> Hayle <$$font> , who had bin in armour ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,570.181

and returned to the South partes againe . STOW-1580-E2-H,570.182

<P_571>

Vpon the seuenth of September there were suche clouds of rayne , as the
olde men of that age had neuer seene before . STOW-1580-E2-H,571.184

<font> Edmunde Hollande <$$font> Earle of <font> Kent <$$font> whilest
he besieged the Castell of <font> Briake <$$font> in <font> Brytaine
<$$font> , he was wounded with an arrowe of a crossebowe in the heade ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,571.185

notwithstanding he toke the Castel STOW-1580-E2-H,571.186

and destroied it to the ground , STOW-1580-E2-H,571.187

and not long after his braines rotted , STOW-1580-E2-H,571.188

and he died . STOW-1580-E2-H,571.189

<heading>

THOMAS DUCKE : WILLIAM NORTON , STOW-1580-E2-H,571.191

THE .28. OF SEPTEMBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,571.192

SIR DREW BARENTINE GOLDSMITH , STOW-1580-E2-H,571.193

THE .28. OF OCTOBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,571.194

<$$heading>

Aboute the feaste of <font> Al Saintes <$$font> the Cardinall of <font>
Burges <$$font> came into <font> Englande <$$font> , being sente from
the Colledge of Cardinalles , to informe the King and Cleargie , of the
vnconstaunte dealing of <font> Pope Gregorie <$$font> , as also he had
informed the <font> Frenche <$$font> King and his Cleargie and realme ,
to the end that those two Kings might sette to theyr helping handes , to
induce the sayde <font> Gregorie <$$font> to obserue the othe he hadde
made , and that by the magnificence of those two Kings , co~ncorde
mighte be made in the Church , vnto the whiche businesse the <font>
Frenche <$$font> Kyng hadde gladlye graunted , and sente messengers vnto
Pope Gregorie , who notwythstandyng was obstinate .
STOW-1580-E2-H,571.196

The Kyng of <font> Englande <$$font> when hee vnderstoode the
Cardinalles message , hee commaunded that curteste and gentle
entertaymente shoulde be gyuen hym , STOW-1580-E2-H,571.197

and offered to beare hys charges so long as hee woulde abyde in <font>
Englande <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,571.198

After the feaste of the Epyphanye , the Archebyshoppe of <font>
Canterburie <$$font> caused to assemble at <font> London <$$font> , all
the Cleargye of the Realme to those personages meete to go to the
general counsel holde~ at <font> Pisa <$$font> , wherevnto were chosen
<font> Roberte Holam <$$font> Bishop of <font> Salisburie <$$font> ,
<font> Henrie Chiseley <$$font> bishop of <font> Saint Dauids <$$font> ,
and <font> Thomas Chillingdon <$$font> Prior of <font> Christes <$$font>
Churche in <font> Canterburie <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-H,571.199

and the Kyng had sente before <font> Iohn Coluile <$$font> Knighte , and
mayster <font> Nicholas Rixton <$$font> Clearkes , wyth letters to be
giuen to the~ . STOW-1580-E2-H,571.200

And in y=e= letter to the Pope it was writte~ , most holy father , &c.
STOW-1580-E2-H,571.201

if y=e= prouide~ce of y=e= Apostolike sea wold vouchsafe to <P_572>
consider how gret harme and danger is sprong vp throughout the whole
worlde , vnder pretence of Scisme , and chiefly the destruction of
Christian people , were aboue the nu~ber as men say of 200000. are
perished by the raging of dyuerse warres , that haue risen in sundry
partes of the world , and euen now of late , to the number of
thirtie_thousande , which <paren> by reason of the dissention had vpon
the Bishoprick of <font> Leons <$$font> , betwixte two which do striue
and contende the one in the aucthoritie of the true Pope , and the other
by the aucthoritie of the Antipope <$$paren> were in slaughter fielde
<paren> a lamentable thing to be spoken <$$paren> slaine and destroied .
STOW-1580-E2-H,572.202

Truely the Apostolike sea woulde be in greate heauinesse of heart ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,572.203

and woulde rather forsake the honor of the Apostolicall sea , than to
see from henceforth such wicked slaughter to be committed ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,572.204

and woulde take example of the true mother , who before King <font>
Salomon <$$font> , rather chose to giue place , than that the childe
shoulde be cutte in peeces , &c. STOW-1580-E2-H,572.205

thus muche of the Epistle sente by the Kyng of <font> Englande <$$font>
to the foresayde <font> Gregorie <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,572.206

This yeare was a great play at the skinners Wel , nere vnto <font>
Clearkenwel <$$font> besids <font> Londo~ <$$font> , which lasted viij.
days , STOW-1580-E2-H,572.207

& was of matter from the creation of the world : STOW-1580-E2-H,572.208

there came to see the same , the most part of the nobles and gentles in
<font> Engla~d <$$font> : STOW-1580-E2-H,572.209

and forthwith after beganne a royall iusting in <font> Smithfielde
<$$font> , betweene the Earle of <font> Somerset <$$font> and the <font>
Seneshall <$$font> of <font> Henalt <$$font> , sir <font> Iohn Cornewall
<$$font> , sir <font> Richard <$$font> of <font> Arundale <$$font> , and
the sonne of sir <font> Iohn Cheyne <$$font> , against other <font>
Frenchmen <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-H,572.210

<heading>

IOHN LAWE : WILLIAM CHICHELEY , STOW-1580-E2-H,572.212

THE .28. OF SEPTEMBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,572.213

SIR RICHARD MARLOW IRONMONGER , STOW-1580-E2-H,572.214

THE .28. OF OCTOBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,572.215

<$$heading>

<font> Thomas Beuforte <$$font> Erle of <font> Surrey <$$font> was made
Chanceller , STOW-1580-E2-H,572.217

and <font> Henrie Scrope <$$font> was made Treasurer .
STOW-1580-E2-H,572.218

In a Parliament holden at <font> London <$$font> , in the Lent season ,
the Knights and Burgesses presented to the King a Bill in this forme :
STOW-1580-E2-H,572.219

To the most excellent Lord the King , and al the Nobles in this present
Parliament assembled , your faithfull Commons <P_573> humbly do shewe ,
that our soueraigne Lord the king may haue the Temporall possessions and
landes , whych by the Bishoppes , Abbots , and Priors , are proudely
spent and wasted in this Realme , which woulde suffise to finde 150.
Earles , 1500. Knightes , 6200. Esquiers , and 100. Hospytals more
than now be , &c. STOW-1580-E2-H,573.220

but when they went about to declare out of what places , those great
summes were to be leuied , wherby the forsayde states should be endued ,
they wa~ted in theyr accompte : wherefore the King commanded the~ that
from thenceforth they shoulde not presume to moue any such matter .
STOW-1580-E2-H,573.221

Vpon the euen of <font> Saint Iohn Baptist <$$font> the kings sonne
being in <font> Eastcheap <$$font> at supper , after midnight , betwixt
two and three of the clocke , a great debate hapned betweene his men and
men of the Courte , lasting an houre , til the Maior and Sherifes with
other Citizens ceased the same : for the which afterward the sayde Maior
, Sherifes , and Aldermen , were sent for to appeare before the Kyng ,
to aunsweare : at whych the King with his sonnes , and diuerse other
Lordes , were highly moued againste the Citie , where through William
Gascoigne chiefe Iustice , enquired of the Maior and Aldermen , for the
Citizens , whether they woulde put them in y=e= Kings grace , wherevnto
they aunswered , thay had not offe~ded the Kyng nor his sonnes , but
according to law stanched the debates : STOW-1580-E2-H,573.222

then the King seeing it woulde be none otherwyse , forgaue altogither ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,573.223

and they departed . STOW-1580-E2-H,573.224

King <font> Henrie <$$font> founded a Colledge at <font> Battelfielde
<$$font> in <font> Shropshire <$$font> , where he ouercame sir <font>
Henrie Percie <$$font> and other . STOW-1580-E2-H,573.225

<heading>

IOHN PENNE : THOMAS PIKE , STOW-1580-E2-H,573.227

THE .28. OF SEPTEMBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,573.228

SIR THOMAS KNOWLES GROCER , STOW-1580-E2-H,573.229

THE .28. OCTOBER . STOW-1580-E2-H,573.230

<$$heading>

About Easter the <font> Guilde Hall <$$font> in <font> London <$$font> ,
was begun to bee made newe by the forsayde Maior and Aldermen .
STOW-1580-E2-H,573.232

The <font> Custos <$$font> or <font> Guardian <$$font> , with the
brethre~ of the Grocers in <font> Londo~ <$$font> , purchased their Hall
in <font> Cunihope Lane <$$font> , for 320. markes ,
STOW-1580-E2-H,573.233

and the~ laide the foundation therof on the tenth of May .
STOW-1580-E2-H,573.234

<font> Iohn Prendergest <$$font> Knight , and <font> William Long
<$$font> , kept the <P_574> seas from Pirates and Rouers , so that the
passage by Sea was quiet , STOW-1580-E2-H,574.235

but by the ill willers they were accused of theft & robberie themselues
, whervpon the Knight toke Sanctuarie at <font> Westminster <$$font> ,
where he could not haue an house or cotage to hide his heade , for that
the same was forbidden by the King , so that he was forced to lye in a
Tente whiche he set vp in the Church Porch , and to haue men to watch
him in the nighte season , for feare of his enimie :
STOW-1580-E2-H,574.236

but his fellowe <font> William <$$font> remayned on the sea , vntill the
Admirall had prepared shippes readie , and went in person to fetch him ,
whiche he coulde not doe , till he promised him by his fidelitie , that
he shoulde haue no harme , which promise notwithsta~ding , <font>
William <$$font> was imprisoned in the tower of <font> London <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-H,574.237

The Earle of <font> Arundale <$$font> , the Earle of <font> Kime
<$$font> , sir <font> Robert Vmfreuile <$$font> , sir <font> Iohn
Oldecastle <$$font> Lord of <font> Cobham <$$font> , sir <font> Iohn
Gray <$$font> , and other warlike power , and a greate number of Archers
were sent into <font> France <$$font> to the ayde of the Duke of <font>
Burgoine <$$font> , against the Duke of <font> Orleaunce <$$font> ,
which at <font> Saint Elo <$$font> beside <font> Paris <$$font>
incou~tred with the enimyes , vpon whom they had a noble victorie ,
wherfore they were bountifully rewarded by the Duke of <font> Burgoine
<$$font> , and then returned into <font> Englande <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-H,574.238

A Squire of <font> Wales <$$font> named <font> Riceap Dee <$$font> ,
which had long time rebelled against the King , was brought to <font>
London <$$font> , and there drawen , hanged and quartered .
STOW-1580-E2-H,574.239

