<BEGIN_strype-1664-e3-h>

<P_180>

<heading:edcomment:LXX._JOHN_STRYPE_TO_HIS_MOTHER_CONTINUATION_OF_THE_ACCOUNT_OF_HIS_COLLEGE_LIFE>

Tuesday STRYPE-1664-E3-H,180.4

From S=t= Kath. Hall STRYPE-1664-E3-H,180.5

in Cambridge , STRYPE-1664-E3-H,180.6

16 Aug. 1664 . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,180.7

Kind Mother , The ii. Present I received with your Letter 6 +L
{TEXT:+L6} . which was forthwith carried to my Tutor , who , I
understood , expected a greater lump , which you may guess by my Bill
here enclosed ; also because we were behind-hand with him in former
Accounts . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,180.8

It would be good if the remainder of the money due to this Bill could be
sent by the next . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,180.9

The next Quarter , which is approaching , would be the more tolerable .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,180.10

Assure yourself I am not so far out of the way , or so unconcerned , but
that I am sensible of the charges that a <P_181> College life doth
expect , and particularly mine ; STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.11

and therefore have endeavoured , STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.12

and shall , the time providence hath allotted for my stay here ,
continue in the same endeavour : to wit , of redeeming the hastening
hours , and improving them , so as that it may be for my advantage and
credit , and therewith all my friends comforts hereafter .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.13

Take this from a serious Pen . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.14

Pray lett@ @'s understand whether that Letter miscarried which I sent
last week to my sister Welsh . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.15

There was something in it I would have an answer to .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.16

I know you expect I should tell you what is become of the money I
brought along with me : STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.17

and I will gladly satisfy you in any thing . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.18

Some of it is yet remaining in my hands , for uses :
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.19

and I question not but you are well contented I should have something
laying by mee against necessity . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.20

Ten Shillings you know I paid out of it for the Horse I came from London
upon . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.21

Another 10@ @=s= I gave to my taylor in part of payment for making my
Sute . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.22

More of it went for Books , whereupon you see noe Books in my Bill .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.23

The remainder you may conclude is in my custody .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.24

Excuse , I beseech you , the largenesse of my taylor's Account , and it
shall be less for the future . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.25

Bed-maker and Laundresse are set down for a whole Quarter : whereas I
was absent a Month : so that what my Laundresse hath had overplus the
last Quarter , shall be abated her for so much of this Quarter ;
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.26

and so I have turned her off : STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.27

besides her loosing my linnen and washing dirtily , she hath also grosly
abused me , and one or two others ; STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.28

but when all comes to all , hath worst of all abused and besooted
herself : and all for a trifle , and most unjustly .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.29

We have hereabouts most intollerable robbing : never by reports so much
. STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.30

I have heard within two or three days of six or seven robberies
hereabouts committed : whereof two or three killed .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.31

No longer than last sabbath , a mile of , a man knocked on the head .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,181.32

Lately a scholar of Peter House had both his eares cut off , because he
told the thieves , after he had delivered some money to them , that he
would give them leave to inflict any punishment <P_182> upon him , if he
had a farthing more : STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.33

but they searching him , found , it seems , 20@ @=s= more :
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.34

so they took him at his word , STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.35

and inflicted the cheater's punishment upon him .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.36

The season beginning now to hasten towards Winter ,
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.37

and a Coat I shall have great occasion for . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.38

It may be you may meet with a piece of black cloth , either in the chest
my uncle Bonnell sent , or among the Broakers , which may serve my turn
. STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.39

If you meet with such a piece cheape , do not passe the opportunity .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.40

My respects and service to all my Friends , particularly to my brother
and sister Johnson , whom I understand are now returned , and I hope in
good health , STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.41

and I shall remain for ever Your very much engaged Son , John V. Stryp
. STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.42

I see not the silver buckles I was promised ; STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.43

yet they would be received very thankfully , if they came .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.44

These for Mrs. Hester Stryp , at Mr. Walsh's House in S=t= Martin's ,
London . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.45

<heading:edcomment:LXXI._JOHN_STRYPE_TO_HIS_MOTHER,_ABOUT_TO_TAKE_HIS_DEGREE>

Saturday Even: 1665 . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.47

Good Mother , I am unsatisfied very much if I can@ @not heare from you
once a weeke , whiles Times are so troublesome , and the place and air
you live in is so dangerous and infectious . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.48

This is the cause that I resolved this Saturday Evening to trouble you
with a Letter . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.49

I am ready to think my Tuesday Letter was miscarried , because no Answer
to it , especially being of concernment . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,182.50

I pray let me understand <P_183> how affairs go .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.51

I can@ @not but imagine you now begin to be a little fearful of the
Plague . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.52

The Report goes , that no lesse than sixty were buried Thursday Evening
of that disease . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.53

I hope by this time you are convinced it is the best way to change your
habitation for the Country . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.54

But secondly , and chiefly , concerning my Degree .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.55

The next Monday or Tuesday come seven-night , I expect to be Bachelor of
Arts , so that you will but supply me with some money .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.56

I have enquired , STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.57

and understand that it will stand me in 8 +L {TEXT:+L8} the cheapest way
; STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.58

and therefore , I beseech you , fayle not to procure it for me .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.59

You may send either by Hurst on Tuesday , or Waterson on Friday .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.60

That I have not yet wrote to Brother Johnson is , because I have not
been able to answer him in the particular of Subscription , having not
had the opportunity of speaking either with the Proctor , or my Tutor ;
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.61

but , as far as I can understand , there is no escaping of it :
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.62

yet it is a more harmelesse thing then is imagined , and no more than
himselfe subscribed to , and all other since Q. Elizabeth's reigne :
being nothing else then the chiefe heads of the Protestant Religion .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.63

Thus much at present in haste . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.64

My humblest service to my Aunt , and sister Welsh , with the rest .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.65

I am your most obedient Son , John Stryp . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.66

From Katharine Hall , Cambridge , STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.67

June 17 , 1665 . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.68

If you have provided those Stockings before spoken of I pray send them .
STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.69

J. Stryp . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.70

These for Mrs. Hester Strype . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.71

Leave these at the further-most House in Nettleton's Court , without
Aldersgate . Or at Mr. Welsh's , a Goldsmith in New Rents in S=t=
Martin's in London . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.72

Del . STRYPE-1664-E3-H,183.73

