<BEGIN_tbarring-1630-e2-h>

<P_116>

<heading:edcomment:94_SIR_THOMAS_BARRINGTON,_29_DECEMBER_1629,_TO_HIS_MOTHER>

Madame My first knowledg of this bearer's journye towards you made me
differ my intentions of sending purposely to you , and by him to present
you with so much balsom as I could gett in London , which allthough it
be not answarable in quantitye to my desyres and indevors , yet the
qualytie may render som answarable satisfaction , haveing with som labor
obtained it of a freind who hath made greate tryall of it ;
TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.4

that which wants tharefore makes the worthe of the remaineder the
greater . TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.5

I wish and praye for a merrye new yeear unto you , and your safe and
comfortable being emong us in it , and so many as God shall see best for
us to enjoy such and so greate a blessing . TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.6

The children of theire owne ernest desyre have presented you with theire
owne , and that meearly so in matter and forme too , even to my sonn
Oliver who would not so much as have it lookt on till he had finished .
TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.7

You will please to thinke I would not perswade them so much to trouble
you , TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.8

but I was unwilling to discorage them in that loveing indevor which was
so meearly spunn oute of theire owne good natures .
TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.9

My wife offers her dewtie and love to you , humblye desyreing your
excuse for her not wrighting , for that in good truth her present toyle
is verye greate . TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.10

My brother Riche remembers you lovingly , who hath ben heear theise two
dayes oute of his love and upon a busines relateing to my neice Alltham
which you shall know shortly , one Mr St. Johns
TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.11

<paren> but it must yet not be imparted to anye because the success is
doubtfull <$$paren> . TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.12

He is religious , honest , of sweetness in nature , discreet ,
TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.13

his estate in land som 300@ @=li= by the yeear ,
TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.14

his practise I beleive neear double , TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.15

handsom for person , probable to rise , my Lord Bedford@ @s only
favorite , who promises that nothing shall hinder it for joyncture if
his estate will make it good . TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.16

I thinke it@ @'s not to be slighted considering his present meanes are
so {COM:preceding_word_"so"_emended} competent by his prefession and his
{COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended} likelyhood to rise so greate ,
considring how he is befreinded . TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.17

I desyre to be remembred , and so doe my wife and sisters , to owr
brother Gerard and our sisters , and my neice and uncle , and cosen
Brewster , who I assure me is now with you . TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.18

And thus I kiss your hands TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.19

and pray to God to bless you and us all TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.20

and am allwayes Your most dewtyfull and loving sonn Thomas Barrington
TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.21

Hatfield Broad Oak , TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.22

December 29 , 1629 TBARRING-1630-E2-H,116.23

<P_117>

To the honourable and my verie good mother the Lady Johan Barrington
TBARRING-1630-E2-H,117.25

