<BEGIN_thoward-1517-e1-h>

<P_1.1,85,E>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_XXXI_LORD_SURREY'S_SECOND_LETTER_OF_CHALLENGE_TO_KING_JAMES_THE_FOURTH_OF_SCOTLAND>

<P_1.1,86,E>

Right highe and mightie Prince , so itt is that latelie I sent unto you
Rougecrosse pursevant at Armes and by him advertised yo=r= Grace that I
and other , my Sovereigne Lord's subjects , were come to represse and
resist your Invasions of this the Kinges my Sovereigne Lordes realme .
THOWARD-1517-E1-H,1.1,86,E.5

And for that intent I offered to give you battell on this half , Friday
next coming , which my message your Grace tooke pleasure to heare as I
am enformed . THOWARD-1517-E1-H,1.1,86,E.6

And by your herauld Isley ye made answere that you were right joyeous of
my desire , and would not faile to accomplishe the same and to abide me
there , where you were at the tyme of my message so shewed unto your
Grace . THOWARD-1517-E1-H,1.1,86,E.7

And albeit it hathe pleased yow to change your said promise and put your
self into a ground more like a fortresse or Campe then upon any
indifferent ground for battel to be tryede , wherefore considering the
day apointed is so nighe <P_1.1,87,E> approching I desire now of your
Grace for the accomplishment of your honorable promise yow will despose
your self for yo=r= parte , like as I shall doo for myne , to be
to_morrowe with your host in your side of the plaine of Milfeild , in
likewise as I shall doo for myne , and shal@ @be with the subjects of my
sovereign Lord on my side of the playne of the said feild to give yow
battell betwixt xij. of the clock and iij. in the afternoone , upon
sufficient warning by yow to be given by viij=th=. or ix of the Clock
in the Morning by the said Pursevant . THOWARD-1517-E1-H,1.1,87,E.8

And like as I and other Noblemen my company binde us by our writeing
subscribed with our hands to keepe the same tyme to the intent above
said : if {COM:preceding_word_"if"_emended} 't
{COM:preceding_word_"'t"_emended} may like your Grace by your honorable
Letters subscribed with your hand to bind yo=r= Grace for the
accomplishment of this desire , trusting that yow will depeach our said
Pursevant immediatly , THOWARD-1517-E1-H,1.1,87,E.9

for the long delay of so honorable a Journey wee think should sound to
your dishonor . THOWARD-1517-E1-H,1.1,87,E.10

Written in the feild in Woller_haughe the 7=th=. day of September at
five of the Clock in the afternoone THOWARD-1517-E1-H,1.1,87,E.11

Thomas Surrey . Thomas Haward , Thom. Dacre , Clifford , Henerie
Scroope , Ralphe Scrope , Rich. Latimer , William Conyers , J. Lomley
, R. Ogle , W. Percye , E. Stanley , William Molynex , Marmaduke
Constable , W. Gascoigne , W. Griffith , George Darcy , W. Bulmer ,
Thom. Strangwayes , &c. THOWARD-1517-E1-H,1.1,87,E.12

