<BEGIN_tillots-a-1670-e3-h>

<P_418>

I . <font> First <$$font> , we will consider the nature of the sin here
mentioned , which is <font> scoffing <$$font> at Religion ,
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.3

<font> There shall come scoffers <$$font> : TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.4

These it seems were a sort of people that derided our Saviour's
prediction of his coming to judge the world . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.5

So the Apostle tells us in the next words , that they said <font> where
is the promise of his coming <$$font> ? TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.6

In those times there was a common perswasion among Christians <font>
that the day of the Lord was at hand <$$font> , as the Apostle elsewhere
tells us . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.7

Now this 't@ @is probable , these <font> scoffers <$$font> twitted the
Christians withall ; TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.8

and because Christ did not come when some looked for him they concluded
he would not come at all . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.9

Upon this they derided the Christians as enduring persecution in a vain
expectation of that which was never likely to happen .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.10

They saw all things continue <font> as they were from the beginning of
the world <$$font> , notwithstanding the apprehensions of Christians
concerning the approaching end of it ; TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.11

<font> For since the Fathers fell asleep all things continue as they
were , from the beginning of the world . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.12

Since the fathers fell asleep <$$font> , {COM:greek_omitted} , which may
either be rendred <font> from the time <$$font> , or else <paren> which
seems more agreeable to the atheistical discourse of these men <$$paren>
<font> saving <$$font> or <font> except that the fathers are fallen
asleep , all things continue as they were <$$font> ;
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.13

Saving that men die and one generation succeeds another , they saw no
change or alteration . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.14

They looked upon all things as going on in a constant course ;
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.15

One generation of men passed away TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.16

and another came in the room of it , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.17

but the world remain'd still as it was . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.18

And thus for ought they knew things might hold on for ever . So that
the principles of these men seem to be much the same with those of
<font> Epicureans <$$font> , who denied the providence of God and the
immortality of mens souls ; and consequently a future judgment which
should sentence men to rewards and punishments in another world .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.19

These great and fundamental principles of all Religion they derided as
the fancies and dreams of a company of melancholy men , who were weary
of the world and pleased themselves {COM:sic} with vain conceits of
happiness and ease in another life . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.20

But as for them , they believed none of those things ;
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.21

and therefore gave all manner of licence and indulgence to their lusts .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,418.22

<P_419>

But this belongs to the second thing I propounded to speak to , namely ,
II. The character which is here given of these <font> scoffers <$$font>
; TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.24

They are said <font> to walk after their own lusts <$$font> .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.25

And no wonder if when they denied a future judgment they gave up
themselves to all manner of sensuality . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.26

St. <font> Jude <$$font> in his <font> Epistle <$$font> gives much the
same character of them that St. <font> Peter <$$font> here does , ver.
18 , 19 . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.27

<font> There shall come in the last days mockers , walking after their
own ungodly lusts , sensual , not having the spirit <$$font> So that we
see what kind of persons they are who prophanely scoff at Religion , men
of sensual spirits and of licentious lives . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.28

For this character which the <font> Apostle <$$font> here gives of the
<font> scoffers <$$font> of that age was not an accidental thing which
happened to those persons , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.29

but is the constant character of them who deride Religion ,
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.30

and flows from the very temper and disposition of those who are guilty
of this impiety ; TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.31

it is both the usual preparation to it , and the natural consequent of
it . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.32

To deride God and Religion is the highest kind of impiety .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.33

And men do not usually arrive to this degree of wickedness at first ,
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.34

but they come to it by several steps . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.35

The <font> Psalmist <$$font> very elegantly expresseth to us the several
gradations by which men at last come to this horrid degree of impiety ;
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.36

<font> Blessed is the man , that walketh not in the counsel of the
ungodly , nor standeth in the way of sinners , nor sitteth in the seat
of the scornfull <$$font> . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.37

Men are usually first corrupted by bad counsel and company , which is
called <font> walking in the counsel of the ungodly <$$font> ;
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.38

next they habituate themselves to their vicious practices , which is
<font> standing in the way of sinners <$$font> ;
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.39

and then at last they take up TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.40

and settle in a contempt of all Religion , which is called <font>
sitting in the seat of the scornfull <$$font> .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.41

For when men once indulge themselves in wicked courses , the vicious
inclinations of their minds sway their understandings ,
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.42

and make them apt to disbelieve those truths which contradict their
lusts . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.43

Every inordinate lust and passion is a false byass upon mens
understandings which naturally draws toward Atheism .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.44

And when mens judgments are once byassed they do not believe according
to the evidence of things , but according to their humour and their
interest . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,419.45

For when men live as if there were no God it <P_420> becomes expedient
for them that there should be none : TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.46

And then they endeavour to perswade themselves so ,
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.47

and will be glad to find arguments to fortifie themselves in this
perswasion . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.48

Men of dissolute lives cry down Religion , because they would not be
under the restraints of it ; TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.49

they are loth to be tied up by the strict laws and rules of it :
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.50

'T@ @is their interest more than any reason they have against it which
makes them despise it , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.51

they hate it because they are reproved by it .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.52

So our Saviour tells us , that <font> men love darkness rather than
light , because their deeds are evil ; TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.53

for every one that doth evil hateth the light ,
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.54

neither cometh to the light lest his deeds should be reproved <$$font> .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.55

I remember it is the saying of one , who hath done more by his <font>
Writings <$$font> to debauch the Age with Atheistical principles than
any man that lives in it , <font> That when reason is against a man ,
then a man will be against reason <$$font> . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.56

I am sure this is the true account of such mens enmity to Religion ,
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.57

Religion is against them TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.58

and therefore they set themselves against Religion .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.59

The principles of Religion and the doctrines of the <font> holy
Scriptures <$$font> are terrible enemies to wicked men ,
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.60

they are continually flying in their faces and galling their consciences
: TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.61

And this is that which makes them kick against Religion and spurn at the
doctrines of that <font> holy Book <$$font> .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.62

And this may probably be one reason why many men , who are observed to
be sufficiently dull in other matters , yet can talk prophanely and
speak against Religion with some kind of salt and smartness , because
Religion is the thing that frets them ; TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.63

and as in other things so in this vexatio dat intellectum ,
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.64

the inward trouble and vexation of their minds gives them some kind of
wit and sharpness in rallying upon Religion .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.65

Their consciences are galled by it , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.66

and this makes them winch and fling as if they had some metal .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.67

For , let men pretend what they will , there is no ease and comfort of
mind to be had from atheistical principles . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,420.68

't@ @is found by experience , that <P_421> none are more apprehensive of
danger or more fearfull of death than this sort of men :
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,421.69

Even when they are in prosperity they ever and anon feel many inward
stings and lashes , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,421.70

but when any great affliction or calamity overtakes them they are the
most poor_spirited creatures in the whole world .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,421.71

The sum is , the true reason why any man is an Atheist is because he is
a wicked man . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,421.72

Religion would curb him in lusts , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,421.73

and therefore he casts it off TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,421.74

and puts all the scorn upon it he can . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,421.75

Besides , that men think it some kind of apology for their vices that
they do not act contrary to any principle they profess :
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,421.76

Their practice is agreeable to what they pretend to believe ,
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,421.77

and so they think to vindicate themselves and their own practices by
laughing at those for fools who believe any thing to the contrary .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,421.78

<P_427>

I have done with the <font> three <$$font> things I propounded to speak
to upon this Argument , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.80

And now I beg your patience to apply what I have said to these three
purposes . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.81

1 . To take men off from this impious and dangerous folly of
prophaneness which by some is miscalled wit .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.82

2 . To caution men not to think the worse of Religion , because some
are so bold as to despise and deride it . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.83

3 . To perswade men to employ that reason and wit which God hath given
them , to better and nobler purposes in the service , and to the glory
of that God who hath bestowed these gifts on men .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.84

1 . To take men off from this impious and dangerous folly .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.85

I know not how it comes to pass that some men have the fortune to be
esteemed Wits onely for jesting out of the common road , and for making
bold to scoff at those things which the greatest part of mankind
reverence . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.86

As if a man should be accounted a Wit for reviling those in Authority ,
which is no more an argument of any man's wit than it is of his
discretion . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.87

A wise man would not speak contemptuously of a great Prince though he
were out of his Dominions , because he remembers that Kings have long
hands , and that their power and influence does many times reach a great
farther than their direct Authority . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.88

But God <font> is a great King , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.89

and in his hand are all the corners of the earth ;
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.90

we can go no whither from his Spirit , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.91

nor can we flee from his presence <$$font> ; TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.92

where-ever we are <font> his eye sees us <$$font>
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.93

and <font> his right hand <$$font> can reach us .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.94

If men did truly consult the interest either of their safety or
reputation , they would never exercise their wit in dangerous matters .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.95

Wit is a very commendable quality , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.96

but then a wise man should always have the keeping of it .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,427.97

It is a sharp weapon , as apt for mischief as for good purposes if it be
not well <P_428> manag'd . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.98

The proper use of it is to season conversation , to represent what is
praise-worthy to the greatest advantage , and to expose the vices and
follies of men , such things as are in themselves truly ridiculous :
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.99

But if it be applied to the abuse of the gravest and most serious
matters it then loses its commendation . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.100

If any man think he abounds in this quality and hath wit to spare there
is scope enough for it within the bounds of Religion and decency ,
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.101

and when it transgresseth these it degenerates into insolence and
impiety . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.102

All wit which borders upon prophaneness and makes bold with those things
to which the greatest reverence is due deserves to be branded for folly
. TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.103

And if we would preserve our selves from the infection of this vice we
must take heed how we scoff at Religion , under any form , lest
insensibly we derive some contempt upon Religion it self .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.104

And we must likewise take heed how we accustom our selves to a slight
and irreverent use of the Name of God , and of the phrases and
expressions of the Holy Bible , which ought not to be applied upon every
light occasion . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.105

Men will easily slide into the highest degree of prophaneness who are
not careful to preserve a due reverence of the great and glorious Name
of God , and an awfull regard to the Holy Scriptures .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.106

None so nearly disposed to scoffing at Religion as those who have
accustomed themselves to swear upon trifling occasions .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.107

For it is just with God to permit those who allow themselves in one
degree of prophaneness to proceed to another , till at last they come to
that height of impiety as to contemn all Religion .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.108

2 . Let no man think the worse of Religion , because some are so bold
as to despise and deride it . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.109

For 't@ @is no disparagement to any person or thing to be laught at ,
but to deserve to be so . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.110

The most grave and serious matters in the whole world are liable to be
abus'd . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.111

It is a known saying of <font> Epictetus , that every thing hath two
handles <$$font> ; By which he means , that there is nothing so bad but
a man may lay hold of something or other about it that will afford
matter of excuse and extenuation , nor nothing so excellent but a man
may fasten upon something or other belonging to it whereby to reduce it
. TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,428.112

A sharp wit may find something in the wisest man whereby to expose him
to the contempt of injudicious <P_429> people .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.113

The gravest book that ever was written may be made ridiculous by
applying the sayings of it to a foolish purpose .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.114

For a jest may be obtruded upon any thing . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.115

And therefore no man ought to have the less reverence for the principles
of Religion , or for the holy Scriptures , because idle and prophane
Wits can break jests upon them . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.116

Nothing is so easie as to take particular phrases and expressions out of
the best Book in the world and to abuse them by forcing an odd and
ridiculous sense upon them . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.117

But no wise man will think a good Book foolish for this reason , but the
man that abuses it ; TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.118

nor will he esteem that to which every thing is liable to be a just
exception against any thing . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.119

At this rate we must despise all things , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.120

but surely the better and the shorter way is to contemn those who would
bring any thing that is worthy into contempt .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.121

3 . And lastly , to perswade men to employ that reason and wit which
God hath given them to better and nobler purposes in the service and to
the glory of that God who hath bestowed these gifts on men , as <font>
Aholiab <$$font> and <font> Bezaleel <$$font> did their mechanical skill
in the adorning and beautifying of God's Tabernacle .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.122

For this is the perfection of every thing , to attain its true and
propor end ; TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.123

and the end of all those gifts and endowments which God hath given us is
to glorifie the giver . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.124

Here is subject enough to exercise the wit of men and angels : To praise
that infinite goodness , and almighty power , and exquisite wisedom
which made us and all things ; and to admire what we can never
sufficiently praise ; To vindicate the wise and just providence of God ,
in the government of the world ; and to endeavour , as well as we can
upon an imperfect view of things , to make out the beauty and harmony of
all the seeming discords and irregularities of the Divine
administrations ; To explain the oracles of the holy Scriptures , and to
adore that great mystery of Divine love <paren> which the Angels ,
better and nobler Creatures than we are , desire to pry into <$$paren>
God's sending his onely Son into the world to save sinners , and to give
his life a ransom for them : TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.125

These would be noble exercises inded for the tongues and pens of the
greatest Wits . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.126

And subjects of this nature are the best trials of our ability in this
kind . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.127

Satyr and invective are the easiest kind of wit .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,429.128

Almost any degree of it will serve to abuse and find <P_430> fault .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.129

For wit is a keen instrument , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.130

and every one can cut and gash with it , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.131

but to carve a Beautiful image and to polish it requires great art and
dexterity . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.132

To praise any thing well is an argument of much more wit , than to abuse
. TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.133

A little wit , and a great deal of ill nature will furnish a man for
Satyr , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.134

but the greatest instance of wit is to commend well .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.135

And perhaps the best things are the hardest to be duly commended .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.136

For though there be a great deal of matter to work upon yet there is
great judgment required to make choice , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.137

and where the subject is great and excellent it is hard not to sink
below the dignity of it . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.138

This I say on purpose to recommend to men a nobler exercise for their
wits , and if it be possible , to put them out of conceit with that
scoffing humour which is so easie , and so ill_natur'd , and is not
onely an enemy to Religion but to every thing else that is wise and
worthy . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.139

And I am very much mistaken , if the State as well as the Church , the
civil government as well as Religion , do not in a short space find the
intolerable inconvenience of this humour . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.140

But I confine my self to the consideration of Religion .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.141

And it is sad indeed , that in a Nation professing Christianity so
horrid an impiety should dare to appear . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.142

But the Scripture hath foretold us that this sort of men should arise in
the Gospel-age , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.143

and they did appear even in the Apostles days .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.144

That which is more sad and strange is , that we should persist in this
prophaneness notwithstanding the terrible judgments of God which have
been abroad in this Nation . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.145

God hath of late years manifested himself in a very dreadful manner , as
if it were on purpose to give a check to this insolent impiety .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.146

And now that those judgments have done no good upon us we may justly
fear that he will appear once for all . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.147

And 't@ @is time for him to shew himself when his very Being is call'd
in question , and to come and judge the world when men begin to doubt
whether he made it . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.148

The <font> Scripture <$$font> mentions two things as the fore-runners
and reasons of his coming to judgment , <font> infidelity <$$font> , and
<font> prophane scoffing <$$font> at Religion .
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.149

<font> When the Son of man comes , shall he find faith on the earth ?
<$$font> TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.150

And St. <font> Jude <$$font> out of an ancient prophecy of <font> Enoch
<$$font> expresly mentions this as one reason of the coming of the Lord
, <font> to convince ungodly sinners of all their hard speeches which
they had spoken against him <$$font> . TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,430.151

<P_431>

And if these things be a sign and reason of his coming , I wish that we
in this Age had not too much cause to apprehend <font> the Judge to be
at the door <$$font> TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,431.153

This impiety did fore-run the destruction of <font> Jerusalem <$$font> ,
and the utter ruine of the Jewish Nation , TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,431.154

and if it hold on amongst us may not we have reason to fear that either
<font> the end of all things is at hand <$$font> , or that some very
dismal calamity greater than any our eyes have yet seen does hang over
us ? TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,431.155

But I would fain hope that God hath mercy still for us , and that men
will pity themselves , and <font> repent , and give glory to God
<$$font> , and <font> know in this their day the things that belong to
their peace <$$font> . Which God of his infinite mercy grant for the
sake of Christ , To whom with the Father , <font> &c. <$$font>
TILLOTS-A-1670-E3-H,431.156

