<BEGIN_tillots-b-1679-e3-h>

<P_444>

I come now to the III. Thing I propounded , which is , <font> To Answer
the main Objection of our Adversaries against this Principle <$$font> ;
and likewise <P_445> to shew that there is no such Reason and necessity
of an universal Infallible Judge , as they pretend .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.3

Now their great Objection is this , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.4

If every man may judge for himself , there will be nothing but confusion
in Religion , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.5

there will be no end of Controversies : so that an universal infallible
Judge is necessary , and without this God had not made sufficient
provision for the assurance of men's Faith , and for the Peace and unity
of his Church : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.6

Or , as it is expressed in the Canon Law , aliter Dominus non videretur
fuisse discretus , <font> otherwise our Lord had not seem'd to be
discreet <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.7

How plausible soever this Objection may appear , I do not despair but if
men will lay aside prejudice , and impartially consider things , to make
it abundantly evident , that this ground is not sufficient to found an
Infallible Judge upon . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.8

And therefore in answer to it , I desire these following particulars may
be considered . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.9

<font> First <$$font> , That this which they say , rather proves what
God should have done according to their fancy , than what he hath really
and actually done . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.10

My <font> Text <$$font> expresly bids Christians to <font> try the
Spirits <$$font> , which to any man's sense does imply that they may
judge of these matters : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.11

But the Church of <font> Rome <$$font> says they may not ; because if
this liberty were permitted , God had not ordered things wisely , and
for the best , for the peace and unity of his Church .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.12

But , as the <font> Apostle <$$font> says in another case , <font> What
art thou , O man , that objectest against God <$$font> ?
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.13

<font> Secondly <$$font> , If this reasoning be good , we may as well
conclude that there is an universal infallible Judge set over the whole
world in all <font> Temporal <$$font> matters , to whose Authority all
mankind is bound to submit . Because this is as necessary to the peace
of the World , as the other is to the peace of the Church .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.14

And men surely are every whit as apt to be obstinate and perverse about
matters of Temporal Right , as about matters of Faith .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.15

But it is evident in fact and experience that there is no such universal
Judge , appointed by God over the whole World , to decide all Cases of
temporal Right ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.16

and for want of him the World is fain to shift as well as it can .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.17

But now a very acute and scholastical man that would argue that God must
needs have done whatever he fancies convenient for the World should be
done , might by the very same way of Reasoning conclude the necessity of
an universal infallible Judge in Civil matters , as well as in matters
of Religion : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,445.18

And <P_446> their aliter Dominus non videretur fuisse discretus , <font>
otherwise God had not seem'd to be discreet <$$font> , is every whit as
cogent and as civil , in the one Case as the other .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,446.19

<font> Thirdly <$$font> , There is no need of such a Judg , to assure
men in matters of Religion ; Because men be sufficiently certain without
him . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,446.20

I hope it may be certain and clear enough <font> That there is a God
<$$font> ; and <font> That his Providence governs the World <$$font> :
and <font> That there is another life after this <$$font> , though
neither Pope nor Council had ever declared any thing about these matters
. TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,446.21

And for Revealed Doctrines , we may be certain enough of all that is
necessary if it be true which the <font> Fathers <$$font> tell us ,
<font> That all things necessary are plainly revealed in the Holy
Scriptures <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,446.22

<font> Fourthly <$$font> , An infallible Judge , if there were one , is
no certain way to end Controversies , and to preserve the unity of the
Church ; unless it were likewise infallibly certain , <font> That there
is such a Judge <$$font> , and , <font> Who he is <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,446.23

For till men were sure of both these , there would still be a
Controversy whether there be an infallible Judge , and who he is .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,446.24

And if it be true which they tell us , <font> That without an infallible
Judge Controversies can@ @not be ended <$$font> , then a Controversie
concerning an infallible Judge can never be ended .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,446.25

And there are <font> two <$$font> Controversies actually on foot about
an infallible Judg ; One , <font> Whether there be an infallible Judge
or not <$$font> ? which is a Controversie between Us and the Church of
Rome : and the other , <font> Who this infallible Judge is <$$font> ?
which is a Controversie among themselves , which could never yet be
decided {SIC:becided} : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,446.26

And yet till it be decided , Infallibility , if they had it , would be
of no use to them for the ending of Controversies .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,446.27

<font> Fifthly <$$font> , There is no such absolute need , as is
pretended , of determining all Controversies in Religion .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,446.28

If men would devest <P_447> themselves of prejudice and interest , as
they ought , in matters of Religion , the necessary things of Religion
are plain enough , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.29

and men would generally agree well enough about them :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.30

But if men will suffer themselves to be byassed by these , they would
not hearken to an infallible Judge , if there were one ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.31

or they would find out some way or other to call his Infallibility into
question . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.32

And as for doubtful and lesser matters in Religion , charity and mutual
forbearance among Christians would make the Church as peaceable and
happy , as perhaps it was ever design'd to be in this World , without
absolute unity in Opinion . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.33

<font> Sixthly <$$font> and <font> Lastly <$$font> , Whatever may be the
inconveniences of mens judging for themselves in Religion , yet taking
this Principle with the Cautions I have given , I doubt not to make it
appear , that the inconveniences are far the least on that side .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.34

The present condition of humane Nature doth not admit of any
constitution of things , whether in Religion or Civil matters , which is
free from all kind of exception and inconvenience :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.35

That is the best state of things which is liable to the least and fewest
. TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.36

If men be modest , and humble , and willing to learn , God hath done
that which is sufficient for the assurance of our Faith , and for the
peace of his Church , without an infallible Judge :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.37

And if men will not be so , I can@ @not tell what would be sufficient .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.38

I am sure there were Heresies and Schisms in the <font> Apostles
<$$font> Times , when Those who governed the Church were certainly
guided by an infallible Spirit . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.39

God hath appointed Guides and Teachers for us in matters of Religion ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.40

and if we will be contented to be instructed by them in those necessary
Articles and Duties of Religion , which are plainly contained in
Scripture ; and to be counselled and directed by them in things that are
more doubtful and difficult , I do not see why we might not do well
enough without any infallible Judge or Guide .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.41

But still it will be said , Who shall judge what things are plain and
what doubtful ? TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.42

The answer to this , in my opinion , is not difficult .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.43

For if there be any thing plain in Religion , every man that hath been
duly instructed in the Principles of Religion can judge of it ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.44

or else it is not plain . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.45

But there are some things in Religion so very plain , that no Guide or
Judge can in reason claim that Authority over men , as to oblige them to
believe or do the contrary ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.46

no , though he pretend to Infallibility ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.47

no , though he were an <font> Apostle <$$font> , though he were an
<font> Angel from heaven <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.48

St. <font> Paul <$$font> puts the case so high , <font> Gal. <$$font>
1.8 . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,447.49

<font> Though we , or an Angel from {COM:word_missing_in_original}
<P_448> received , let him be accursed <$$font> : which plainly
supposeth that Christians may and can judge when Doctrines are contrary
to the Gospel . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.50

What ? TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.51

not believe an <font> Apostle <$$font> , nor <font> an Angel from heaven
<$$font> , if he should teach any thing evidently contrary to the plain
Doctrine of the Gospel ? TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.52

If he should determine Vertue to be Vice , and Vice to be Vertue ?
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.53

No ; not an Apostle , nor an Angel ; because such a Doctrine as this
would confound and overturn all things in Religion .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.54

And yet <font> Bellarmin <$$font> puts this very Case ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.55

and says , If the Pope should so determine , <font> we were bound to
believe him , unless we would sin against Conscience <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.56

I will conclude this Discourse by putting a very plain and familiar Case
; by which it will appear what credit and authority is fit to be given
to a Guide , and what not . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.57

Suppose I came a Stranger into <font> England <$$font> , and landing at
<font> Dover <$$font> took a Guide there to conduct me in my way to
<font> York <$$font> , which I knew before by the <font> Mapp <$$font>
to lie <font> North <$$font> of <font> Dover <$$font> :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.58

having committed my self to him , if he lead me for two or three days
together out of any plain Road , and many times over hedge and ditch , I
can@ @not but think it strange , that in a Civil and well inhabited
Country there should be no Highways from one part of it to another :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.59

Yet thus far I submit to him , though not without some regret and
impatience . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.60

But then if after this , for two or three days more he lead me directly
<font> South <$$font> , and with my face full upon the Sun at noon-day ,
and at last bring me back again to <font> Dover Pere <$$font> ; and
still bids me follow him : Then certainly no modesty do's oblige a man
not to dispute with his Guide , and to tell him surely that can be no
way because it is <font> Sea <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.61

Now though he set never so bold a face upon the matter , and tell me
with all the gravity and authority in the world , That it is not <font>
the Sea <$$font> but <font> dry Land <$$font> under the <font> species
<$$font> and <font> appearance of Water <$$font> ; and that whatever my
eyes tell me , having once committed my self to his guidance , I must
not trust my own senses in the case ; it being one of the most dangerous
sorts of Infidelity for a man to believe his own eyes rather than his
<font> faithful <$$font> and <font> infallible Guide <$$font> : All this
moves me not ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.62

But I begin to expostulate roundly with him , and to let him understand
that if I must not believe what I see , he is like to be of no farther
use to me ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,448.63

because I shall not be able , at this rate , to know whether I have
<P_449> a Guide , and whether I follow him {SIC:him_him} or not .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.64

In short , I tell him plainly , that when I took him for my Guide , I
did not take him to tell me the difference between <font> North <$$font>
and <font> South <$$font> , between a <font> Hedge <$$font> and a <font>
High-way <$$font> , between <font> Sea <$$font> and <font> dry Land
<$$font> ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.65

all this I knew before , as well as he or any man else could tell me ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.66

but I took him to conduct and direct me the nearest way to <font> York
<$$font> : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.67

And therefore after all his impertinent talk ; after all his Motives of
Credibility to perswade me to believe him , and all his confident <font>
sayings <$$font> , which he gravely calls <font> Demonstrations <$$font>
, I stand stifly upon the shore , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.68

and leave my learned and reverend Guide to take his own course , and to
dispose of himself as he pleaseth ; but firmly resolved not to follow
him . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.69

And is any man to be blamed that breaks with his Guide upon these Terms
? TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.70

And this is truly the Case , when a man commits himself to the Guidance
of any Person or Church : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.71

If by vertue of this Authority they will needs perswade me out of my
senses , and not to believe <font> what I see <$$font> , but <font> what
they say ; that Vertue is Vice , and Vice Vertue <$$font> , if they
declare them to be so : And that because they say they are Infallible ,
I am to receive all their Dictates for Oracles , tho never so evidently
false and absurd in the Judgment of all Mankind :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.72

In this case there is no way to be rid of these unreasonable People ,
but to desire of them , since one kindness deserves another , and all
Contradictions are alike easie to be believed , that <font> they
<$$font> would be pleased to believe that Infidelity is Faith , and that
when I absolutely renounce their Authority , I do yield a most perfect
submission and obedience to it . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.73

Upon the whole matter , all the Revelations of God , as well as the Laws
of men , go upon this presumption , that men are not stark fools ; but
that they will consider their Interest and have some regard to the great
concernment of their eternal salvation . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.74

And this is as much to secure men from mistake in matters of Belief , as
God hath afforded to keep men from sin in matters of Practice .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.75

He hath made no effectual and infallible provision that men shall not
sin ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.76

and yet it would puzzle any man to give a good Reason , why God should
take more care to secure men against Errors in belief , than against sin
and wickedness in their Lives . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.77

I shall now only draw <font> three <$$font> or <font> four <$$font>
Inferences from this Discourse which I have made , and so conclude .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,449.78

<P_450>

1 . <font> That it is every mans Duty who hath ability and capacity for
it , to endeavour to understand the grounds of his Religion . <$$font>
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.80

For to try Doctrines is to enquire into the grounds and reasons of them
; which the better any man understands , the more firmly he will be
established in the Truth , and be the more resolute in the day of Trial
, and the better able to withstand the Arts and assaults of cunning
Adversaries , and the fierce storms of Persecution .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.81

And on the contrary , that man will soon be moved from his stedfastness
who never examined the Grounds and Reasons of his belief .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.82

When it comes to the Trial , he that hath but little to say for his
Religion will probably neither do nor suffer much for it .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.83

2 . <font> That all Doctrines are vehemently to be suspected which
decline Trial <$$font> , and are so loath to be brought into the light ;
which will not endure a fair Examination , but magisterially require an
implicite Faith : Whereas Truth is bold and full of courage , and loves
to appear openly : and is so secure and confident of her own strength as
to offer her self to the severest Trial and Examination .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.84

But to deny all liberty of Enquiry and Judgment in matters of Religion
is the greatest injury and disparagement to Truth that can be , and a
tacite acknowledgment that she lies under some disadvantage , and that
there is less to be said for her than for Error .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.85

I have often wonder'd why the People in the Church of <font> Rome
<$$font> do not suspect their Teachers and Guides to have some ill
design upon them , when they do so industriously debar them of the means
of Knowledge , and are so very loath to let them understand what it is
that we have to say against their Religion . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.86

For can any thing in the world be more suspicious than to perswade men ,
to put out their eyes , upon promise that they will help them to a much
better and more faithful Guide ? TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.87

If any Church , any profession of men , be unwilling their Doctrines
should be exposed to Trial , it is a certain sign they know something by
them that is faulty , and which will not endure the light .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.88

This is the account which our Saviour gives us in a like case ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.89

It was <font> because mens deeds were evil <$$font> that <font> they
loved darkness rather than light <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.90

For <font> every one that doth evil hateth the light ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.91

neither cometh he to the light lest his deeds should be reproved :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.92

But he that doth the truth cometh to the light , that his deeds may be
made manifest that they are wrought in God <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,450.93

<P_451>

3 . Since Reason and Christianity allow this liberty to private persons
to judg for themselves in matters of Religion , we should use this
privilege with much modesty and humility , with great submission and
deference to our Spiritual Rulers and Guides , whom God hath appointed
in his Church . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.95

And there is very great need of this Caution , since by experience we
find this liberty so much abused by many to the nourishing of Pride and
Self-conceit , of Division and faction ; and those who are least able to
judge , to be frequently the most forward and confident , the most
peremptory and perverse : and instead of demeaning themselves with the
submission of Learners , to assume to themselves the authority of Judges
, even in the most doubtful and disputable matters .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.96

The Tyranny of the <font> Roman <$$font> Church over the Minds and
Consciences of men is not to be justified upon any account :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.97

but nothing puts so plausible a colour upon it , as the ill use that is
too frequently made of this natural Privilege of mens judging for
themselves in a matter of so infinite concernment , as that of their
eternal happiness . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.98

But then it is to be consider'd , that the proper remedy in this Case ,
is not to deprive men of this Priviledge , but to use the best means to
prevent the abuse of it . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.99

For though the <font> inconveniences <$$font> arising from the ill use
of it may be very great , yet the <font> mischief <$$font> on the other
hand is intolerable . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.100

Religion it self is liable to be abused to very bad purposes ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.101

and frequently is so ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.102

but it is not therefore best that there should be no Religion :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.103

And yet this Objection , if it be of any force and be pursued home , is
every whit as strong against Religion it self , as against mens liberty
of judging in matters of Religion . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.104

Nay I add farther , that no man can judiciously embrace the true
Religion , unless he be permitted to judge , whether that which he
embraces be the true Religion or not . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.105

4 . When upon due Trial and Examination we are well setled and
establish'd in our Religion , <font> let us hold fast the profession of
our Faith without wavering <$$font> ; and not be <font> like Children ,
tossed to and fro , and carried about with every wind of Doctrine ,
through the sleight of men , and the cunning craftiness of those who lye
in wait to deceive <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.106

And above all , let us resolve to live according to the excellent Rules
and Precepts of our holy Religion ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.107

let us heartily obey that Doctrine which we profess to believe .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,451.108

We , who enjoy the <font> Protestant <$$font> Religion , have all the
means and advantages <P_452> of understanding the Will of God , free
liberty and full scope of enquiring into it : and informing our selves
concerning it : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.109

We have all the opportunities we can wish of coming to the knowledge of
our Duty : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.110

The Oracles of God lie open to us , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.111

and his Law is continually before our eyes ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.112

<font> his word is nigh unto us in our mouths , and in our hearts
<$$font> ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.113

<paren> that is , we may read it and meditate upon it <$$paren> <font>
that we may do it : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.114

The Key of Knowledg is <$$font> put into our hands , so that if we do
not <font> enter into the Kingdom of Heaven <$$font> , it is we our
selves that shut our selves out . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.115

And where there is nothing to hinder us from the knowledge of our Duty ,
there certainly nothing can excuse us from the practice of it .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.116

For the end of all knowledg is to direct men in their duty , and
effectually to engage them to the performance of it :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.117

The great business of Religion is , <font> to make men truly good , and
to teach them to live well <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.118

And if Religion have not this effect , it matters not of what Church any
man lists and enters himself ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.119

for most certainly , <font> A bad man can be saved in none <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.120

Tho a man know the right way to Heaven never so well , and be entred
into it , yet if he will not walk therein , he shall never come thither
: TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.121

Nay , it will be an aggravation of this man's unhappiness , that he was
lost in the way to Heaven , and perish'd in the very road to Salvation .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.122

But if we will in good earnest apply our selves to the practice of
Religion , and the obedience of God's Holy Laws , his Grace will never
be wanting to us to so good a purpose . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.123

I have not time to recommend Religion to you at large , with all its
advantages . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.124

I will comprise what I have to say in a few words ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.125

and mind them at your peril . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.126

Let that which is our great concernment be our great care . <font> To
know the truth and to do it , To fear God and keep his Commandments .
<$$font> TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.127

Considering the Reasonableness and the Reward of Piety and Virtue ,
nothing can be wiser ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.128

considering the mighty assistance of God's Grace , which he is ready to
afford us , and the unspeakable satisfaction and delight which is to be
had in the doing of our duty , nothing can be easier :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.129

Nothing will give us that pleasure , while we live ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.130

nothing can minister that true and solid comfort to us , when we come to
die : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,452.131

There is probably no such way for a man to be happy in <P_453> this
World ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,453.132

to be sure , there is no way but this to escape the intolerable and
endless miseries of another World . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,453.133

<font> Now God grant that we may all know and do in this our day , the
things that belong to our peace , for his Mercies sake in Jesus Christ :
To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all Honour and Glory now
and for ever <$$font> , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,453.134

Amen . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-H,453.135

