<BEGIN_torkingt-1517-e1-h>

<P_22>

<heading>

FFYRST AT O=R= LONDYNG ATT JAFFE . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,22.4

<$$heading>

Sonday , the xij Day of Julii , that was relique Sonday , a_bowt v of
the Cloke at aftyr_noon , we came to Jaffe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,22.6

and fell to an <P_23> Ankyr in the Rode ther . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,23.7

And in_contynently we sent to Jherusalem ffor the ffather Warden of the
mounte Syon to com and se vs conducted to Jherusalem , As the custome ys
. TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,23.8

Wedynsday , the xv Day of Julii , the ffather Warden of Bedelem cam to
vs with lordis of Jherusalem - TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,23.9

And Rama thane beyng turkys - The great Turke havyng in Dominyon All the
holl londe , And in shorte tyme they concludyd what sume ower patrone
should pay for o=r= tribute . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,23.10

And thanne we war suffered to com on londe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,23.11

The same Day at iij of Cloke at aftir_noon , we com on londe ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,23.12

And as we came owt of the boott we war receyvyd by the Turkys and
Sarrasyns , and put in to an old Cave by name and tale , ther Screvener
ever wrytyng ower namys man by man As we entyred in the presens of the
seyd lordis , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,23.13

And ther we lay in the same Grotte or cave all nyght upon the stynking
Stable grounde , as well nyght as Day , ryght evyll intretyd by the seyd
Turkes_Mames . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,23.14

At this Jaffe begynnyth the holy londe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,23.15

and to every pylgryme at the ffyrst foote that he set on the londe ther
ys grauntyd plenary remission , De Pena et a Culpa .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,23.16

At thys haven Jonas the prophete toke the see , whanne he fledde from
the sithe of our lord in Tharsis . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,23.17

<P_24>

And in the same Jaff , Seynt Petir reysid ffrom Deth Tabitam , the
servaunt of the Appostolis . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.19

And fast by ys the place where Seynt Petir vsyd to ffyssh , And our
Savior Crist Calleyd hym and seyd , sequere me .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.20

This Jaff was Sumtyme a grett Citee , as it appereth by the Ruyne of the
same , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.21

but nowe ther standeth never an howse but oonly ij towers , And Certeyne
Caves vnder the grounde . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.22

And it was oon of the fyrst Cityes of the world ffounde by Japheth ,
Noes sonne , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.23

and bereth yett hys name . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.24

Thursday , the xvj Day of Julii , at iiij of the Cloke at aftyr_noone ,
we toke 3 assis TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.25

and rode to Rama the same nyght , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.26

And ther we war Recyvyd into Duke Philipps hospitall .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.27

And it ys callyd so be cause Duke Philipp of Burgone , byldyd it of hys
grett Charitie to Receye Pylgryms therin . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.28

We ffound no thyng therin , but bar walles and bar florethes , excepte
oonly a well of good ffresh watir which was myche to our Comforth .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.29

Nevtheles ther com to vs Jacobyns and other feynyd Cristen Peple of
Sonndry Sectis , that browgth to vs mattes ffor our mony to lye upon ,
And also brede , Sodying egges and sumtyme other vetaylles as mylke
Grapys , and Appyllys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.30

And ther we taryed all that nyght And ffriday all Day .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.31

A_bowt ij myle from Rama ys the Towne of Lydia , wher Seynt George
suffered martydom and was hedyd . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.32

And in the same Seynt Peter helyd Enea of the Palsey .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.33

Rama ys from Jaff x myles , And from Jherusalem xxx myle ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,24.34

And vpon the right honde goyng ffrom Rama to Jherusalem a_bowxt xx myle
ffrom Rama <P_25> ys the Castell of Emaus wher ij Discpulis of our
Criste knew hym in brekyng of bred aftyr his Resurrecion as it ys well
knowen by the Gospell . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.35

A lytyll from thens , upon an hill called Mounte Joye , lyeth Samuell
the Pphete . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.36

And a lityll ther_by ys the towne of Ramathe where Samuell was born .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.37

And of thys towne was Joseph of Aramathia that awght the new Tumbe or
Monyment that our Savir Crist was buryed in . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.38

And a lytyll over the myd way {HELSINKI:was} on the left honde ys the
vale Terebynthy wher David overcome Goleam . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.39

ffriday , the xvij Day of Julii , a_bowte vj of the Cloke att aftyr_noon
the Turke , compellyd vs to com owt of our hospytall at Ramys ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.40

led vs in to the feld a myle with_owt the Cetee where stondeth ij Towers
, TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.41

And ther we lay in the field all night . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.42

Satirday , erley in the mornyng , we toke our Jorneyne towardys
Jherusalem , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.43

And a_bowt noon we restyd vs vndernethe the Olyff trees
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.44

And ther refresshyd vs with Such mete ond wyne as we browght with vs
from ower Shippe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.45

And a_bowght vj or vij of the Cloke at after_noon we cam to Jherusalem
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.46

and were receyvyd into the Mounte Syon , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.47

And ther we supped , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.48

And aftyr Supper we war lede to our hospytall callyd Sancto Jacobo ,
ryght in the way to the holy Sepulcre Warde . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.49

Sunday , the xix Day of Julii , we cam all to Mounte Syon to Masse ,
which was song ther ryght Devowtly . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,25.50

And thanne they {SIC:the} Delyved to every Pylgryme a candyll of wax
brennyng in his <P_26> honde All the masse tyme , ffor which Candyll
they recyvyd of every Pylgryme v gale ob. TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,26.51

And whanne Masse was Don we went all to Dyn in the place wher we War
ryght honestely svyed . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,26.52

And at medys of the Dyner the ffather Wardyn made a ryght holy sermon ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,26.53

and shewyd ryght Devoutly the holynesse of all the blyssyd choseyn place
of the holy londe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,26.54

And exortyd every man to cofession and repentaunce , And so to visite
the seyd holy placis in clennes of lyff . And with shuch Devocion as
all_myghty god wold geff vnto them of hys most Speciall grace .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,26.55

And thys Sermon Don , the ffader warden gaff vs warnyng that every man
shuld provyd mete for him self and he wold fynd vs wyne ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,26.56

and so he Dede all the tyme that we war ther . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,26.57

And Carpetts to lay upon vs ffor the which every man pylgryme
recompenssyd the seyd ffryers at ther Devocion .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,26.58

As for bred and othe vitallys was broght to us for ower mony by persons
of Divse sects . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,26.59

And all way the Wardeyne of the seyd ffrers or sum of hys Brothern by
hys assigment Daly accompanyd with vs Informyng And shewing vnto vs the
holy places with_in the holy lande . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,26.60

Munday , Seynt Margaretes Day , we begane ower Pylgrymage at the Mount
Syon . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,26.61

<P_27>

ffyste the place wher the Jewys wold a restyd and take a_way the holy
body of our blyssyd lady whanne the Apostys bar hyr to the Vale of
Josaphat to be buryed . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.63

And ther by we cam in to a place wher Seynt Petir , Aftyr that he had
Denyed our lord , thryse went owt of the howse of Cayphas in to a Cave
and wept byttyrly , Whanne he hard the Coke crow iij=es= .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.64

The place ys callyd Gallicantus . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.65

<heading>

PYLGRMAGIS IN TO THE VALE OF JOSOPHAT . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.67

<$$heading>

And Thanne we Descendyd Downe by the Vale of Salamons temple .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.69

And fyrst we cam to Torrens Cedron , which in somer tyme ys Drye , And
in wynter , and specially in lente , it ys mervelows flowyng with rage
of watir that comyth with Grett violence thorow the vale of Josophat .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.70

And it renne be_twyne the Citee and the Mounte of Olivete ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.71

And it ys callyd as it ys be_fore Torrens Cedron .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.72

And over the same watir seynt Eline made a brygge of stone whiche ys
yett ther over . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.73

And many yers be_for the passion of Crist , there {SIC:the} lay over the
same watir a tree , ffor a foote bryge , wheroff the holy Crosse was
aftyr_wardes made . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.74

This seying Quene Saba , by the spirite of prophecie , whanne she passyd
that wey she wold nott trede thervpon , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.75

but wadyd thorow the watir . Seying that the Savyor of all the world
shuld suffre hys Deth vpon that Tree , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.76

Ther is clene remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.77

And thus Descendyd we come to the botome of the Vale of Josophat
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.78

and begynnyth the Vale of Siloe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.79

And they both be but on vale , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.80

but the name Chaungeth . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.81

And att the bygynyng of thys Vale ys a fayer Tombe in the maner of a
tower substancially made , Wherin as ys sayd Absolon ys buryed .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,27.82

And so ever <P_28> ony Sarazin comyth by that Sepulcre he cast a stonne
ther att with grett violence and Dispite , by cause the seyd Absolon
pursued hys father , king David , and cause hym to flee .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,28.83

And sum other men Say it ys the sepulcre of Josophat , And that the Vale
take the name of the seyd Josophat . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,28.84

Nott far from thys place ys the myddys of the vale of Josophate , wher
ys a very fayer churche in the kepyng and handys of the Sarazyns ,
wherin we Descendid in to a wonde ffayer vawght by xlviii grees . Wher
ys the holy Tombe of our blyssyd lady , wher she was buryed by the
Apostoles , And aftyr that Assumpte in to hevyn .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,28.85

And ther ys clene remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,28.86

<heading>

PYLGRYMAGES AT THE MOUNTE OF OLIVETE . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,28.88

<$$heading>

Departyng owt of thys forseyd churche of ower lady , we Came to the fote
of the Mounte of Olyvete , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,28.90

And a lytyll Ascendyng we came to the place vnder an holow Roke , wher
our savyor preying fell in such an Agony that he Swete watir and blode
That the Droppes ffell in grett plenty from hys eyne to the erthe ,
seying , Pater si possibile est vt transseat a me calix iste verumtamen
, non sicut ego volo sed sicut tu vis ffiat voluntas tua .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,28.91

Clene remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,28.92

Ther is Also the stone wher vpon the Aungell stod comfortyng hym the
same tyme . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,28.93

ffrom thens Descendyng a stonys Cast we came to the place <P_29> wher
our savyor Crist left Petir , Jamis , and John .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.94

Sedete hic Donec vadam illuc et orem . vigilate et orate .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.95

ffrom thens we assendyd in to the place wher as Seynt Thomas the
Apostill receyved the Gyrdyll of our lady whanne she was Assumpte .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.96

ffrom thense we entred in to the gardeyn TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.97

and visited the place wher our savyor was takyn and where Seynt Petir
Stroke of Malcus eere . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.98

And therby ys the place shewyd by a token of a ston wher Judas be_trayed
our Savyor to the Jewys with a kysse , And wher the Jewis fell bakward ,
when Crist seyd , Quem queritis , Illi autem Dixerunt Jhm nazarenum .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.99

And yet we ascendid mor TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.100

and came to the place wher ower Savyor Crist seying and beholdyng the
Citie of Jherusalem vpon Palme of {COM:sic} Sonnday wepte vpon seing ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.101

Si cognovisses et tu , S. fleres , etc. TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.102

ffrom thens we Ascendid mor hyer TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.103

and come to a place wher the Aungell of ower lord browght a palm vnto
our blyssyd lady shewying vnto hyr the Day of hyr Dethe .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.104

Also thanne we cam to the place wher our blyssyd lady Dede reste hyr
many tymes ffor werynesse whanne she went pylgrmagis aftyr the passion
of our lorde , And also hys assencion . Also wher the Postyllys made
Crede of ower feyth . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,29.105

Also a lityll thense ys the place wher ower Savyor Crist <P_30> taught
hys Discipulis to pray , Seying Cum oratis ita Dicite Pater noster .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.106

Thanne next we went vnto the hyethe and tope of thys seyd Mounte of
Olivete , wher we founde an olde Chirche with_ine the whiche Chrche ys a
fayer Tower xiij Sqware , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.107

And on the on Syde ys a Dore , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.108

And in the myddys of the Tower ys the place wher our blyssyd Savyor
Crist Jhu ascendid vnto hevyn . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.109

Videntibus illis , etc. TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.110

In the same Tower ys the ston vpon the whiche ower Savyor stonding
ascendid in to hevyn , in the whiche stone The prynte Of hys holy foote
yett appere , And specially of the ryght foote .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.111

Ther ys clene remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.112

And from thense we Ascendid a lytyll TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.113

And come to a nother tower Callyd Galilee TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.114

and that ys the Place of the whiche the Aungell shewyng the resurrection
of our Savyor , seyd to ys Discipulis , Precedet vos in Galileam ibi eum
videbitis sicut predixit vobis . Accordyng to the promyse of our Savyor
made a_for hys passion , whanne he seyd Postquam Resurrexero precedam
vos in Galileam . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.115

That ys for to sey into the seyd Place Callyd Galilee . And not in to
the Region of Galilee whiche ys ffer from thys place .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.116

And whanne we war on the mounte of Olivete we myghte se pfyghtly , Vpon
the Golden gate of the temple of Salomon , of whiche gate o=r= lord rode
in on Palme Sonnday . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.117

But no Cristen man ys not suffered for to come ny it .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.118

Neverthelesse to them that with Devocion behold it a_ffar ys grauntyd
clene remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,30.119

<P_31>

Thanne we Descendyng the same way that ower lorde rode vpon palme
Sonnday , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.121

And cam to the Place wher the Chyldern of Israell brake braunches of
Olyff trees and kest in the way a_ffor ower Savyor whanne he rode on hys
Asse towards Jherusalem , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.122

And they songe , Osanna Benedictus qui venit in nomine domini .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.123

And thanne be the ledyng and conductyng of ower seyd gydes we decenddid
in to the Vale of Josophat , but not the same wey we went owte warde .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.124

Ther we Ascendid vp to the gate of the Citee callyd Seynt Stevyns gate ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.125

ffor ther ys the Place wher Seynt Stephen was stoyned to Deth , And wher
Saule stod and kepte hys clothes with_in Jherusalem .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.126

And a_non we entred in att the forseyd gate , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.127

and on the left hande with_in the gate ys Probatica Piscina vnder the
wale of the Temple of Salomon , in the whiche Place ower lord shewyd
many Miraclis as it ys well knowen by the Gospell .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.128

ffrom thence we went to the howse wher the Synnys of Mary Mawdleyn war
for_govyn . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.129

Therby ys an other howse that sumtyme was a fayer Churche of Seynt Anne
. TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.130

But now the Sarrasyns have made ther of a muskey , that is for to sey
ther Temple . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.131

And that ys the self Place that was Seynt Annes howse .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.132

And ther She Deyed . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.133

And in a vawght vnderneth ys the very self Place wher our blyssyd lady
was born . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.134

And ther ys Plenarie Remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,31.135

<P_32>

The stonys of that Place wher ower lady was born ys remedi and
consolacion to women that Travell of Chylde . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.137

ffrom thense we went to the howse of Herode , that ys on the left hande
of Pylates howse . And stondyth heyer vpon the ffronte of the hyll .
In to the whiche howse ower Savyor was presentyd vnto herodes by Pylates
sendyng acusyd by the Jewys TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.138

neverthelesse . The seyd herode Clothed hym in a white Garment
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.139

and sent hym agen to Pilate , Et facti sunt Amici herodes et Pilatus in
illo Die , etc. TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.140

And ij howses of Pilate and Herode be yet now the fayrest howses in
Jherusalem , and specially the howse of king Herode .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.141

Item . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.142

As we passyd by the strete ther stondeth An arche on {SIC:ov} the way ,
vpon the which stondyth ij large whitht stonys .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.143

Vpon the oon of them our Savyor stode whanne he was jugede to Deth ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.144

And on the other stone stode Pylate whanne he gaff Sentence that he
shuld be Crucyfyed . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.145

The next place that we cam ys wher ower blyssyd lady stode whanne she
mette with hyr Der sonne beryng his Crosse , wher for over myche Sorow
and Dolor of harte She Sodenly fell in to a sowne and forgetfullnesse of
hyr mynde , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.146

and thys holy Place ys callyd Sancta Maria De Spasimo .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.147

Seynt Elyne byldyd a chirche ther , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.148

but yt ys Downe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.149

And the Sarrazins have often attempted to bylde ther ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.150

but ther edifying wold not stonde in no wyse .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.151

Item , the next place ys wher the Jewes Constrayned Symeon Cirenen ,
commyng from the Towne , to take the Crosse and ber it aftyr our Savyor
Criste . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,32.152

<P_33>

And from thense we went to a place callyd Bivium , that ys as myche for
to sey as a Crosse strete or a Crosse wey , wher the women of Jherusalem
stod and Sorowfully wepte whanne our lord was lede to hys Deth , To whom
he seyd wepe ye nott vpon me ye Doughters of Jherusalem ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,33.154

But wepe ye vpon yower self and vpon yower Chyldern .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,33.155

And from thense we went to the howse of Dives Epulonis qui Sepultus est
in Inferno . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,33.156

And fyrst , as our wey lay , we cam to the howse of Veronica , whych ys
from the howse of Pilate vcl pace , wher as our blyssid Savyor impressyd
the ymage of hys fface in hyr wymple whiche ys at Rome .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,33.157

And it ys callyd ther the Vernacle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,33.158

And so we visited all the long wey by which our Savyor Criste was lede
from the howse of Pilate vnto the place of hys Crucifying .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,33.159

And also we passyd by the gate of the Temple of the holy Sepulcre ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,33.160

and in ower wey homward we cam to the Chirche that the Jacobyns hold .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,33.161

In the chirche syd ys a lytyll Chapell in the whiche Chapell Seynt Jamis
the mor was hedyd by king herode . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,33.162

Also therby ys the place wher our lord Criste aftyr hys Resurrecion
apperyd To mary Mawdleyn and to other Devowte women in the hye wey as
they com from hys Sepulcre , wher he seyd on to them . Avete ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,33.163

And ther with they com ner hym , Et tenuerunt pedes eius .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,33.164

<P_34>

And all theses Stacions thus visited the Day of Seynt Margarete afore
rehersyd . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.166

We returnyd to the Mounte Syon to reffressh us TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.167

and ther restyd us for a Certeyn tyme . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.168

<heading>

PYLGRIMAGE OF THE MOWNTE SYON . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.170

<$$heading>

A lityll from the Movnte Syon , The Chirche of the Aungellis , wher
sumtyme was the howse of Annas the Busshope , in to the which our Savior
Criste was ffyrst lede ffrom the Mownte of Olivete , wher he sufferyd
many Iniuris . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.172

And specially ther he toke a buffet of on of the busshopps servaunts ,
Seying , Sic respondes Pontifici . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.173

ffrom thense we went to a Chirche of Seynt Savior , wher sum tyme stod
the grett hous of Chayphas wher our blyssyd Savior was scornyd , hys
face Coverd and bobbyd , And most grevowsly betyn
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.174

and ther sufferyd many afflicions all that nyght .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.175

Ther ys allso a lytyll cave at the Auters ende wher they shette hym ynne
tyll the Jewys had taken ther counsell and Determynyd what they wold Do
with hym . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.176

And it ys yett callyd Carcer Dni . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.177

Ther ys also in the same place the moste parte of the grett stonne that
the Aungell as we rede Removyd ffrom the Dor of the Sepulcre .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.178

And it is now the stone of the hye auter in the same Churche .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.179

And the other parte of the Same stone lith yett beffore the Sepulcre
Dore . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,34.180

And ther with_owt the Door in the Courte , on the left honde , ys a tree
with many stonys a_bowght it , wher the ministres of the Jewys <P_35>
and Seynt Petir with them warmyd them by the ffyer .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,35.181

And goyng owt of the same Courte , in the hygh wey on the ryght honde ,
in a Corner , ys a@ @stone wher our blyssyd lady stode whanne Petir went
owt Sore wepyng . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,35.182

And hys wepying was so myche that he cowd not geff hyr non Answer whanne
she inquired of hyr Swete sonne . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,35.183

And ther she Desyrows to know of hyr sonne , Most Sorrowfull a_bode tyll
in the mornyng That She saw them lede hym bownde to the howse of Pilate
, whethir she most Sorowfully folowyd hym . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,35.184

A lityll from thys Chirche ther appeareth a Ruyne of an old falyn
Chirche wher thys most glorius virgine , aftyr the Deth of our Savyor
hyr sonne , Dwellyd and bode most devowtly by the space of xiiij yerys
vn to the Day of hyr Assumption . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,35.185

And ther ys clene remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,35.186

Ther by ys the place and a stone lying wher our blyssyd lady Died and
assumptyd In to hevyn . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,35.187

Ther ys clene Remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,35.188

Ther by Also ys a parte of a stone upon the whych Seynt John Evngeliste
sayd often Masse be_fore that blyssyd lady as her Chapleyn aftyr the
assencion of ower lorde . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,35.189

Ther ys Also the place shewyd by a stonne whiche ys a yard of hight ,
wher Seynt Mathe was Chosyn in to the Nowmber of the Apostolys .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,35.190

ffrom thens going in to the Mownte Syon , fast by the Chirche , ys the
place wher our blyssyd lady vsyd to sey hyr most Devowte Prayers and
Dayly Devowte Devocions at the Assencon of our lord and be_for .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,35.191

<P_36>

Also therby be ij stonys , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,36.193

upon oon of them ower Savyr Criste vsed to sitt and preche to hys
Discipls , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,36.194

And upon the other satt hys blyssed mother heryng hys seyd prechynges .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,36.195

Under the Chirche of the seyd Syon ys the Sepulcre or byryall of
prophets and kyngs of Israell . As David , Salomon , Roboas Abias , Asa
, Jeconias , Sedechias , with many moo . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,36.196

In thys Sepultur ys no Cristen man suffred to entre ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,36.197

ffor the Sarrazins kepte that Place in grett revence
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,36.198

and worshippe it ryght myche in ther maner , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,36.199

and have made ther of ther muskey . That ys for to sey ther Chirche or
Chapell . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,36.200

Ther by ys the place wher Seynt Stevin the ij=de= tyme Seynt Gamaliell ,
Seint Poules techer , Abbibas his sonne , And Nichodem war buryed .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,36.201

Also therby ys the place wher the Pascall lambe was rostyd , etc. And
wher the watir was hett to wassh the ffete of Cristis Discipulis .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,36.202

And Ther fast by ys the Place wher kyng David Dyd penaunce , and made
the vij Psalmys for the sleyng of Vrye , whom he put in the forh_frontt
{TEXT:sic} of the batell porposly to have hym slayne to the entent that
he myght the mor at liberte vse hys wyff whom he kept in advoutre .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,36.203

<P_50>

<heading>

PYLGRYMAGE TO Y=E= MOWNTIS OF JUDE . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,50.206

<$$heading>

A_bowte ij of the cloke at Aftyr_none , we toke our assis at Bethelem ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,50.208

ffyrst we come to the Sepulcre of the vij prophetis .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,50.209

<P_51>

Ther ys also the place wher David Slew Golyas .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,51.211

And from thense we com to the howse of Zacharie , in the Mowntayns of
Jude whych ys v myle from Bethelem , and v from Jherusalem , in to the
whiche howse of zacharie , aftyr the salutacon of the Aungell , and the
conception of Crist , The most blyssyd virgine goyyng in to the
Mowntaynes with grett spede , entred and salutyd Elisabeth , and mad
thys Swete song , Magnificat anima mea Dmn . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,51.212

And ther by was sumtyme a Chirche that nowe ys fallyn , wher@ @ys the
place wher zacharie fulfyllyd with the holy gost prophesyd , Saying ,
Benedictus Dns Deus Israll , And wher he askyd pene and ynke , and
wrotte hys sonne , Johes est nomen eius . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,51.213

Thanne next aftyr we come to the howse of Symyonis Justi et Timorati ,
the whiche recevyd Criste in hys Armys , whanne he was presentyd in to
the temple , seying , Nunc Dimittis Dne svu. tuu.
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,51.214

In ower way home wardys , ij myle from Jherusalem , we com vnto a
cloyster of Grekkys monkes , whose chyrche ys of the holy crosse , etc.
, TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,51.215

ther as the hye auter of the same Chirche stondeth , ys the place wher
the tree grew that the holy Crosse was made . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,51.216

And ther by ys Salomons archezard , whyche ys yett a Dilectable place .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,51.217

<P_52>

Thus we cam to Jherusalem , the same Satyrday , at nyght ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.219

and went to Mounte Syon , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.220

and ther refresshed vs TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.221

and rested vs for that nyght . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.222

SatyrDay , at aftyr_noon , we visited places a_bowyt Jherusalem ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.223

it was Seynt Jamys Day . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.224

ffyrst we came to an old brokyn Castyll , where the Jewys wher gadererd
to_gedyr of a counsell at the tyme of the passion of our lord ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.225

and Judas went to counsell with them to the same place .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.226

And it ys callyd now malu. consilium . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.227

ffrom thense we cam to Acheldemake , other wyse Callyd terra Sancta ,
that was bowght with the xxx pece of silver that our Savyor was sold for
by Judas . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.228

And ther ys made a grett vowght , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.229

and ther be vij holes a_bowght to cast the Dede Cristen mens bodyes in
to the seyd vowght or cave , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.230

it was so ordeynyd and Dressyd by Seynt Elyn .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.231

Ther by in the Rokkes be certayne Caves , wher the Apostolys hid them in
the tyme of the passion of our lorde . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.232

Item , not farr from thense we cam to a fayer tree , w=t= a grett hepe
of stonys a_bowght it , wher Ysac , the pphete , was Sawen in sounder by
the myddys w=t= a sawe of Tree . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.233

Ther ys also by Ortus Olerum , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.234

ther ronnys watyr properly in that Garden . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.235

Than we cam to Natatorium Siloe , wher our Savyor gaff sight to the born
blynde man , a_noyntyng hys eyne with Claye and Spetyll , Saying , Vade
, et lava in Natatoria Siloe Qui abiit et venit videns .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,52.236

<P_53>

And aftyr that we cam to a ffountayne wher our blyssyd lady was wont
many tymes to wasse hyr clothes , and the clothes of ower blyssyd Savyor
in hys chyldhod . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.238

ffrom thense we cam to the Chirche of Seynt Jamys the lesse , in a Cave
wher he hyd hym the tyme of the passion of our lord , a_vowyng that he
wold never ete mete vnto the tyme he sawe hys Mayster Criste rysen vpon
Estern Day . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.239

Erly in the mornyng ower blyssyd Savyr com to hym ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.240

and browght hym mete , saying , Jamis , now ete ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.241

for I am rysyn . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.242

Item , ther by ys the Sepulcre of zacharie , the prophete .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.243

And from thense we com to the place wher sumtyme stode the Towne of
Gethsemany , which is rehersyd in scriptur . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.244

Thes places thus visited , we retorynd homwarde a_geyne , be the Temple
of Salomon , whiche ys callyd Porticus Salomonis .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.245

And ther we myght se grett nowber of lampes brennyng in the seyd Temple
at the Sone_sett . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.246

And so we went to our hospitall TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.247

and restyd vs for that nyght . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.248

The same Sonday that Seynt Annys Day , a_fore noon , we went to Bethanye
, whiche ys be_yon the Mownte of Olyvete ij myle from Jherusalen .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.249

Ther we Entred in to an Old Chirche , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.250

And Sawe the grave or monument in the which Lazarus lay iiij Days Dede ,
as the Gospell sheweth , etc. , whom our Savyor Crist reysyd from the
Deth to lyff . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.251

Not far from theinse ys the house of Simonis leprosi , whiche preyd ower
lorde to ete with hym . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.252

And ther as he Satt , Mary mawdleyn browght Alabauster of an onyment ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,53.253

and satt at <P_54> our lordys fete , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.254

and with_owt seassyng , whesshed hys fete with hyr terys , wppyng them
with hyr her of hyr hede , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.255

And a_noyntyd them with hyr precious onyment .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.256

And ther our Savyr for_gaff the synnys of the sayd mary Mawdleyn .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.257

Thys Symon leprosus that harborowed our lorde And suche of hys Disciplis
as war Cristeyned , was aftyr warde made Bushoppe ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.258

And he was namyd Julian . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.259

And thys ys he that men call vpon for good harborowe .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.260

Ther by ys the howse of the Martha , our lordes hostes , And the howse
of the seyd Mary Mawdleyn , whyche we visited .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.261

And thys Day we retornyd to Bethphage , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.262

ffrom thens our Savyr Crist Sent ij Discipulis to Jherusalem , vpon
palmys sonnday , ffor an asse , seying , Ite in Castellum qd contra vos
est . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.263

Thanne we made an ende of all our pylgrymags , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.264

And retornyd to Mownte Syon to Dyner , wher we had a ryght honeste Dyner
of the wardens Costes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.265

And at myddys of the Dyner he mad a Ryght holy and a ffamous sermon
vn_ta vs . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.266

And restyd vs ther all that Day . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.267

And as we went to Bethanye , ffyrst we come to the howse of Judas ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.268

And a_for hys Doore ys the place wher he hanged hym self , et Crepuit
medius . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.269

And ther we se the Dede see perfyghly , wher the v Citees stod that
Sanke for synne . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,54.270

Munday , that was Septem Dormiencium , we com wery erly in <P_55> the
mornyng to Mounte Syon , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.271

And ther we hard messe TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.272

and brake ower fasts . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.273

Thanne we taryed long for our assys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.274

And thanne ther we toke humnle our leve of the holy places , And of the
most blyssyd Citee of Jherusalen . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.275

And thus with ryghth light and Joyous hertis , by warnyng of our Dragman
and guydes , The same Day , at viiij of the cloke in the mornyng , We
found all redy , the lordes , Turkis , and Sarrasyns , Mamolukes , as
well of Jherusalem , as of Rama . And other with ther folkes , to a
grett nowmber of horsemen , to condyte vs to Jaffe .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.276

And so at the mownte Syon , we toke our assys ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.277

And Rode forthe at the seyd tyme . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.278

And be_syd the Castell of Emaus we rest vs , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.279

and refresshyd vs with suche wyne and mete as we browght with vs from
Jherusalem , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.280

and a_bowght vj of the cloke at aftyr_noon , we com to Rama ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.281

and lityd ther at the hospitall , beyng ryght wery of that Jorney , ffor
the bestys that we rode vpon , ryght weke and ryght simple , and evyll
trymed to Jorney with wher we lay all that nyght .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.282

Tewysday , abowzt viij or ix of the cloke , we toke our assis
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.283

and cam towardes Jaffe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.284

the Turkes constreynyd vs to tary by the space of iiij howers ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.285

and ther we lay in the sande , and the sonne bornyng exedyngly hoote ,
whiche was gretly to our payne . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.286

And ther we war ryght evyll intreated by the Turkes and Sarrasyns many
weys , and in grett fere , which war to long to wryte .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.287

The same nyght , with grett Diffyculty and moche paciens , we war
Delived a borde into ower Shippe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.288

And ther we lay at ankyr , wedynesday and thursday , all Day .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,55.289

<P_56>

The cause was ther com many infideels and bowght many sondry thyngs in
our shippe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.291

The fryday , the last Day of Julii , a_bowght v of the cloke in the
mornyng , we made sayle to_warde Cypress homward with ryght grett joy
and solas . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.292

Tewysday , the iiij=th= Day of August , we come to Cypres ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.293

And ther we lay at the Towne , whiche ys callyd Salyns , by the space of
iiij wekes and on Day . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.294

And whyles we lay in Cypres , many of our pylgrymes went to see the
Cityes in the Countre ther a_bowght , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.295

And som visited pylgrymages . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.296

A_bowt iij myle from ffamagust ys an old Castell wherin Seynt Katherine
was borne , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.297

and she was the kyngs Dowghter of that yle callyd Costus , as it is
shewyd ther as@ @well by wrytyng as be reportt ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.298

She was martyred in the Citye of Alexandre , And born by the handys of
Aungellys to the Mownte Synay , And ther buryed by the seyd Aungellys .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.299

Also the xxv Day of August , that was Seynt Bertilmews Day , the morne
aftyr Seynt Bertilmew , Decessyd Roberd Crosse , of London , Pewterer ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.300

and was buryed in the Chirche yard in Salyns .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.301

And xxvij Day of August , Decessyd Syr Thomas Toppe , a prest of the
west countre , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.302

And was Cast over the borde , As was many moo whos soules god assoyle .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.303

And thanne ther Remayned in the shippe iiij Englyssh prestis moo .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,56.304

<P_57>

Wedynsday , the xxvj Day of August , a_bowt x of the cloke in the
morning , we made Sayle to_wardys the Rodes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.306

Neverthelesse the wynd was soo streyneable a_yens vs , that we made nott
spede , but sumtyme sealyd bakward , sumtyme forward , by the Coste of
Cipres . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.307

And thus fonde the wynde a_gens vs or ellys such calmys that we sped but
lytyll of our waye . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.308

And aftyr that , nott in shorte tyme , we com ny the mountaynes of
Turkey , in asia . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.309

And sone aftyr we passyd by Mirrea , wher Seynt Nicholas was Bisshope .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.310

And thus we Sayled thorow the Gulf of Seynt Elene , otherwyse callyd the
Gulf of Satalie , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.311

And com a_long the Costes of Turkey , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.312

And ther we saw the Mowntaynes of Macedonye . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.313

And in the Gulfe aforseyd , Seynt Elyne kest on of the holy nayles in to
the see to sease the tempest . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.314

ffryday , the xxv Day of Septembre , we had siygte of the yle of the
rodes TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.315

Sonnday a_for the ffeste of Seynt Michell , we come to the Rodes to
Dyner , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.316

And ther myself lay seke by the space of vj wekys .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.317

Off our cher and well entretyng at the rodys , And what Comfort was Don
to vs , and Speciall that was seke and desesyd , by Sir Thomas Newporte
, And Mayster William Weston , And Syr John Bowthe , and aftyrward by
other Jentylmen of Englond ther , it war to long to wrytte .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,57.318

Att the Rodes , In the Chyrche of Seynt John , ys many grett <P_58>
reliques , The fynger of Seynt John , that he showyd ower savor with
whanne he seyd Ecce Agnus Dei . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.319

In the place of the lordes mysteres , ys a fayer Chapell in the whiche
Chapell ther ys on of the thornys that our lorde was corwnyd with
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.320

and every good fryday from ix of the Cloke to it be x. it burgyns
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.321

and waxe grene , etc. TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.322

The morne aftyr Seynt Martyn , that was the xij Day of nomevbr , at j of
the clok att aftyr_noon , I toke shippyng at the Rodis ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.323

it was a shippe of the rodys , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.324

And fryday , the xiij Day nomebr , we com to an ylonde callyd Calamo , C
myle from the Rodes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.325

And it pteyneth to the Rodes . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.326

Sonnday , the xv Day of Novembre , we came to an yland callyd Meleo ,
vndernethe the Domynycon of the Venescians , iij_<paren>_C_<$$paren>
myle from the Rodes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.327

in thys yle ys made grett plente of mylstonys , And brunstonys , And
also grett plente of Partyrege and veri good wynes .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.328

The wynde being ev streyght and contrarius a_gens vs , that we myght
nott make no Sayle in Cristmasse wek . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.329

The same Day that was the xxviij Day of December , at ij or iij of the
cloke , at myd_nyght we made Sayle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.330

Tewysday , Seynt Thomas Day , Erly in the morning , we Discoverd nott
fare from vs iij grett shippys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.331

And thanne we war in Grett fere , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.332

ffor we wende they had be Turkes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.333

but they {SIC:ther} war not soo . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.334

They war Cristen Men , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.335

we made to_wardes them , for to have Spoke with som of them to know what
Tydyngs they browgh owt of ffraunce , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.336

and Sodenly on of the shippes Shott a goone at vs ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.337

And hit ower Shippe TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,58.338

and <P_59> Stoke A Sonnder on of our grett Cables ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.339

god be thankyd no man was harmyd nor hurte . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.340

Thanne he made vs to mayne , that ys to sey stryk Downe ower sayles .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.341

The same Seynt Thomas Day the Martir , we traversed the see , And the
morow aftyr . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.342

And also Newyers Day , sumtyme bakward , sumtyme forward , both Day and
nyght , in gret fer be the coste of Turkey . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.343

Satyrday , the secun@ @day of Januarii , the wynde made well for vs in
ower way . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.344

Sunday , the wynde began to Ryse in the north ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.345

And munday all Day and all nyght it blew owtrageowsly .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.346

Indured a wondred grett Tempest , As well by excedyng wonders blowing of
wynde as by contynuall lythynyng . So that the capteyne , and the
patron , And all the knyghtys of the Rode , whych war ther to the
nowmbyr of viiij , wendyd we shulde a be lost .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.347

The same nyght , a_bowte x of the Cloke , we all promysyd pylgrymage to
ower lady of grace of Missena in Cecylia . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.348

And every man Delivered hys offeryng the same tyme to the patrone of the
shippe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.349

Tewysday , the v Day of Januarii , we Seyleyd vp and Down in the Gulff
of Venys , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.350

ffor the wynde was so straygth a_yens vs that we myght not Kepte the
Ryght wey in no wyse , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.351

And sore we war offeryd to be dryff in to Barbaria , where Dwellyth ower
Mortall Enimys , As Turkes , Mamnoluks , Sarrazyns , and other infidelys
. TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,59.352

<P_60>

Wednesday , the vj Day of Januarii , the wynde Rose a_yens vs , with
grett tempest , thonnderyng and lyghtnyng all Day and all nyght , So
owtrageowsly , that we know not wher wee war .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,60.354

And thanne we putt vs all in the Mercy of god , beyng in grett peyne and
woo both Day and nyght , voowyng sum of vs pylgrylmages to our blyssyd
lady of Lorett in ytalya , and sum to our lady of Walsyngham , and sum
to Seynt Thomas of Cannterbury , we that war englysshmen .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,60.355

The Patrone of our Shippe garderd mony of vs for to make our offeryng to
the iij kyngs of coloney , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,60.356

And as sone as we cam on londe we shuld have Messe in the honor of them
. TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,60.357

And in thys fforsayd long Contynual tempeste and storme we war Dreff
bakward iij_C myle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,60.358

Thursday , the vij Day of Januarii , the Maryoners made a grett Showte ,
seyng to vs that they sey londe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,60.359

Thanne they war glade , and we also . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,60.360

And the same nyght we came to the Porte callyd Shefelanya , vnder the
Venycians , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,60.361

And whanne we shuld a take the Porte Sodenly fell down and Deyde the
Pylate of our shippe , which we call lodysman .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,60.362

And thanne we had a grett lose , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,60.363

ffor he was a good honest person , on whose Soule Jhu have mercy .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,60.364

In thys yle ys good wynes and grett Chepe , Plente of lambes , <P_61>
Gotys , motons , and also hennys , and capons .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.365

In all thes for_sayd yles ys growing wondyr myche licores , tyme , Sage
, ffyggs , Oryges , Pomgarnetts , smale Reysyns , which we call Reyse of
Corans . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.366

Whanne we lay in thys yle oftyntymes we went on londe
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.367

and hard messe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.368

and in the yle callyd Shefelaria Dwellyd Hercules ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.369

thys yle ys vj_C myle ffrom the Rodes . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.370

Also a man that was born in thys yle told vs that they had no Rayne by
the space of x months , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.371

they sow ther whete with_owt Rayne , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.372

Croppyd them with_owt Rayne , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.373

And made ther wyne with_owt Rayne . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.374

In thys yle we lay xxv Days . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.375

Sonnday , the last Day of Januarij , we made sayle to_wards Missena , in
Cecyll , with lesse wynd , and munday all Day .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.376

Tewysday , the ij Day of Februarii , that was the Purificacon of our
lady , the wynde made well for us . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.377

Wedynsday , Seynt Blasies Day , the wynde Rose in the Suthweste ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.378

so contynued all Day And all nyght , and thursday all Day and all nyght
, that it put vs many tymes on Joypert of our lyff ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.379

and sped no thyng of our Ryght weye . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.380

ffriday , the v Day of ffebruarii , proched nye the Cyte of Corfew ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.381

but the wynde enforcyd So myche and so strayte a_yens vs , that our
govenor Saw it was not possible for to wyne the porte of the Cite of
Corfewe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,61.382

Satyrday , that was the Vedasti et Amandi , we passyd by the <P_62>
forseyd havyn , with grett wynde , thunderyng , and lytenyng owt of
mesur , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.383

and so contynued a mervelows grett tempeste And storme ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.384

the same day , lx or lxxx myle from Corfew , we gate an haven a_mong the
Rokkes and monteyns , in grett parell , whiche havyn ys callyd Swafane ,
in Turkey , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.385

And whanne we war inne we cowd nott get owt nor kast our Anker for the
grett Depes that was ther in shorte tyme . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.386

They cowd not fynd no londe at iiij_score fadom ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.387

Also the grett tempest contynowd so owtrageowsly , that we war never in
such a fer in all our lyff . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.388

And at the last they kest ij grett ankers to_gedyer ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.389

And as god wold they toke hold . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.390

And thanne the Maryoners brake the ordinar takele of the shippe , the
somer Castyll Chambers , Dores , wyndows , and all maner of bordys ,
that the wynde myght have hys cowse att more large .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.391

And thanne we all promyseyd pylgrymages to our blyssyd lady of Lorett ,
in Italee . The Maryorners seyng to vs they never see nor hard of such
a wynde in all their lyffs . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.392

And it contynowed the same Satyrday tyll it was myd_nyght .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.393

And in the same yle callyd Swafana , in Turkey , we a_bode v days ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.394

and Dyverse knyghes {COM:sic} of the Rodes went on londe with ther hande
gonnes TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.395

and slew horse for ther hawkes that war in the sheppe ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.396

ther war in the shippe j_C hawkes and moo . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,62.397

Thursday , the xij Day of ffebruarij , a_bowte x or xj of the <P_63>
clok at night , we made Sayle bakward j_C myle to_wards Corfew , whyche
we passyd by a_fore , be cause our vitales war ner spent .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.398

ffryday , the xij Day of ffebruarij , we cam in to the havyn of Corfewe
, whiche Cite and yle ys vnder the Venycianns .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.399

Satyrday we com on lande , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.400

yt ys a good Citie , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.401

there {SIC:the} ys also a castyll , and a stronge stonding vpon a Roke
of Stone in the see , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.402

and it ys excedeynly full of peple , and Specially of Jewys .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.403

The same Satyrday ther Justyng and ronnyng with sperys . Also Sonnday
And Munday , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.404

And was shewyd ther many Dyverse fetis of werre .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.405

In thys Citye ther ys plente of brede and wyne , and good cher , And
schase of fysshe many tymes . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.406

Ther ys also the fayerest yle of comodites that {SIC:than} ony man may
see , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.407

And the felde full of whete benys , wynes , and specially of Olyff trees
, TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.408

we went of on pylgrymage to our blyssyd lady , a myle from the Citye ,
the fayerst grounde that ever I saw in my lyff .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.409

Satirday a_for the fyrst Sonnday of clene lent , the xx Day of
ffebruarii , we went in to the castell a_mong the Jewys ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.410

it was ther Sabaday . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.411

The same Day ther was a Jewe maryed , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.412

and aftyr Dyner I saw them Danse in a grett Chamber , bothe men and
women , in Ryche apparell , Damaske , Saten , velvett , weryng a_bowte
ther nekkys chenys of fine gold with many Rynggs on ther fyngers with
stonys of grett pryce , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.413

She that was Maryed , she had vpon her hede a crowne of gold .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.414

On of the Jewys be_gan to syng , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.415

And than all the women Daunsed to_gedyr by the space of an ower .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,63.416

<P_64>

And aftyr that ther cam in yong men , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.418

on of them sang , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.419

Thanne the men and women Dauncyd to_geder . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.420

Aftyr that they callyd in ther mynstrellys , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.421

and so the Dauncyd iij long howrys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.422

They be fayer women , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.423

wonderful werkes in Sylk and gold and many goodly thyngs they have to
sell in thys cetye , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.424

we a_bode ther by the space of xiiij Dayes . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.425

ffriday , the xxvj Day of ffebruaij , at iiij of cloke at aftyr_none ,
we made Sayle towardes Myssena , Cecyll . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.426

Satyrday , the xxvij Day of ffebruarij , we lay xx from Corfew ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.427

for the wynde was so a_yens vs , we myght pass no father {COM:sic} .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.428

Ther ys a wonder fayer Chapell of o=r= lady , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.429

and many grett myracles ys shewyd ther , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.430

ther we bood vij Dayes . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.431

ffryday , the v Day of Marche , at x of the cloke in the mornyng , we
made Sayle with scase wynde , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.432

and pasyd Corfew ageyne , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.433

and so in to the Gulf of Venyse . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.434

Satyrday and Sonnday the wynde made well for vs .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.435

Munday , the viij Day of Marche , we came to Calabria , perteynyng to
the kyngdom of Napolis , now vnder the kynge of Spayne .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.436

Ther we lay by cause the wynd was a_yens vs . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.437

Ther ys grett plente of whete , and many strong Castylls stondyng ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.438

a wonderfull hygh {TEXT:hyth} Rokke of Stone , I never saw suche in all
my lyff . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,64.439

Also ovyr the watyr on the other syd , which ys Distant a Calabria xxiij
myle , ys the yle of Cecyll in the whyche yle by <P_65> the see syde ys
Mons Ethneus whiche brennyth both Day and nyght ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.440

ye may se the smoke come owt of the Toppe of it .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.441

Ther cam owt of thys hyll fyer ronnyng Downe like as it had be a flode
of watyr in to the Citye , which stondyth by the see syd ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.442

and brent many howses , And also Shippes that war in the havyn ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.443

And put the City , whiche ys callyd Cathanea , in grett Juberte , wher
the holy body of Seynt Agathe lyes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.444

And by the myracle of the veyle of Seynt Agathe the Citee a_for rehersyd
was preservyd . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.445

Thursday , the xj Day of Marche , we went on londe , in Calabria ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.446

hyred horses and mules , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.447

and rode by the space of xx TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.448

and cam to a fayer towne callyd Regio , that stondyth on the watyr syde
, TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.449

and ther we lay all nyght . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.450

ffryday , the Day of Seynt Gregori , we toke a barke at the forseyd
Regio , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.451

and sayle over the watir to Myssena , whiche ys xij myle ov .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.452

And ther we abode v Dayes . TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.453

Thys Missena , in Cecyll , ys a fayer Cite and well wallyd w=t= many
fayer towers and Divse castell , the fayerst havyn for Shippes that ev I
saw , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.454

ther ys also plente of all maner of thyngs that ys necessari for man ,
except clothe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.455

that ys very Dere ther , TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.456

ffor englyssh men brynge it thedyr by watyr owt of and a Enlong ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.457

it ys a grett long wey , iij_m=l= myle and iij_C by watir .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-H,65.458

