<BEGIN_tunstall-1519-e1-h>

<P_1.1,134>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LI_D=R=._CUTHBERT_TUNSTALL_TO_KING_HENRY_THE_EIGHTH_CONCERNING_MAXIMILIAN'S_PROPOSAL_TO_RESIGN_THE_EMPIRE_TO_HENRY_A._D._1517>

Plese it your Grace to undirstond that besids al other maters contenyd
in our Lettres jointly written at thys tyme to your Grace , oon is in
them untowchyd by cause I wold not make my clerke privey to the secretie
theroff , which yff I shold not to longe have taried the last curror
save thys , I shold then have written . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,134.4

But by cause then we wer sent for to come to th'@ @emperor commissionars
, and our Lettres wer redy written contenyng a longe discurse and
declaration off many mattres shewyd by the Cardinal Sedunensis which was
necessary your Grace shold know in al haste , we therfor not knowinge
how long th'@ @emperors commissioners shuld lete us , dispached that
poste , reservyng thys to <P_1.1,135> be written by my selff at laysor
which then I had not . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,135.5

The thinge is this . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,135.6

The said Cardinal Sedunens. in makinge his long discurse hertofor by us
written , emongest other things shewyd me that oon off the secrete
maters tretyd betuyx th'@ @emperor and your Grace was that th'@ @emperor
entendeth to resigne the Empire unto your Grace , and to obten your
Election by hys procurement and sollicitinge off the Electors therunto ,
which th'@ @emperor entendyd to do for the avancement of your honor and
the love which he berith you . Which mater when I herd I lete as I
nothynge had marked it , and lete hym passe on in tellynge off his tale
which endyd in thys , that thys thynge shold be oon off the secrete
maters treatid by hym betwix th'@ @Emperor and your Grace .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,135.7

Sire besids that I am your Graces subject and servant , and sworn off
your counsel thoff unworthi , your Grace hath also shewyd so largely
your bounteousnes and liberalite anenst me that I ougth mo to desire the
incresement and augmentation off your Graces honor then any servaunt to
your Grace belonginge . Which I assure your Grace I doo tendre as moch
to my symple powar as any subjiet in your realme
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,135.8

or ellys it wer pitie I shuld lyve . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,135.9

And lykwyse yff ther@ @be any thynge soundinge to your Grace's damage or
hynderaunce iff I shold concele it ; ther coud no pain be to great for
me . Wherfor I most humbly besech your Grace to accepte graciously and
favorably the <P_1.1,136> thinge which now I write both for the ardent
love which I bere unto your Grace , and for the accomplishment off my
dutie . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,136.10

Surly yff it lyke your Grace I thinke the said Election off your Grace
to th'@ @empire can@ @not be brogth aboute by no means , for diverse
considerations . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,136.11

Fyrste that lyke as in the Election off the Pope a certain forme is to
be kept which not observed makith the Election to be voyd , so off
auncient tyme and ordinaunce off the universale churche a certain forme
must be observyd in chesinge off th'@ @emperor , which ometted , the
Election is voyde . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,136.12

Oon of the cheffe points in the Election off th'@ @emperor is that he
which shal be electyd must be off Germanie subgiet to the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} Empire ; wheras your Grace is not ,
nor never sithen the Cristen faith the Kings of Englond wer subgiet to
th'@ @empire . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,136.13

But the Crown of Englond is an Empire off hitselff mych bettyr then now
the Empire of Rome : for which cause your Grace werith a close Crown .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,136.14

And therfor yff ye wer chosen , sens your Grace is not off th'@ @empire
the Election wer voide . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,136.15

And iff your Grace shuld accepte the said Election therby ye must
confesse your realme to be under subjection off th'@ @empire to the
perpetual prejudice off your successor , TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,136.16

or ells the said Election wer voyde as made off a person not eligible .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,136.17

Besids that the forme off the Election contenyth that first he must be
Kinge of Romains TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,136.18

and the coronation at Rome makith hym have the name off the Emperor ,
wher befor he is callyd but <P_1.1,137> Kinge off Romains .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,137.19

Over thys yff th'@ @emperor which nou is remain stil Kyng off Romains as
I understond he entendeth to doo , then yff your Grace wer eligible and
undir th'@ @empire , yet ye coud not be chosen Emperor , by cause ye
were never Kinge of Romains . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,137.20

And also he remanyng ye could not be chosen Kynge off Romains , bycause
the Kingdome is not voyde , and noon can be chosen therto but when it is
voyd edyr by dethe or ellys when the Kinge off Romains is crownyd
Emperor , wherby undir hym may be chosen a Kinge off Romains .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,137.21

The said Empire also <paren> as it is now establyshed <$$paren> may not
have two Emperors at oon tyme , but oon as cheff , and the odyr as here
apparaunt , which is callyd the Kinge off Romains , wher he must begyn
that wyl come to th'@ @empire . For which considerations I repute it
impossible <paren> the laws theron made stondinge <$$paren> that your
Grace may be chosen . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,137.22

And I am afferd lest the said offer beinge so speciouse at the first
heringe was oonly made to get therby sum money of your Grace : Which
they move to have kepte secret lest the publyshynge off it shuld make
their intent to be knowen , and frustrate them off thir purpose befor
they coud acheve it . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,137.23

Surly yff it lyke your Grace my simple advise is that your Grace
interpretinge al to the beste , and the said offer to be made rather off
th'@ @emperors good mynd and grete benivolence then for odyr purpose ,
yff the mater shal herafter be set forward or <P_1.1,138> movyd to gyff
most exquisite thanks to th'@ @emperor for his good mynd therin : which
peraventure may procede off good benivolence , and so to withdraw your
fote bake out off that mater , and to make good interpretation opon so
grete an offer , which shal be most honorable .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,138.24

Thus in thys mater I have shewed my simple advise and mynd ; which , I
thougth , my dutie savyd , I could not kepe close from your Grace ,
wherin I trust such as be lernyd in the law far bettyr then I wil
afferme the same if it lyke your Grace to make them privey to it .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,138.25

And iff I doo erre , as I suppose I do not , I submitte to reformation
besechinge your Grace graciously to accepte my trew mynde and rygth
meanyng in thys mater , which I have touchyd for my discharge lest
heraffter it mygth be imputyd to me not to have shewyd it in tyme when
it came first to my knowledge . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,138.26

In al other maters at thys tyme we have written at large how her we find
not al persons inclyned as it was thougth they shold be .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,138.27

And thus Almyghty Jhu~ preserve your Grace to his plesur with encrese
off mych honor . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,138.28

From Machlyn TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,138.29

the xij=th=. day of Februarie TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,138.30

By your most humble subjecte and servaunt Cuthbert Tunstal .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-H,1.1,138.31

