<BEGIN_turner-1568-e1-h>

<P_B2R>

<heading>

OF NEW AND OLDE WINE , AND OF IT THAT IS OF A MEANE AGE THAT IS NEYTHER
TO BE CALLED NEW NOR OLDE . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2R.4

<$$heading>

There are twoo sortes of newe Wine , one that is called <font> Must
<$$font> , and that is but latelye made or pressed out of the grapes ,
and is swete in tast , troubled in color , and thick in substaunce ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2R.6

and this sort is properlye called in Latin Mustum .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2R.7

And another sorte is called newe Wine , which hath left his sweetnes &
gotten clearenesse , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2R.8

but yet it is not long since it was made . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2R.9

<font> Galen <$$font> in his booke of making of medicines , seemeth to
call all Wine that is not fully fiue yeares olde , newe wine , and it
that is past fiue yeares vntill it bee ten yeare olde , wine of middle
age , and it that is aboue the age of ten yeares , olde wine ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2R.10

and <font> Dioscorides <$$font> writing of the nature of Wines in his
fifte booke , calleth it Wine of middle age , that is more than seauen
yeare olde , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2R.11

and <font> Plinie <$$font> writeth , <P_B2V> not without an error of the
scribe <paren> as I gesse <$$paren> that Falerno media aetas incipit ab
anno decimo quinto . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2V.12

But <font> Valeriola <$$font> a man otherwise wel learned , leauing the
authoritie of <font> Galen <$$font> , calleth it newe Wine that keepeth
still his Mustish and swete taste , and as yet hath gotten no
sharpenesse , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2V.13

and he calleth that Wine of middle age , that is no more sweete , but is
cleare , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2V.14

and sayth that he and his countrimen take the most notable Wines of
Fraunce for olde Wines , before they bee fullye one yeare olde .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2V.15

And this doth he holde enarrationum medicinalium , lib. sexto ,
enarratione septima . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2V.16

In the same place he reproueth <font> Aloisius Mundella <$$font> for
saying that wine sixe yeares olde was newe wine after <font> Galen
<$$font> , who although fayled in exceeding one yeare beyond <font>
Galens <$$font> numbring of the yeares of new wine , yet he went a great
deale farther from <font> Galens <$$font> minde than <font> Mundella
<$$font> did . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2V.17

<font> Must <$$font> when it is made euen of ripe grapes , is but hote
in the first degree , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B2V.18

for <font> Galen <$$font> in his boke of the powers of simple medicines
, hath these wordes <P_B3R> following . Vinum est ex secundo ordine
excalfacientium . Sed quod admodum vetus est ex tertio , sicut quod
mustum vocant ex primo , caliditatis eius proportioni respondet siccitas
, TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3R.19

that is , wine <paren> that is to say of midle age <$$paren> is hote in
the seconde degree , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3R.20

but it that is verie olde is hote in the third degree , as it that is
called <font> Must <$$font> is hote in the first degree .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3R.21

By these words their errour is openly confuted , that holde that euery
wine is hote in the second degree . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3R.22

<font> Galen <$$font> writeth truly that the Grapes that grow in verie
colde places , neuer come to ripenesse , neither to sweetenesse ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3R.23

but when other wines are made , they are sweete & pleasant ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3R.24

but such Wines made of such grapes , are very soure and therfore colde ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3R.25

the words of <font> Galen <$$font> are these written in y=e= second
booke de alimentoru~ facultatibus . In regionibus frigidis ne vuae
{COM:sic} quidem ipsae exquisite maturari queunt , nedum passaru~
quaepiam , ob id quod resinam vinis immittant , ne acescant celeriter .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3R.26

That is . In colde countries neither rasins come to anye perfite
ripenesse <P_B3V> neither the grapes , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.27

and therefore men put rosin into the wines , that they shoulde not
shortly waxe soure . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.28

And in the booke of good and ill iuice he sayth thus .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.29

The Wines that are to olde or to newe , are to be eschued .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.30

For the olde doe heate to much , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.31

and the new Wines as long as they are greene , or very new , heat
nothing at all , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.32

so farre are they fro~ helping of men to digest their meates , that they
are very hardly digested themselues , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.33

and oft times they hang and abide still in a mans stomacke , euen as
water . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.34

<font> Dioscorides <$$font> also who wrote before <font> Galen <$$font>
, sayth lib. 5. The sinewes are hurte with olde wine , and other
instruments of the senses : TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.35

yet for all that it is sweeter in taste than the other wines are .
Wherfore a man ought to beware of it , that feeleth the weakenesse of
anye inwarde part . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.36

Yet when a man is in good helth a little being delayed with water , it
maye be taken without harme . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.37

Newe Wine puffeth a man vp , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.38

and filleth him with winde , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.39

and is hard of digestion TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.40

and breedeth heauie dreames , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B3V.41

and maketh a man <P_B4R> to make water . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4R.42

It that is of a meane age betweene both , is free from the harmes that
maye come of both , wherefore it is commonlye vsed both of hole and
sicke men with their meate . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4R.43

<font> Aristotel <$$font> in his fourth booke Meteorologicorum the .x.
Chapter writeth . That new Wine hath more earth or earthlynesse in it
than olde hath , wherevpon a man maye gather plainlye that new Wine is
verye ill for them that are disposed to the stone ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4R.44

for it hauing so much thicke earthlinesse in it , giueth matter whereof
the stone may be made to hote kidneys , that the heate of kidneis may so
bake it into stones as the heate of the Bricke kill turneth the claye
into Bricke or tile stones . Wherefore I must needes dispraise the
maner of our delicate Englishmen and women that drinke the Rhennish wine
only for pleasure , whilst it is as yet as thicke as puddle or
horsepisse . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4R.45

For beside that it giueth matter to make the stone of , I haue knowen
three within the space of one yere in high Germany that toke the falling
sicknesse by drinking much newe Rhenishe <P_B4V> wine ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4V.46

and they died all three , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4V.47

and coulde not be holpen with phisicke , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4V.48

one of them sodenly lost his spech TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4V.49

and died within an houre after that he sickened ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4V.50

and the other two liued but a day or two after , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4V.51

and died miserably with great paine , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4V.52

and had grieuous fittes of the falling sicknesse at sundry times .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4V.53

I haue marked that within these dosen yeares there haue bene more sicke
in the falling_sicknesse , than had wont to be before . The cause
wherof I iudge to be , that mens wiues , nurses , and children drinke
more Rhennishe <font> Must <$$font> , and other sweete wines vnfined ,
brought out also of other cou~tries as wel as out of Germany : tha~ they
were wont to drinke before in times past . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4V.54

<font> AEtius <$$font> a diligent follower of <font> Galen <$$font> ,
and a faithfull gatherer of the writinges of olde Greke writers of
phisick , saith that wine <paren> meaning thereby wine of middle age
that is neither verie new , neither verye olde <$$paren> is hote in the
second degree , and that verye olde is hote in the thirde degree , as
very new <font> Must <$$font> is hote in the first degree .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B4V.55

Ye maye see here once againe , that they <P_B5R> are more bolde than
learned and wise , that holde that all Wines are hote in the second
degree . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B5R.56

Some peraduenture will aske whether there is any kinde of newe Wine that
may serue for anye vses , and may be dronken at any time or no ; To whom
I make this aunswere by the authoritie of <font> Galen <$$font> in his
booke of good and euill iuice , that ex recentibus vinis genus illud
du~taxat tuto bibitur , quod tenuis substantiae est , sicuti ex Italicis
Cauchanum & Albanu~. &c. quae sane tenuia , candida & aquosa existunt
. &c TURNER-1568-E1-H,B5R.57

That is . Amongst new wines only that kinde maye be safelye drunken ,
that is of a thin substaunce , as amongst Italian wines are <font>
Cauchanum <$$font> & <font> Albanum <$$font> . &c. which wines in dede
are thin , white , and waterish , and therfore are called Oligophora ,
that is , wines that can abide but small menging of water with them .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B5R.58

And as redishe yelow Wines bicause they are hote in working , they fill
the head by and by , so the other wines that are thin and waterish wines
, and gently binding are not only not noysome vnto the head ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B5R.59

but <P_B5V> oft times take awaye light head aches which come of humors
gathered togither in the stomache , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B5V.60

thus farre <font> Galen <$$font> . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B5V.61

Nowe some men that reade this booke , acknowledging the~selues to be my
scholers , peradue~ture would learne of me bicause I teach English men
in this English booke , what kindes of wines that are brought into
England , are of this sort . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B5V.62

I answere , that neither Sacke , Malmesey , Muscadell , neither Clared ,
French nor Gascone wine , though they be most vsed here in Englande at
this time , are such Wines as <font> Galen <$$font> speaketh of here ,
but Rhennish wine that is racket and cleare , and Rochell , and Sebes
and other small white Wines that are cleare from their groundes ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B5V.63

therefore to them that are disposed vnto the headache , amongst all new
Wines these aboue named small Wines are least hurtfull ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B5V.64

and maye be taken with lesse ieoperdie . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B5V.65

If anye contende that French , Clared and Gascone wine , and other wines
as strong as Gascone is , doe as little hurt to the head as these wines
doe : I aunswere that the <P_B6R> French , Clared and Gascone wines are
not thin and subtill , but strong , thicke and hote , and not as <font>
Galen <$$font> sayth aquosa that is , waterish . Wherfore if the
authoritie of <font> Galen <$$font> may take place , their opinion is
here openly confuted , which commend so much French , Clared and Gascone
Wine , and despise and condemne Rhennish and such like White wines .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B6R.66

The same men haue forbidden all their patientes that are disposed to the
stone , gout , and rewme , by name all Rhennish and white Wines ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B6R.67

and saye that white and Rhennish Wines make and engender the goute ,
holding that white and Rhennishe Wine driue so sore that they bring
matter to the kidneis and bladder , whereof the stone is engendred .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B6R.68

First I must reason against this vnreasonable reason more largely than
the argument of this booke , in some mens opinion , requireth , bicause
they haue holden this opinion so long and without authoritie or good
reason teach it so stiffelye still . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B6R.69

For the better discussing of this matter , it is needefull to tell what
things breede and <P_B6V> make the stone , and howe manye chiefe causes
there be of it , and whether thin and waterish wines be y=e= materiall
or efficient cause of the stone , or no cause of it at all , but a
preseruatiue from the stone . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B6V.70

Although the naturall disposition that a man hath of his father or
mother to the stone be a great and vnauoydable cause of the stone , yet
beside that , there are two common causes , of the which the one is the
materiall cause , and the other is the cause efficient , or working or
making cause , that maketh the stone , of y=e= matter that is disposed
to be a stone . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B6V.71

<font> Galen <$$font> in the third booke of norishmentes , writing of
cheese in few wordes sheweth both the materiall and efficient cause of
the stone . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B6V.72

Olde cheese , sayth he , is harder to digest and of worse iuice , and
therefore readier to breede the stone , Nam vbi succorum crassities cum
arde~ti calore iungitur , illic calculi generantur ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B6V.73

that is , wher@ @as there is grossenesse of iuices ioyned with a burning
heate , there are stones engendred . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B6V.74

<font> Galen <$$font> I graunt in his booke of good and ill iuices ,
writeth that the often <P_B7R> vse of such medicines that make thin and
cut grosse humors in pieces , maketh a mans bloud eyther whayish , or
Cholericke or Melancholike , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7R.75

for such kindes of Medicines doe not onely cut and make thin , but also
heate out of measure . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7R.76

Beholde and marke here that he speaketh not of Rhennishe and white wine
, but of vnmeasurablye hote medicines , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7R.77

and he sayth immediatlye after , ob idq~ solida membra exiccant , &
crassum humorem reddunt , quo in renibus assato , gignuntur calculi ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7R.78

that is . They drie vp the fast and sound members , and make the humor
grosse , whereof when as it is burned or rosted in the kidneyes , stones
are ingendred . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7R.79

Thus farre <font> Galen <$$font> . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7R.80

The same sentence and meaning hath <font> Galen <$$font> methodi medendi
.13. libro in these wordes , qui crassi succi cibis vescuntur , calculi
vitio vexantur . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7R.81

They that eate meates of grosse iuice , are grieued with the disease of
the stone . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7R.82

<font> Aetius <$$font> writeth that the causes of the stone are
continuall crudities or rawnesse , or vndigested humors wherof is
gathered togither <P_B7V> great plenty of vndigested and raw matter ,
when a burning riseth about the kidneys and bladder , which burneth them
and maketh them go togither in one , and maketh therof an hard stone .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7V.83

<font> Alexander Trallianus <$$font> intreating of the stone saith : Est
materialis calculorum causa humor crassus , efficiens autem ignea
caliditas , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7V.84

the materiall cause of the stone is a grosse humor ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7V.85

and the efficient cause is a fierie heate . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7V.86

Now by these authorities that I haue alleaged , it is cleare vnto all
them that can and will see that the matter or materiall cause of the
stone is a grosse or thicke humor , and that the worker or efficient
cause of the same is a great heate in or about the kidneyes or bladder .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7V.87

If that be graunted to be true , it followeth that those meates and
drinkes that are of grosser substance and hoter than others be , cause
and breede the stone rather than other meates and drinkes that are
thinner , finer and of a colder complexion , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B7V.88

but both French , Clared and Gascone Clared wine are of grosser and
thicker substaunce , <P_B8R> and hoter of complexion than white Rhennish
wine and white french wines be of . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B8R.89

Therfore they breede y=e= stone more than white Rhennish and whyte
French Wines doe . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B8R.90

The Rhenish wine that is co~monly drunken in Gentlemens houses and
Citizens houses is commonly a yere old at y=e= least before it be
drunken , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B8R.91

& therfore it is older than y=e= common Clared wine , which dureth not
commonlye aboue one yeare , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B8R.92

and if Rhennish wyne be drunken within the yeare , it is commonly racked
before it be drunken , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B8R.93

therfore for two causes it hath fewer dregges and lesse terrestritie or
grosse earthlynesse than the Clared wine hath , TURNER-1568-E1-H,B8R.94

and therfore breedeth the stone lesse than Clared wine that is commonly
drunke in gentlemens houses doth . TURNER-1568-E1-H,B8R.95

If I can proue this y=t= I haue sayde , and also that Clared wine is
hoter than white Rhennish and white French wines be , there is nothing
to let me but I may conclude without anye withstanding , that Clared or
red wines breede the stone more than white wines do . Which I will
assaye to bring to passe after thys maner following .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,B8R.96

<P_C6V>

<heading>

OF THE NATURE OF WYNES OF DIUERS AND SUNDRY COLORS OUT OF GALEN DE
METHODO MEDENDI , SEXTO & .12. TURNER-1568-E1-H,C6V.99

<$$heading>

In the sixt booke . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C6V.101

Whatsoeuer Wines be sweete , and also of a readish yelow color , all
such are sharpe or biting , and hote aboue measure .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C6V.102

In the .xij. booke . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C6V.103

To them that swoune by the reason of yellow gall that vexeth the mouth
of the stomache , a colde drinke is to be giuen vnto them ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C6V.104

yet for all that wine that is hote of nature , and doth further the
conueyance of iuices into the bodie , ought to be offred to al them that
are vexed with swounding , TURNER-1568-E1-H,C6V.105

for it is plainly our will , that the nourishment that is taken in ,
should be delt and conueyed <P_C7R> into the bodye , and that it shoulde
not tarie in the stomach , TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7R.106

but it is openly knowen that of wines they ought to be chosen that are
yelow in color , of a fine substance and olde , TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7R.107

and such must needes be of a good smell . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7R.108

To them that fall in a swounding by to much plentie of rawe humors ,
grosse thicke wines are noysome , TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7R.109

and waterye wines as vnprofitable are to be eschued .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7R.110

Therefore we must choose out those that are midle wines , which , as is
before sayd , are yellowe and white . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7R.111

But so manye wines as are the hotest of all , are bright yelow in color
, as is the wine called <font> Cecubum <$$font> in Italie .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7R.112

Of other kindes of wine they that are soure with astriction , and
meetelye white and thicke , are not fit for the conueyance or leading of
iuices into the bodie . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7R.113

But if they be olde inough , if ye haue no other , ye maye vse them ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7R.114

for all such when they are old are good for the stomach .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7R.115

Furthermore all wines that smell well and are redish yellow , so much as
is of their nature altogither , they trouble the heade <P_C7V> when a
man is vexed with both kindes of swounding , that is of it that commeth
of yellow gall , and also it that commeth of great plentie of rawe
humors falling into the mouth of the stomach , TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7V.116

and {COM:sic} there is no conuenient wine as is required , and thou art
needes compelled to vse some wine , thou must flie as I haue said before
, all soure astringent wines , and new wines , and thicke wines , and
chose waterish wines , and of them such as are olde ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7V.117

for such wines although they do not mightily heat , yet they are led or
caried lightly into the body , wherefore these doe all alike conuey and
deale the norishing iuices into the body , as red yellow wines do ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7V.118

yet there is a difference betweene the~ , that is , that the redish
yellow wines are more profitable for the digestion that is in the
stomach , and in the veynes , bicause they doe heate more .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7V.119

Moreouer , they are easie to be tempered <paren> or else as <font>
Linaker <$$font> translateth it , to be mixed <$$paren>
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7V.120

& therfore are profitable to make good iuice . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7V.121

But there is none of all these things in waterishe wines ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C7V.122

for verie little of the substance of <P_C8R> these is turned into y=e=
kinde of bloud . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8R.123

But when as redish yellowe wine smite the head , they that are waterishe
doe neuer trouble it , TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8R.124

and they beyonde all other driue out water . Next vnto the which are
redish yellowe wines that are most thin and subtill , which also ought
to be chosen most chiefly against swounding . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8R.125

Yelow wines that are grossest in substance are conueyed into the bodie
more slowlie tha~ these be , howbeit they are more piercing then all
soure and binding wines , TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8R.126

but these redish yellowe wines againe doe nourish more than thin wines ,
and correct fautie iuices , of all other wines most speedily engendring
a good bloud . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8R.127

Thus farre <font> Galen <$$font> . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8R.128

Nowe after that it is often inough proued by the best authors that euer
wrote of Phisick , that all red wines as are our Clared wines , and all
blacke wines , which we call red wines , are hoter and grosser in
substaunce than small white wines be of : and both driue out water lesse
than small white wines doe : It followeth that Clared and red wines are
more , both the materiall and efficient <P_C8V> causes of the stone ,
than small white wines are . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8V.129

Where as some argue that such wines as driue most , bring humors most of
all other to the kidneys , water vessels , and bladder , whereof the
stone is ingendered there . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8V.130

But small Rhennish wine and other small white wines driue humors most to
the places before named , TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8V.131

therefore they breede the stone more than other wines that driue not so
much as they do : TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8V.132

I answere vnto the <font> maior <$$font> , that not euery wine that
driueth most humors vnto the kidneys , water vessels & bladder is y=e=
greatest breeder & engendrer of the stone . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8V.133

For although small and waterish whyte wines driue more than Clared , yet
it followeth not that they breede y=e= stone more than red and Clared
wines doe . TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8V.134

For although they driue some kinde of humors vnto the places aboue
rehearsed : yet doe they not leaue them sticking fast in those places ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,C8V.135

but they driue them quite thorow all the water vesselles into the
chamber pot or vrinall , for the which cause they are called in Greeke
{COM:greek_omitted} , that is , <P_D1R> driuers forth of water and vrine
, and such things as are in the vrine . Which name they haue not ,
bicause <paren> as some men doe dreame <$$paren> they bring many humors
wherof the stone is made , to the kidneys and bladder , and let them lie
there , as it were rotting in a dunghill , but as a faire and thin water
casten into a canel of a streete if it haue one to driue it forwarde ,
not onelye carieth it selfe awaye forth of the towne into the common
sinke that is without the towne , but also the filthines that hath bene
in the canell long before , euen so that small white wine that hath a
nature to driue forth it selfe , and with it other things that are
necessarie to be driuen out by the vrine , breedeth not humors in the
water vesselles , but driueth them quite away , and suffereth them not
to tarie there , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D1R.136

how then can white wine that after this manner scoureth the water
vessels be an ingendrer of the matter of the stone , when as it driueth
the same matter away , and will not suffer it to tarie in those places
where as the stone vseth to be ingendred . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D1R.137

When I was a <P_D1V> scholer in Cambridge , there was there a stinking
butcherie , and very noysome to the~ that went by it , or through it ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D1V.138

what if a man should haue bene hired for .xl .s. in the yeare to keepe
the butcherie , & the rest of the towne sweete , by carying out of the
puddings , guts , and stinking bloud ; TURNER-1568-E1-H,D1V.139

if this fellow should carie out all the filthinesse out of the butcherie
once in the weeke vnto the market hill , and let it lie there , should
this man iustly be called a scourer or clenser of the towne , that
carieth the filth therof from one place onlye to another , & not quite
out of the towne ; TURNER-1568-E1-H,D1V.140

I think no . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D1V.141

Euen so if smal white wines should driue humors from diuerse places of
the bodie , and shoulde not carrie them forth by the water vesselles ,
but let them lie stinking there , it ought not to be called a scourer
but a defiler , & an hurter of the bodie . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D1V.142

If the maister of the pudding cart before named , would let the
filthines of the butcherie tarie so long there vntill it stanke so sore
, by reason of long continuing in that place , and for lacke of carying
out betime , that both they of the <P_D2R> butcherie , and all the
neighbours about were grieuouslye vexed with the foule stinke of that
filth that taried so long there , if an other carter offred for the same
wages euery seconde day to carie out all the vncleannesse of the towne ,
which of these two me~ were more worthy to haue the office and name of
the townescourer ; TURNER-1568-E1-H,D2R.143

Smal white wines scoure and driue out the vncleannesse of the bodie as
much as it is possible to be done by them , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D2R.144

and red and Clared wine stoppe and hold backe , and fill the bodie full
of ill humors , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D2R.145

now which are most profitable to be taken most commonly of a man for the
keeping of his health : TURNER-1568-E1-H,D2R.146

But although small white wine by nature hath such properties to driue
out by vrine vnprofitable humors , that are commed within the compasse
of their working , yet the vertue of it is hindered , either if the man
by eating and drinking to much continually fill the bodie with so many
excrementes , that nature euen being holpen with white wine can@ @not
driue them out , by reason of the ouerflowing plentie of them ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D2R.147

also if that <P_D2V> the meat lie to long in the stomach , and the
excrements to long in the guttes , and goe not downe at conuenient times
to the stoole . Than the white wine for lacke of helpe , can not doe
his office . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D2V.148

And it is plaine , that banketting and much eating and drinking and
keeping of the meat to long in the stomache , and the excrements
vnscoured out of the bellie , giue the most part of the material cause
vnto the stone , which thing may be easilye proued by the authority of
<font> Aetius <$$font> writing of the stone , in these wordes .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D2V.149

Ye must beware of such meats as are hard of substance , and are not esie
to be broken with chowing {COM:sic} , and also them that haue much
substance , and nourish verye much , and those that are conueyed in by
heapes into the bodie , before they be fully digested , or made ripe ,
also meates of an heauy qualitie , and are hardly chaunged and swim
aboue , and go to slowly downe to y=e= belly & fill it ful of wind .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D2V.150

Flie also such as stop the ways and veynes of the bodie , or otherwise
abide to long in the bellies , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D2V.151

for the bellie being made wearie with such meates , <P_D3R> sendeth them
forth either as yet raw , or halfe sodden to the liuer and kidneyes ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3R.152

and so it that was brought in by heapes rawe , is sifted or streyned
vnfitlye and against nature , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3R.153

and with an hastie rage is caried to the kidneyes ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3R.154

and by and by it groweth togither , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3R.155

and is thickned , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3R.156

and standeth there still . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3R.157

Thus farre <font> Aetius <$$font> . Of whome we may learne plainly howe
the stone is made , and of what causes , and that neither small white
wine , neyther any other wine , will preserue a man from the stone ,
except he keepe good diet withall , and emptie out the excrements of the
bellie dailye . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3R.158

And the same sayth afterward , ventrem semper probe laxum habere oportet
. Hic enim si bene subierit , puriora lotia prodibunt .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3R.159

That is , ye must haue your bellie alway well losed ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3R.160

for if the bellie worke well downeward , your water shall come forth the
fairer and cleaner . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3R.161

If so often emptying of the bellye as nature requireth , maketh a mans
water cleare and faire , then the to much stopping of the bodie maketh a
foule , drousie <P_D3V> or dreggye water . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3V.162

But such foule geare breedeth the stone , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3V.163

therfore to much stopping of the bellye is oft the cause of the stone .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3V.164

For when as such plentie of filthie matter cometh forth by the water ,
there must needes be much aboue in the kidneyes and bladder , wherof the
stone may be ingendred , if there be anye excessiue heate in the
kidneyes and bladder . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3V.165

All men therefore may plainly see that small white wine is falslye
accused to be a breeder of the stone , when as ill diet and the stopping
of ill humors within the bodye , is the cause thereof , and that wines
that are hoter and stronger than white and Rhennish wines be , engender
rewmes , and breede the goute more than the white small wines do , as it
is by places aboue alleaged , fully prooued . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D3V.166

<P_D8R>

<heading>

TO WHOM WINE IS ILL , AND VNMETE AND VERIE HURTFULL .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8R.169

<$$heading>

<font> Aristotell <$$font> sayeth that wine is neither fit for children
, nor nurses , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8R.171

and <font> Galen <$$font> counsayleth that children shall taste no wine
at all : TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8R.172

and woulde , that not euen springoldes that are full growen , shoulde
take wine but in small quantitie , bicause that it maketh them fall
headlongs into wrath and into lust of the bodie , and maketh the
reasonable part of the minde dull and drousie .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8R.173

Wine is ill also for them that are of a hote burning complexion , and
haue any inflammation within them in their bodies , or haue any burning
agues . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8R.174

It is also generallye ill for them that haue a great reume and the goute
, or eyther an halfe or hole palsey . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8R.175

The wine that is menged with <font> Gipso <$$font> or with Alibaster ,
as Sacke is , hurteth the sinewes , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8R.176

and maketh y=e= head heauy , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8R.177

& setteth it on fier , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8R.178

and is very ill for the bladder . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8R.179

Wine <P_D8V> that is menged with cute , as our Malmsey is , fill a mans
head TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8V.180

and make hym drunken , breath out more hardlye ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8V.181

and trouble the stomache , which wordes I iudge , ought to be
vnderstanded of such a wine , as hath very much cute put into it .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8V.182

<heading>

TO WHOME AND FOR WHAT PURPOSES WINE IS GOOD . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8V.184

<$$heading>

The holy scripture sayeth , y=e= wine maketh the hart of man merie , and
that it is good to be taken of them that haue a weake and a feeble
stomach , TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8V.186

and the .xxxj. chapter of the Prouerbes hath this saying ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8V.187

O Lamuell , giue not vnto kings , I say , vnto kings , wine to drinke of
it , or to princes strong drinke , least they , after they haue drunken
, forget the law that is appointed , or ouerthrow the causes of all
poore mens children . TURNER-1568-E1-H,D8V.188

Giue strong drinke vnto them that are condemned to die , and Wine to
them that haue a sorowfull hart , that after they haue drunken , they
maye forget their pouertie , and remember <P_E1R> no more their
misfortune . TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.189

<font> Galen <$$font> in his first booke de sanitate tuenda , sayeth
that wine moisteneth and nourisheth whatsoeuer is before made drie out
of measure , and also swageth and ouercommeth the sharpenesse of bitter
gall , and furthermore , emptieth out by sweate , and driueth forth by
water . TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.190

<heading>

OUT OF DIOSCORIDES .XJ. CHAPTER OF THE FIFT BOOKE .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.192

<$$heading>

Generally euery wine not mixed , and is only simple of himselfe , and is
of nature in taste soure and binding , maketh hote ,
TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.194

is easily conueyed into the bodie , TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.195

it is good for the stomache , TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.196

it maketh a man haue an appetite , TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.197

it norisheth TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.198

and maketh a man sleepe , TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.199

strengthneth TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.200

and maketh a good color , TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.201

and if it be plenteouslye drunken , helpeth them that haue taken
Hemlocke , or Coriander , or the poison called Pharicum , or y=e= poison
called Iria or Opium , which is the iuice of Poppy , or Litharge , or
Eugh , or Wolfes bayne , or choking mushromes , or todestooles .
TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1R.202

It is also <P_E1V> good against al the bitings and stingings of all
creeping beastes , which after they haue stinged or bitten , kill a man
with colde , or ouerthrowe the stomach . TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1V.203

It is good for the long continuaunce of windinesse of the midrife , and
against the bitings of the stomach , and hitchcocke or yesking , and
against bending or stretching out of the stomach , and against the
flowing of the guttes and bellye . TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1V.204

Wine is also good to them that sweate much , and are made faint with to
much sweating , and especiallie such as is white , olde and
well_smelling . TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1V.205

Hitherto <font> Dioscorides <$$font> . Whose words when as he speaketh
of the holesomnesse of wines against poisons , and the bitings and
stingings of venemous beastes , must be vnderstanded of Muscadine , Sack
, Malmesey and Bastarde , and such hote wines which by reason of their
heate , enter farther into the body , and more speedily , and are better
against cold poisons tha~ colder wines be . TURNER-1568-E1-H,E1V.206

