<BEGIN_tyndold-1530-e1-h>

<P_1,1G>

<heading>

THE FYRST BOKE OF MOSES CALLED GENESIS TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.4

THE FYRST CHAPITER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.5

<$$heading>

In the begynnynge God created heaven and erth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.7

The erth was voyde and emptie , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.8

a~d darcknesse was vpon the depe , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.9

and the spirite of god moved vpon the water TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.10

Than God sayd : let there be lyghte TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.11

and there was lyghte . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.12

And God sawe the lyghte that it was good : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.13

& devyded the lyghte from the darcknesse , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.14

and called the lyghte daye , and the darcknesse nyghte :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.15

and so of the evenynge and mornynge was made the fyrst daye
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.16

And God sayd : let there be a fyrmament betwene the waters ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.17

a~d let it devyde the waters a sonder . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.18

Than God made the fyrmament TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.19

and parted the waters which were vnder the fyrmament , from the waters
that were above the fyrmament : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.20

And it was so . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.21

And God called the fyrmament heaven , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.22

And so of the evenynge and morninge was made the seconde daye
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.23

And God sayd , let the waters that are vnder heaven gether them selves
vnto one place , that the drye londe may appere :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.24

And it came so to passe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.25

And god called the drye lande the erth TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.26

and the gatheringe togyther of waters called he the see ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.27

And God sawe that it was good TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.28

And God sayd : let the erth bringe forth herbe and grasse that sowe seed
, and frutefull trees that bere frute every one in his kynde , havynge
their seed in them selves vpon the erth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.29

And it came so to passe : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.30

a~d the erth brought forth herbe and grasse sowenge seed every one in
his kynde & trees berynge frute & havynge their seed in the~ selves ,
every one in his kynde . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.31

And God sawe that it was good : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.32

and the~ of the evenynge and mornynge was made the thyrde daye .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.33

Than sayd God : let there be lyghtes in y=e= firmament of heaven to
devyde the daye fro~ the nyghte , that they may be vnto sygnes , seasons
, days & yeares . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.34

And let them be lyghtes in the fyrmament of heave~ , to shyne vpon the
erth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.35

& so it was . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.36

And God made two great lyghtes A greater lyghte to rule the daye , & a
lesse lyghte to rule the nyghte , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.37

and he made sterres also . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.38

And God put them in the fyrmament of heaven to shyne vpon the erth , and
to rule the daye & the nyghte , a~d to devyde the lyghte from darcknesse
. TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.39

And God sawe y=t= it was good : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.40

and so of the evenynge a~d mornynge was made the fourth daye .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,1G.41

<P_1,20G>

And God sayd , let the water bryng forth creatures that move & have lyfe
, & foules for to flee over the erth vnder the fyrmament of heaven .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.43

And God created greate whalles and all maner of creatures that lyve and
moue , which the waters brought forth in their kindes , a~d all maner of
federed foules in their kyndes . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.44

And God sawe that it was good : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.45

and God blessed them saynge . Growe and multiplye
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.46

a~d fyll the waters of the sees , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.47

& let the foules multiplye vpo~ the erth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.48

And so of the evenynge & morninge was made the fyfth daye .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.49

And God sayd : let the erth bring forth lyvynge creatures in thir kyndes
: catell & wormes & beastes of the erth in their kyndes ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.50

& so it came to passe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.51

And god made the beastes of the erth in their kyndes , & catell in their
kyndes , a~d all maner wormes of the erth in their kyndes :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.52

and God sawe that it was good . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.53

And God sayd : let vs make man in oure symilitude a~ after oure
lycknesse : that he may have rule over the fysh of the see , and over
the foules of the ayre , and over catell , and over all the erth , and
over all wormes that crepe on the erth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.54

And God created man after hys lycknesse , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.55

after the lycknesse of god created he him : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.56

male & female created he them . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.57

And God blessed them , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.58

and God sayd vnto them . Growe and multiplye TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.59

and fyll the erth TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.60

and subdue it , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.61

and have domynyon over the fysh of the see , and over the foules of the
ayre , and over all the beastes that move on the erth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.62

And God sayd : se , I have geven yow all herbes that sowe seed which are
on all the erth , and all maner trees that haue frute in them and sowe
seed : to be meate for yow & for all beastes of the erth , and vnto all
foules of the ayre , and vnto all that crepeth on the erth where in is
lyfe , that they may haue all maner herbes and grasse for to eate ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.63

and even so it was . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.64

And God behelde all that he had made , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.65

a~d loo they were exceadynge good : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.66

and so of the evenynge and mornynge was made the syxth daye
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,1,20G.67

<P_2,1G>

<heading>

THE SECONDE CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.70

<$$heading>

Thus was heave~ & erth fynished wyth all their apparell :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.72

a~d i~ y=e= seue~th daye god ended hys worke which he had made
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.73

& rested in y=e= seventh daye fro~ all his workes which he had made .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.74

And God blessed y=e= seventh daye , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.75

and sanctyfyed it , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.76

for in it he rested from all his workes which he had created and made .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.77

These are the generations of heaven & erth when they were created , in
the tyme when the Lorde God created heaven and erth and all the shrubbes
of the felde be_fore they were in the erthe . And all the herbes of the
felde before they sprange : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.78

for the Lorde God had yet sent no rayne vpon the erth ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.79

nether was there yet any man to tylle the erth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.80

But there arose a myste out of the ground TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.81

and watered all the face of the erth : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.82

Then the Lorde God shope man , even of the moulde of the erth
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.83

and brethed into his face the breth of lyfe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.84

So man was made a lyvynge soule . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.85

The Lorde God also planted a garden in Eden from the begynnynge ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.86

and there he sette man whom he had formed . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.87

And the Lorde God made to sprynge out of the erth , all maner trees
bewtyfull to the syghte and pleasant to eate , and the tree of lyfe in
the middes of the garden : and also the tree of knowledge of good and
euell . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.88

And there spronge a rever out of Eden to water the garden ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.89

and thence devided it selfe , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.90

and grewe in to foure principall waters . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.91

The name of the one is Phison , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.92

he it is that compasseth all the lande of heuila , where gold groweth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.93

And the gold of that contre ys precious , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.94

there is found bedellion and a stone called Onix .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.95

The name of the seconde ryver is Gihon , which compassyth all the lande
of Inde . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.96

And the name of the thyrde river is Hidekell , which runneth on the
easte syde of the assyryans . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.97

And the fourth river is Euphrates . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.98

And the Lorde God toke Adam TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.99

and put him in the garden of Eden , to dresse it and to kepe it :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.100

and the Lorde God co~maunded Ada~ saynge : of all the trees of the
garde~ se thou eate . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.101

But of the tre of knowlege of good and badd se that thou eate not :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.102

for even y=e= same daye thou eatest of it , thou shalt surely dye .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.103

And the Lorde God sayd : it is not good that man shulde be alone ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.104

I will make hym an helper to beare him company :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.105

And after y=t= the Lorde God had make of the erth all maner beastes of
the felde , and all maner foules of the ayre , he brought them vnto Adam
to see what he wold call them . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.106

And as Ada~ called all maner livynge beastes : eve~ so are their names .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,1G.107

<P_2,20G>

And Adam gave names vnto all maner catell , and vnto the foules of the
ayre , and vnto all maner beastes of the felde .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.109

But there was no helpe founde vnto Adam to beare him companye
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.110

Then the Lorde God cast a slomber on Adam , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.111

and he slepte . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.112

And then he toke out one of his rybbes , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.113

and in stede ther of he fylled vp the place with flesh .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.114

And the Lorde God made of the rybbe which he toke out of Adam , a woma~
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.115

and brought her vnto Adam . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.116

Then sayd Ada~ this is once bone of my boones , and flesh of my flesh .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.117

This shall be called woman : because she was take of the man .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.118

For this cause shall a man leve father and mother & cleve vnto his wyfe
, TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.119

& they shall be one flesh . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.120

And they were ether of them naked , both Adam and hys wyfe ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.121

a~d were not ashamed : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,2,20G.122

<P_3,1G>

<heading>

THE .III. CHAPTER TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.125

<$$heading>

But the serpent was sotyller than all the beastes of the felde which
y=e= Lorde God had made , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.127

and sayd vnto the woman . Ah syr , that God hath sayd , ye shall not
eate of all maner trees in the garden . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.128

And the woman sayd vnto the serpent , of the frute of the trees in the
garden we may eate , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.129

but of the frute of the tree y=t= is in the myddes of the garden <paren>
sayd God <$$paren> se that ye eate not , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.130

and se that ye touch it not : lest ye dye . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.131

Then sayd the serpent vnto the woman : tush ye shall not dye :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.132

But God doth knowe , that whensoever ye shulde eate of it , youre eyes
shuld be opened and ye shulde be as , God and knowe both good and evell
. TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.133

And the woman sawe that it was a good tree to eate of and lustie unto
the eyes and a pleasant tre for to make wyse .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.134

And toke of the frute of it TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.135

and ate , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.136

and gaue vnto hir husband also with her , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.137

and he ate . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.138

And the eyes of both of them were opened , that they vnderstode how that
they were naked . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.139

Than they sowed fygge leves togedder TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.140

and made them apurns . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.141

And they herd the voyce of the Lorde God as he walked in the garde~ in
the coole of the daye . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.142

And Adam hyd hymselfe and his wyfe also from the face of the Lorde God ,
amonge the trees of the garden . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.143

And the Lorde God called Adam TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.144

and sayd vnto him where art thou ? TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.145

And he answered . Thy voyce I harde in the garden ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.146

but I was afrayd because I was naked , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.147

and therfore hyd myselfe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.148

And he sayd : who told the that thou wast naked ?
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.149

hast thou eaten of the tree , of which I bade the that thou shuldest not
eate ? TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.150

And Adam answered . The woman which thou gavest to bere me company she
toke me of the tree , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.151

a~d I ate . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.152

And the Lorde God sayd vnto the woman : wherfore didest thou so ?
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.153

And the woman answered , the serpent deceaved me
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.154

and I ate . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.155

And the Lorde God sayd vnto the serpe~t because thou haste so done moste
cursed be thou of all catell and of all beastes of the feld :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.156

vppo~ thy bely shalt thou goo : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.157

and erth shalt thou eate all dayes of thy lyfe .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.158

Morover I will put hatred betwene the and the woman , and betwene thy
seed and hyr seed . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.159

And that seed shall tread the on the heed , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.160

a~d thou shalt tread hit on the hele . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.161

And vnto the woman he sayd : I will suerly encrease thy sorow a~d make
the oft with child , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.162

and with payne shalt thou be deleverd : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.163

And thy lustes shall pertayne vnto thy husbond
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.164

and he shall rule the . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.165

And vnto Ada~ he sayd : for as moch as thou hast obeyed the voyce of thy
wyfe , and hast eaten of the tree of which I commaunded the saynge : se
thou eate not therof : cursed be the erth for thy sake .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.166

In sorow shalt thou eate therof all dayes of thy life ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.167

And it shall beare thornes a~d thystels vnto the .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.168

And thou shalt eate the herbes of y=e= feld : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.169

In the swete of thy face shalt thou eate brede , vntill thou returne
vnto the erth whe~ce thou wast take~ : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.170

for erth thou art , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.171

a~d vnto erth shalt thou returne . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,1G.172

<P_3,20G>

And Adam called his wyfe Heua , because she was the mother of all that
lyveth TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,20G.174

And the Lorde God made Adam and hys wyfe garmentes of skynnes ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,20G.175

and put them on them . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,20G.176

And the Lorde God sayd : loo , Adam is become as it were one of vs , in
knowlege of good and evell . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,20G.177

But now lest he strech forth his hand and take also of the tree of lyfe
and eate and lyve ever . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,20G.178

And the Lorde God cast him out of the garden of Eden , to tylle the erth
whe~ce he was taken . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,20G.179

And he cast Ada~ out , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,20G.180

and sette at y=e= enteringe of the garden Eden , Cherubin with a naked
swerde movinge in and out , to kepe the way to the tree of lyfe .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,3,20G.181

<P_6,1G>

<heading>

THE .VI. CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.184

<$$heading>

And it came to passe wha~ men bega~ to multiplye apo~ the erth a~d had
begot them doughters , the sonnes of God sawe the doughters of men that
they were fayre , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.186

and toke vnto them wyves , which they best liked amo~ge the~ all .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.187

And the Lord sayd : My spirite shall not all waye stryve withe man ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.188

for they are flesh . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.189

Nevertheles I wyll geue them yet space , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.190

and hundred_and_.xx. yeres There were tirantes in the world in thos
dayes . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.191

For after that the children of God had gone in vnto the doughters of men
and had begotten them childern , the same childern were the mightiest of
the world and men of renowne . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.192

And whan the Lorde sawe y=t= the wekednesse of man was encreased apon
the erth , and that all the ymaginacion and toughtes of his hert was
only evell continually , he repented that he had made man apon the erth
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.193

and sorowed in his hert . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.194

And sayd : I wyll destroy mankynde which I haue made , fro~ of the face
of the erth : both man , beast , worme and foule of the ayre ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.195

for it repe~teth me that I haue made them . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.196

But yet Noe found grace in the syghte of the Lorde .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.197

These are the generatio~s of Noe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.198

Noe was a righteous man and vncorrupte in his tyme ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.199

& walked wyth god . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.200

And Noe begat .iii. sonnes : Sem , Ham and Iapheth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.201

And the erth was corrupte in the syghte of god ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.202

and was full of mischefe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.203

And God loked vpon the erth , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.204

a~d loo it was corrupte : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.205

for all flesh had corrupte his way vppon the erth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.206

Than sayd God to Noe : the end of all flesh is come before me ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.207

for the erth is full of there myschefe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.208

And loo , I wyll destroy them with the erth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.209

Make the an arcke of pyne tree , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.210

and make chaumbers in the arcke , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.211

and pytch it wythin and wythout wyth pytch . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.212

And of this facion shalt thou make it . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.213

The lenth of the arcke shall be .iii._hundred cubytes , a~d the bredth
of it .L. cubytes , and the heyth of it xxx. cubytes .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.214

A wyndow shalt thou make aboue in the arcke .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.215

And wythin a cubyte compasse shalt thou finysh it .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.216

And the dore of the arcke shalt thou sette in y=e= syde of it :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.217

and thou shalt make it with .iii. loftes one aboue an other .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.218

For behold I will bringe in a floud of water apon the erth to destroy
all flesh from vnder heaven , wherin breth of life is so that all that
is in the erth shall perish . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.219

But I will make myne apoyntement with the , that both thou shalt come in
to y=e= arcke and thy sonnes , thy wyfe and thy sonnes wyves with the .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.220

And of all that lyveth what soever flesh it be , shalt thou brynge in to
the arcke , of every thynge a payre , to kepe tham a lyve wyth the .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,1G.221

And male and female se that they be , <P_6,20G> of byrdes in their kynde
, and of beastes in their kynde , and of all maner of wormes of the erth
in their kinde : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,20G.222

a payre of every thinge shall come vnto the to kepe them a lyve .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,20G.223

And take vnto the of all maner of meate y=t= may be eaten
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,20G.224

& laye it vp in stoore by the , that it may be meate both for y=e= and
for the~ : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,20G.225

and Noe dyd acordynge to all that God commaunded hym .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,6,20G.226

<P_7,1G>

<heading>

THE .VII. CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.229

<$$heading>

And the Lorde sayd vnto Noe : goo into the arcke both thou and all thy
houssold . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.231

For the haue I sene rightuous before me in thys generacion .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.232

Of all clene beastes take vnto the .vii. of every kynde the male and
hys female And of vnclene beastes a payre , the male and hys female :
lykewyse of the byrdes of the ayre .vii. of every kynde , male and
female to save seed vppon all the erth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.233

For vii. days hence wyll I send rayne vppo~ the erth .XL dayes. & .XL.
nyghtes TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.234

and wyll dystroy all maner of thynges that I haue made , from of the
face of the erth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.235

And Noe dyd acordynge to all y=t= the lorde co~maunded hym :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.236

and Noe was .vi._hundred yere olde , when the floud of water came vppon
the erth : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.237

and Noe went and his sonnes and his wyfe and his sonnes wyves wyth hym ,
in to the arke from the waters of the floud .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.238

And of clene beastes and of beastes that ware vnclene and of byrdes and
of all that crepeth vppo~ the erth , came in by cooples of every kynde
vnto Noe in to the arke : a male and a female : even as God commaunded
Noe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.239

And the seventh daye the waters of the floud came vppon the erth . In
the .vi._hundred yere of Noes lyfe , in the seco~de moneth , in the
.xvii. daye of the moneth , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.240

y=t= same daye were all the founteynes of the grete depe broken vp ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.241

& the wyndowes of heave~ were opened , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.242

a~d there fell a rayne vpon the erth .XL. dayes and .XL. nyghtes .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.243

And the selfe_same daye went Noe , Sem , Ham and Iapheth , Noes sonnes ,
and Noes wyfe and the .iii. wyves of his sonnes wyth them in to the
arke : both they and all maner of beastes in their ki~de , & all maner
of catell in their kynde & all maner of wormes that crepe vppon the erth
in their kynde , and all maner of byrdes in there kynde . and all maner
off foules what soever had feders . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.244

And they came vnto Noe in to the arke by cooples , of all flesh y=t= had
breth of lyfe in it . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.245

And they that came , came male a~d female of every flesh accordi~ge as
God co~maunded hym : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.246

& y=e= Lorde shytt the dore vppo~ him TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.247

And the floud came .XL. dayes & .XL. nyghtes vppon the erth ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.248

& the water increased TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.249

and bare vp the arcke TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.250

a~d it was lifte up from of the erth TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.251

And the water prevayled TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.252

and increased exceadingly vppon the erth : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.253

and the arke went vppo~ the toppe of the waters .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.254

And the waters prevayled excedingly above mesure vppo~ the erth , so
that all the hye hylles which are vnder all the partes of heaven , were
covered : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,1G.255

<P_7,20G>

eve~ xv. cubytes hye prevayled the waters , so that the hylles were
covered . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,20G.257

And the fleshe that moved on the earth , bothe birdes catell and beastes
perisshed , with all that crepte on the erth and all men : so that all
that had the breth of liffe in the nostrels of it thorow_out all that
was on drye lond dyed . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,20G.258

Thus was destroyed all that was vppo~ the erth , both man , beastes ,
wormes and foules of the ayre : so that they were destroyed from the
erth : save Noe was reserved only and they that were wyth hym in the
arke . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,20G.259

And the waters prevayled vppon the erth , an_hundred_and_fyftye dayes .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,7,20G.260

<P_8,1G>

<heading>

THE .VIII. CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.263

<$$heading>

And god reme~bred Noe & all y=e= beastes & all y=e= catell y=t= were
with hi~ in y=e= arke TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.265

And god made a wynde to blow vppo~ y=e= erth ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.266

& y=e= waters ceased : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.267

a~d y=e= fountaynes of the depe a~d the wyndowes of heave~ were stopte
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.268

and the rayne of heaven was forbidde~ , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.269

and the waters returned from of y=e= erth TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.270

a~d abated after the ende of an_hundred_and_.L dayes .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.271

And the arke rested vppo~ the mountayns of Ararat , the .xvii. daye of
the .vii. moneth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.272

And the waters went away TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.273

a~d decreased vntyll the .x. moneth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.274

And the fyrst daye of the tenth moneth , the toppes of the mounteyns
appered . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.275

And after the ende of .XL. dayes . Noe opened the wyndow of the arke
which he had made , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.276

a~d sent forth a raven , which went out , ever goinge and cominge agayne
, vntyll the waters were dreyed vpp vppon the erth
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.277

Then sent he forth a doue from hym , to wete whether the waters were
fallen from of the erth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.278

And when the doue coude fynde no restinge place for hyr fote , she
returned to him agayne vnto the arke , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.279

for the waters were vppon the face of all the erth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.280

And he put out hys honde TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.281

and toke her TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.282

and pulled hyr to hym in to the arke TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.283

And he abode yet .vii. dayes mo , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.284

and sent out the doue agayne out of the arke ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.285

And the doue came to hym agayne aboute eventyde ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.286

and beholde : There was in hyr mouth a lefe of an olyve tre which she
had plucked wherby Noe perceaved that the waters were abated vppon the
erth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.287

And he taried yet .vii. other dayes , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.288

and sent forth the doue , which from thence forth came no more agayne to
him . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.289

And it came to passe , the syxte_hundred_and_one yere and the fyrst daye
of the fyrst moneth , that the waters were dryed vpp apon the erth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.290

And Noe toke off the hatches of the arke TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.291

and loked : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.292

And beholde , the face of the erth was drye .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.293

So by the .xxvii. daye of the seconde moneth the erth was drye .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.294

And God spake vnto Noe saynge come out of the arcke , both thou and thy
wyfe a~d thy sonnes and thy sonnes wyues with the .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.295

And all the beastes that are with the whatsoever flesh it be , both
foule and catell and all manner wormes that crepe on the erth , brynge
out with the , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.296

and let them moue , growe a~d multiplye vppon the erth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.297

And Noe came out , a~d his sonnes and his wyfe and his sonnes wyues with
hym . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.298

And all the beastes , and all the wormes , and all the foules , and all
that moved vppon the erth , came also out of the arke , all of one kynde
together . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,1G.299

<P_8,20G>

And Noe made an aulter vnto the Lorde , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,20G.301

and toke of all maner of clene beastes and all maner of clene foules ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,20G.302

and offred sacrifyce vppon the aulter . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,20G.303

And the Lorde smellyd a swete savoure TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,20G.304

and sayd in his hert : I wyll henceforth no more curse the erth for
mannes sake , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,20G.305

for the imagynacion of mannes hert is evell even from the very youth of
hym . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,20G.306

Moreouer I wyll not destroy from henceforth all that lyveth as I haue
done . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,20G.307

Nether shall sowynge tyme and harvest , colde , and hete , somere &
wynter , daye and nyghte ceasse , as longe as the erth endureth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,8,20G.308

<P_9,1G>

<heading>

THE .IX. CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.311

<$$heading>

And God blessed Noe and his sonnes , and sayd vnto them : Increase and
multiplye TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.313

and fyll the erth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.314

The feare also and drede of yow be vppon all beasts of the erth , and
vppon all foules of the ayre , a~d vppon all that crepeth on the erth ,
and vppon all fyshes of the see , which are geuen vnto youre handes
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.315

And all that moveth vppon the erth havynge lyfe , shall be youre meate :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.316

Euen as y=e= grene herbes , so geue I yow all thynge .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.317

Only the flesh with his life which is his bloud , se that ye eate not .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.318

For verely the bloude of yow wherein youre lyves are wyll I requyre .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.319

Eue~ of the hande of all beastes wyll I require it ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.320

And of the hande of man and of the hand off euery mannes brother , wyll
I requyre the lyfe of man : so y=t= he which shedeth mannes bloude ,
shall haue hys bloud shed by man agayne : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.321

for God made man after hys awne lycknesse . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.322

See that ye encrease , and waxe , and be occupyde vppon the erth ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.323

& multiplye therein . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.324

Farthermore God spake vnto Noe & to hys sonnes with hym saynge : see , I
make my bo~d wyth you and youre seed after you , and wyth all lyvynge
thinge that is wyth you : both foule and catell , and all maner beste of
the erth that is wyth yow , of all that commeth out of the arke what
soeuer beste of the erth it be . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.325

I make my bonde wyth yow , that henceforth all flesh shall not be
destroyed wyth y=e= waters of any floud , a~d y=t= henceforth there
shall not be a floud to destroy the erth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.326

And God sayd . This is the token of my bo~de which I make betwene me
and yow , a~d betwene all lyvynge thyng that is with yow for ever :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.327

I wyll sette my bowe in the cloudes , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.328

and it shall be a sygne of the appoyntment made betwene me and the erth
: So that when I brynge in cloudes vpo~ y=e= erth , the bowe shall
appere in y=e= cloudes . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.329

And than wyll I thynke vppon my testament which I haue made betwene me
and yow , and all that lyveth what soeuer flesh it be . So that
henceforth there shall be no more waters to make a floud to destroy all
flesh . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.330

The bowe shal@ @be in the cloudes , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.331

and I wyll loke vpon it , to remembre the euerlastynge testament betwene
God and all that lyveth vppon the erth , what soeuer flesh it be .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.332

And God sayd vnto Noe : This is the sygne of the testament which I have
made betwene me and all flesh y=t= is on the erth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.333

The sonnes of Noe that came out of the arcke were : Sem , Ham , and
Iapheth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.334

And Ham he is the father of Canaa~ . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.335

These are the .iii. sonnes of Noe , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.336

and of these was all the world overspred . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,1G.337

<P_9,20G>

And Noe beynge an husba~d man , went furth TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.339

and planted a vyneyarde TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.340

and drancke of the wyne TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.341

and was droncke , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.342

and laye vncouered in the myddest of his te~t .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.343

And Ham the father of Canaan sawe his fathers prevytees ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.344

& tolde his .ii. brethren that were wythout .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.345

And Sem and Iapheth toke a mantell TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.346

and put it on both there shulders TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.347

a~d went backward , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.348

a~d covered there fathers secrets , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.349

but there faces were backward So that they sawe not there fathers
nakydnes . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.350

As soone as Noe was awaked fro~ his wyne and wyst what his yongest sonne
had done vnto hym , he sayd : cursed be Canaan ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.351

a~d a seruante of all seruantes be he to his brethren .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.352

An he sayd : Blessed be the Lorde God of Se~ , and Canaan his seruante .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.353

God increase Iapheth that he may dwelle in the tentes of Sem .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.354

And Canaan be their seruante . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.355

And Noe lyved after the floude .iii._hundred_and_.L yere : So that all
the dayes of Noe were .IX._hundred_and_.L. yere ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.356

a~d than he dyed . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,9,20G.357

<P_12,1G>

<heading>

THE .XII. CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.360

<$$heading>

Then the Lorde sayd vnto Abra~ Gett the out of thy contre and from thy
kynred , and out of thy fathers house , into a londe which I wyll shewe
the . And I wyll make of the a myghtie people ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.362

and wyll blesse the , and make thy name grete , that thou mayst be
al_blessinge . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.363

And I wyll blesse the~ that blesse the , a~d curse the~ that curse the .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.364

And in the shall be blessed all the generations of the erth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.365

And Abram we~t as the Lorde badd hym , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.366

and Lot went wyth him . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.367

Abram was .LXXV. yere olde , when he went out of Haran .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.368

And Abram toke Sarai his wyfe a~d Lot his brothers sonne , wyth all
their goodes which they had goten and soulles which they had begoten in
Haran . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.369

And they departed to goo in to the la~de of Chanaan .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.370

And when they were come in to the lande of Chanaan , Abram went furth in
to the la~de tyll he came vnto a place called Sychem , and vnto the oke
of More . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.371

And the Canaanytes dwelled then in the lande .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.372

Then the Lorde apeared vnto Abram TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.373

a~d sayd : vnto thy seed wyll I geue thys la~de .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.374

And he buylded an aultere there vnto the Lorde which apeared to hym .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.375

Then departed he thence vnto a mountayne that lyeth on the east syde of
Bethel TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.376

and pytched hys tente : Bethel beynge on the west syde , and Ay on the
east : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.377

And he buylded there an aulter vnto the Lorde
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.378

& called on the name of y=e= Lorde . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.379

And than Abram departed TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.380

and toke his iourney southwarde TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.381

After thys there came a derth in the lande .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.382

And Abram went doune in to Egipte to soiourne there ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.383

for the derth was sore in the lande . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.384

And when he was come nye for to entre in to Egipte , he sayd vnto Sarai
his wife . Beholde , I knowe that thou art a fayre woman to loke apo~ .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.385

It wyll come to passe therfore whe~ the Egiptians see the , that they
wyll say : she is his wyfe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.386

And so shall they slay me and save the . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.387

Saye I praye the therfore that thou art my sister , that I maye fare the
better by reason of the and that my soule maye lyue for thy sake .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.388

As soon as he came in to Egipte , the Egiptia~s sawe the woman that she
was very fayre . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.389

And Pharaos lordes sawe hir also , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.390

and praysed hir vnto Pharao : So that she was taken in to Pharaos house
, which entreated Abram well for hir sake , so that he had shepe , oxsen
a~d he asses , men seruantes , mayde serua~tes , she asses and camels .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.391

But God plaged Pharao and his house wyth grete plages , because of Sarai
Abrams wyfe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.392

Then Pharao called Abram TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.393

and sayd : why hast thou thus dealt with me ?
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.394

Wherfore toldest thou me not that she was thy wife ?
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.395

Why saydest thou that she was thy sister , and causedest me to take hyr
to my wyfe ? TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.396

But now loo , there is the wife , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.397

take hir TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.398

a~d be walkynge . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,1G.399

<P_12,20G>

Pharao also gaue a charge vnto his men over Abram , to leade hym out ,
wyth his wyfe and all that he had . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,12,20G.401

<P_13,1G>

<heading>

THE .XIII. CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.404

<$$heading>

Than Abram departed out of Egipte , both he and his wyfe and all that he
had , and Lot wyth hym vnto the south . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.406

Abram was very rich in catell , syluer & gold .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.407

And he went on his iourney fro~ the south even vnto Bethel , a~d vnto
the place where his tente was at the fyrst tyme betwene Bethel and Ay ,
and vnto the place of the aulter which he made before .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.408

And there called Abram vpon the name of the Lorde .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.409

Lot also which went wyth him had shepe , catell and tentes : so that the
londe was not abill to receaue them that they myght dwell to_gether ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.410

for the substance of their riches was so greate , that they coude not
dwell to_gether TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.411

And there fell a stryfe betwene the herdmen of Abrams catell , and the
herdmen of Lots catell . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.412

Moreouer the Cananytes and the Pherysites dwelled at that tyme in the
lande . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.413

Than sayd Abram vnto Lot : let there be no stryfe I praye the betwene
the and me and betwene my herdmen and thyne ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.414

for we be brethren . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.415

Ys not all the hole lande before the ? TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.416

Departe I praye the fro~ me . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.417

Yf thou wylt take the lefte hande , I wyll take the right :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.418

Or yf thou take the right hande I wyll take the left .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.419

And Lot lyft vp his eyes TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.420

and beheld all the contre aboute Iordane , which was a plenteous contre
of water every where , before the Lorde destroyed Sodoma and Gomorra .
Even as the garden of the Lorde , & as the lande of Egipte tyll thou
come to Zoar . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.421

Than Lot chose all the costes of Iordane TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.422

a~d toke hys iourney from the east . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.423

And so departed the one brother from the other .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.424

Abram dwelled in the lande of Canaan . And lot in the cytes of the
playne , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.425

& tented tyll he came to Sodome . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.426

But the men of sodome were wyked TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.427

and synned exceadyngly agenst the Lorde . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.428

And the Lorde sayed vnto Abram , after that Lot was departed from hym :
lyfte vp thyne eyes TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.429

& loke from y=e= place where thou art , northward , southward , eastward
and westward , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.430

for all the lande which thou seiste wyll I gyue the & thy seed for ever
. TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.431

And I wyll make thy seed , as the dust of the erth ; so that yf a ma~
can nombre the dust of the erth , than shall thy seed also be nombred .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.432

Aryse TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.433

and walke aboute in the lande , in the length of it a~d in the bredth
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.434

for I wyll geue it vnto the . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.435

Than Abra~ toke downe hys tente , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.436

& went TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.437

and dwelled in the okegrove of Mamre which is in Ebron
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.438

and buylded there an altar to the Lorde . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1G.439

<P_14,1G>

<heading>

THE .XIIII. CHAPTER TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.442

<$$heading>

And it chaunsed within a while , that Amraphel kynge of Synear , Arioch
kunge of Ellasar , Kedorlaomer kynge of Elam and Thydeall kynge of the
nations : made warre wyth Bera kynge of Sodo~e and with Birsa kynge of
Gomorra . And wythe Sineab kynge of Adama , & with Semeaber kynge of
Zeboim , and wyth the kynge of Bela Which Bela is called Zoar .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.444

All these came together vnto the vale of siddim which is now the salt
see TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.445

Twelve yere were they subiecte to kinge kedorlaomer ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.446

and in the .xiii yere rebelled . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.447

Therefore in the .xiiii. yere came kedorlaomer and the kynges that were
wyth hym , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.448

and smote the Raphayms in Astarath Karnaim , and the Susims in Ham , a~d
the Emyms in Sabe Kariathaim , and the Horyms in their awne mounte Seir
vnto the playne of Pharan , which bordreth vpon the wyldernesse .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.449

And then turned they TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.450

and came to the well of iugmente which is Cades ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.451

and smote all the contre of the Amalechites , and also the amorytes that
dwell in Hazezon Thamar . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.452

Than went out the kynge of Sodome , and the kynge of Gomorra , and the
kynge of Adama and the kynge of Zeboijm , and the kynge of Bela now
called Zoar . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.453

And sette their men in aray to fyghte wyth them in the vale of siddim ,
that is to say , wyth kedorlaomer the kynge of Elam and with Thydeall
kynge of the Nations , and wyth Amraphel kynge of Synear . And with
Arioch kynge of Ellasar : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.454

foure kynges agenste v . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.455

And that vale of siddim was full of slyme pyttes .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.456

And the kynges of Sodome and Gomorra fled , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.457

and fell there . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.458

And the resydue fled to the mountaynes . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.459

And they toke all the goodes of Sodome and Gomorra and all their
vitalles , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.460

a~d went their waye . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.461

And they toke Lot also Abrams brothers sonne and his good <paren> for he
dwelled at Sodome <$$paren> TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.462

and departed TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.463

Than came one that had escaped , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.464

and tolde Abram the hebrue which dwelt in the okegrove of Mamre the
Amoryte brother of Eschol and Aner : which were confederate wyth Abram .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.465

When Abram herde that his brother was taken , he harnessed his seruantes
borne in his owne house . iii_hundred_&_.xviii.
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.466

a~d folowed tyll they came at Dan . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.467

And sette hymselfe a~d his seruantes in aray ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.468

& fell vpon them by nyght , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.469

& smote them , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.470

& chased them awaye vnto Hoba : which lyeth on the lefte hande of
Damascos , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.471

and broughte agayne all the goodes & also his brother Lot , a~d his
goodes , the weme~ also and the people . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.472

And as he retourned agayne from the slaughter of kedorlaomer and of the
kynges that were with hym , than came the kynge of Sodome agaynst hym
vnto the vale of Saue which now is called kynges dale .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.473

Than Melchisedech kinge of Salem brought forth breed and wyne .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.474

And he beynge the prest of the most hyghest God , blessed hym saynge .
Blessed be Abram vnto the most hyghest God , possessor of heaven and
erth . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1G.475

<P_14,20G>

And blessed be God the most hyghest , which hath delyvered thyne enimies
in to thy handes . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20G.477

And Abra~ gaue hym tythes of all . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20G.478

<P_22,1G>

<heading>

THE .XXII. CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.481

<$$heading>

After these dedes , God dyd proue Abraham TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.483

& sayde vnto him : Abraham . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.484

And he answered : here am I . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.485

And he sayde : take thy only sonne Isaac whome thou louest ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.486

& get the vnto the lande of Moria , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.487

and sacrifyce him there for a sacrifyce vpon one of the mountayns which
I will shewe the TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.488

Than Abraham rose vp early in the mornynge TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.489

and sadled his asse , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.490

and toke two of his meyny wyth him , and Isaac his sonne :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.491

a~d clove wod for the sacrifyce , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.492

and rose vp TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.493

and gott him to the place which God had appoynted him .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.494

The thirde daye Abraham lyfte vp his eyes TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.495

and sawe the place a_farr of , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.496

and sayde vnto his yong men : byde here with the asse .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.497

I and the lad will goo yonder and worshippe and come agayne vnto you
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.498

And Abraham toke the wodd of the sacrifyce TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.499

and layde it vpon Isaac his sonne , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.500

and toke fyre in his hande and a knyfe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.501

And they went both of them together . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.502

Than spake Isaac vnto Abraham his father TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.503

& sayde : My father ? TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.504

And he answered here am I my sonne . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.505

And he sayde : se here is fyre and wodd , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.506

but where is the shepe for sacrifyce ? TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.507

And Abraham sayde : my sonne , God wyll prouyde him a shepe for
sacrifyce . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.508

So went they both together . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.509

And when they came vnto the place which God shewed him , Abraha~ made an
aulter there TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.510

and dressed the wodd , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.511

a~d bownde Isaac his sonne TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.512

and layde him on the aulter , aboue apon the wodd .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.513

And Abraham stretched forth his hande , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.514

and toke the knyfe to haue kylled his sonne .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.515

Than the angell of the Lorde called vnto him from heauen saynge :
Abraham , Abraham . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.516

And he answered : here am I . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.517

And he sayde : laye not thy handes apon the childe
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.518

nether do any thinge at all vnto him , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.519

for now I knowe that thou fearest God , in y=t= thou haste not kepte
thine only sonne fro~ me . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.520

And Abraham lyfted vp his eyes TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.521

and loked aboute : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.522

and beholde , there was a ram caught by the hornes in a thykette .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.523

And he went TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.524

and toke the ram TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.525

and offred him vp for a sacrifyce in the steade of his sonne
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.526

And Abraham called the name of the place , the Lorde will see : wherfore
it is a come~ saynge this daye : in the mounte will the Lorde be sene .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.527

And the Angell of the Lorde cryed vnto Abraham from heaven the seconde
tyme saynge : by my selfe haue I sworne <paren> sayth the Lorde
<$$paren> because thou hast done this thinge and hast not spared thy
only sonne , that I will blesse the and multiplye thy seed as the
starres of heaven and as the sonde vpo~ the see syde
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.528

And thy seed shall possesse the gates of hys enymies .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.529

And in thy seed shall all the nations of the erth be blessed , because
thou hast obeyed my voyce TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.530

So turned Abraham agayne vnto his yonge men ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.531

and they rose vp TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.532

and we~t to_gether to Berseba . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.533

And Abraham dwelt at Berseba TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,22,1G.534

<P_13,1N>

<heading>

THE .XIII. CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.537

<$$heading>

And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayenge : sende men out to serche the
londe of Canaan , which I geue vnto the childern of Israel : of euery
trybe of their fathers a man TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.539

and let them all be soche as are ruelars amonge them .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.540

And Moses at the commaundement of the Lorde sent forth out of the
wildernesse of Pharan : soche men as were all heedes amonge the childern
of Israel , whose names are these . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.541

In the trybe of Ruben , Sammua y=e= sonne of Zacur :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.542

In the trybe of Symeon , Saphat the sonne of Hori .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.543

In the trybe of Iuda Caleph the sonne of Iephune .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.544

In the trybe of Isachar , Igeal the sonne of Ioseph .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.545

In the trybe of Ephraim , Hosea the sonne of Nun .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.546

In the trybe of Ben Iamin , Palti the sonne of Raphu .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.547

In the trybe of Zabulon , Gadiel the sonne of Sodi .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.548

In the trybe of Ioseph : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.549

In the trybe of Manasse , Gaddi the sonne of Susi .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.550

In the trybe of Dan , Amiel the sonne of Gemali .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.551

In the trybe of Asser , Sethur the sonne of Micheel .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.552

In the trybe of Nephtali , Nahebi the sonne of Vaphsi .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.553

In the trybe of Gad , Guel the sonne of Machi .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.554

These are the names of the men whiche Moses sent to spie out the londe .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.555

And Moses called the name of Hosea the sonne of Nun , Iosua .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.556

And Moses sent them forth to spie out the lande of Canaan ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.557

and sayed vnto them : get you southwarde TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.558

and goo vpp in to the hye contre , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,1N.559

and se the londe what maner thynge it is a~d the people that dwelleth
therein : whether they be stronge or weke , ether fewe or many , and
what the londe is that they dwell in whether it be good or bad , and
what maner of cities they dwell in : whether they dwell in tentes or
walled townes , <P_13,20N> a~d what maner of londe it is : whether it
{HELSINKI:is} be fatt or leane , & whether there be trees therein or not
. TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.560

And be of a good corage , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.561

and brynge of the frutes of the londe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.562

And it was aboute the tyme that grapes are first rype .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.563

And they went vp TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.564

and serched out the lande from the wildernesse of Zin vnto Rehob as men
goo to Hemath , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.565

and they ascended vnto the south TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.566

and came vnto Hebron , where Ahiman was and Sesai and Thalmani the
sonnes of Enacke . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.567

Hebron was bylt .vii. yere before Zoan in Egipte .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.568

And they came vnto the ryuer of Escol TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.569

and they cutte doune there a braunch with one clouster of grapes
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.570

& bare it apo~ a staffe betwene twayne , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.571

& also of the pomgranates & of the fygges of the place .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.572

The ryuer was called Escol , because of the clouster of grapes whiche
the childern of Israel cutt doune there . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.573

And they turned backe agayne from serchinge the londe , at .xl. dayes
ende . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.574

And thei went TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.575

and came to Moses and Aaron & vnto all the multitude of the childern of
Israel , vnto the wildernesse of Pharan : euen vnto Cades ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.576

and broughte them worde and also vnto all the congregacion ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.577

and shewed them the frute of the lande . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.578

And they tolde him sayenge : we came vnto the londe wether thou sendedst
vs , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.579

& surely it is a lo~de that floweth with milke & honye
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.580

& here is of the frute of it TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.581

Neuerthelesse the people be stronge y=t= dwell in the londe ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.582

and the cities are walled and exceadinge greate ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.583

and moreouer we sawe the childre~ of Enack there .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.584

The amaleckes dwel in the south cuntre , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.585

and the Hethites , Iebusites and the Amorites dwell in the mou~taynes ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.586

and the Cananites dwell by the see a~d alonge by the coste of Iordayne .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.587

And Caleb stylled the murmure of the people agenst Moses sayenge : let
vs goo vp and conquere it , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.588

for we be able to ouercome it . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.589

But the men that went vpp with him , sayde : We be not able to goo vpp
agenst the people , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.590

for they are stronger then we : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.591

And they broughte vpp an euell reporte of the londe which they had
serched , vnto the childern of Israel sayenge . The londe which we haue
gone thorowe to serche it out , is a londe that eateth vpp the
inhabiters thereof , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.592

and the people that we sawe in it are men of stature .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.593

And there we sawe also geantes , the childre~ of Enack which are of the
geau~tes . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.594

And we semed in oure syght as it were greshoppers
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.595

and so we dyd in their sighte . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,13,20N.596

<P_14,1N>

<heading>

THE .XIIII. CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.599

<$$heading>

And the multitude cryed out , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.601

& the people wepte thorow_out that nyght , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.602

all the childern of Ysrael murmured agenst Moses & Aaron .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.603

And the hole congregacion sayed vnto them : wolde god that we had dyed
in the lond of Egipte , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.604

ether we wolde that we had dyed in thys wildernesse .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.605

Wherfore hath the Lorde broughte vs vnto this londe to fall apon the
swerde , that both oure wyues , & also oure childre~ shulde be a praye ?
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.606

is it not better that we returne vnto Egipte agayne ?
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.607

And they sayde one to another : let vs make a captayne and returne vnto
Egipte agayne . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.608

And Moses & Aaron fell on their faces before all the congregacion of the
multitude of the childern of Ysrael . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.609

And Iosua the sonne of Nun , and Caleb the sonne of Iephune which were
of them that serched the londe rent their clothes
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.610

and spake vnto all the companye of the childern of Ysrael saynge : The
londe which we walked thorowe to serche it , is a very good lande .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.611

Yf the Lorde haue lust to vs , he will bring vs in to this londe & geue
it vs , which is a lond y=t= floweth with mylke & hony .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.612

But in any wise rebell not agenst the Lorde ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.613

Moreouer feare ye not the people of the londe ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.614

for they are but bred for vs . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.615

Their shylde is departed from them , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.616

& the Lorde is with vs : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.617

feare them not therfore . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.618

And all the whole multitude bade stone them with stones .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.619

But the glorie of the Lorde appered in the tabernacle of witnesse , vnto
all the childern of Israel . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.620

And the Lorde sayed vnto Moses : Howe longe shall thys people rayle apon
me , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.621

and how longe will it be , yer they beleue me , for all my signes whiche
I haue shewed amonge them ? TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.622

I will smyte them with the pestilence & destroy the~ ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.623

and will make of the a greatter nacion and a mightier then they .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.624

And Moses sayed vnto the Lorde : then the Egiptians shall heare it ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.625

for thou broughtest this people with thy mighte from amonge them .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.626

And it wil@ @be tolde to the inhabiters of this lande also ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.627

for they haue herde likewise , that thou the Lorde art amo~ge this
people , a~d y=t= thou art sene face to face , & y=t= thy cloude
stondeth ouer them & that thou goest before them by daye tyme in a piler
of cloude , & in a piler of fyre by nyght . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.628

Yf thou shalt kill all this people as thei were but one ma~ then the
nacions which haue herde the fame of the , will speake sayenge : because
y=e= Lorde was not able to bringe in this people in to y=e= londe he
swore vnto them , therfore he slewe them in the wildernesse .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.629

So now let {TEXT:lat} the power of my Lord be greate , acordynge as thou
hast spoken sayenge : the Lorde is longe yer he be angrye , a~d full of
mercy , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.630

and suffereth synne and trespace , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.631

and leaueth no man innocent , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.632

and visiteth the vnryghtuousnesse of the fathers vppon y=e= childern ,
eue~ vpo~ y=e= thirde & fourth generacion . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.633

be mercyfull I beseche y=e= therfore , vnto y=e= synne of this people
acordinge vnto thi greate mercy , & acordinge as thou hast forgeue~ this
people from Egipte euen vnto this place . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,1N.634

<P_14,20N>

And the Lorde sayed : I haue forgeue~ it , acordynge to thy request .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.636

But as trulye as I lyue , all the erth shal@ @be fylled with my glorye .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.637

For of all those me~ whiche haue sene my glorye & my miracles which I
dyd in Egipte & in y=e= wildernesse , & yet haue tempted me now this .x.
tymes & haue not herkened vnto my voyce , there shall not one se the
lond whiche I sware vnto their fathers , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.638

nether shall any of the~ that rayled apo~ me , se it .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.639

But my servau~te Caleb . because there is another maner sprite with hi~
, & because he hath folowed me vnto the vttmost : him I will bringe in
to the lond which he had walked in , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.640

& his seed shall conquere it , & also the Amalechites a~d Cananites
which dwell in the lowe contrees TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.641

Tomorowe turne you TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.642

and gete you in to the wildernesse : euen the waye towarde the red see .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.643

And the Lorde spake vnto Moses a~d Aaron sayenge : how longe shall this
euell multitude murmure agenst me ? TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.644

I haue herde y=e= murmurynges of y=e= childern of Ysrael whyche they
murmure agenste me . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.645

Tell them , y=t= the Lorde sayeth . As truely as I lyue , I wil do vnto
you euen as ye haue spoken in myne eares . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.646

Youre carkasses shall lye in this wildernesse ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.647

nether shall any of these numbres which were numbred from .xx. yere &
aboue of you which haue murmured agenst me come in to the londe ouer
which I lifted myne hande to make you dwell therein , saue Caleb the
sonne of Iephune , and Iosua the sonne of Nun .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.648

And youre childern whiche ye sayed shuld be a praye , the~ I will bringe
in , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.649

& they shall knowe the londe which ye haue refused ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.650

and youre carkesses shall lye in this wildernesse
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.651

And youre childern shall wa~dre in this wildernesse .xl. yeres & suffre
for youre whoredome vntill your carkasses be wasted in the wildernesse ,
after the numbre of the dayes in which ye serched out y=e= londe .xl.
dayes , & euery daye a yere : so that they shall bere your
vnrightuousnes .xl. yere , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.652

& ye shall fele my vengeaunce TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.653

I the Lorde haue sayed y=t= I will do it vnto all this euell
congregacion y=t= are gathered together agenst me :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.654

euen in thys wildernesse ye shal@ @be consumed ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.655

and here ye shall dye . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.656

And the men which Moses sent to serche the londe , and which <paren>
when they came agayne <$$paren> made all the people to murmure agenst it
in that they broughte vpp a slaunder apon y=e= londe : dyed for their
bryngenge vp that euell slaunder apon it , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.657

and were plaged before the Lorde . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.658

But Iosua the sonne of Nun and Caleb the sonne of Iephune which were of
y=e= me~ that went to serche the londe , lyued still .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.659

And Moses tolde these sayenges vnto all the childern of Ysrael ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.660

and the people toke great sorowe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,20N.661

<P_14,40N>

And they rose vp yerlee in the mornynge TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.663

& gatt them vpp in to the toppe of the mountayne sayenge : lo we be here
, TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.664

a~d will goo vpp vnto the place of which the Lorde sayed ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.665

for we haue synned . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.666

And Moses sayed : wherfore will ye goo on this maner beyonde the worde
of the Lorde ? TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.667

it will not come well to passe TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.668

goo not vpp for the Lorde is not amonge you that ye be not slayne before
youre enemyes . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.669

For the Amalechytes and the Cananites are there before you ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.670

& ye will fall apon the swerde : because ye are turned a_waye from y=e=
Lorde , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.671

and therfore the Lorde wyll not be wyth you .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.672

But they were blynded to goo vpp in to y=e= hylltoppe :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.673

Neuer the lather , the arke of the testament of the Lorde and Moses
departed not out of the hoste . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.674

Then the Amalekytes a~d the Cananites which dwelt in that hill , came
doune TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.675

and smote them TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.676

and hewed the~ : euen vnto Horma . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,14,40N.677

<P_16,1N>

<heading>

THE .XVI. CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.680

<$$heading>

And Corah the sonne of Iezehar the sonne of Cahath the sonne of Leui :
Dathan & Abiram the sonne of Eliab , and On the sonne of Peleth , the
sonne of Ruben : stode vpp before Moses , with other of the childern of
Israel .ii._hundred_and_fyftie , heedes of the congregacion , and
councelers , and men of fame , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.682

and they gathered the~ selues together agenst Moses and Aaron
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.683

& sayed vnto them : ye haue done ynough . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.684

For all the multitude are holy euery one of them ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.685

and the Lorde is amonge them . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.686

Why therfore heue ye youre selues vpp aboue the congregacion of the
Lorde . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.687

When Moses herde it , he fell apon his face TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.688

and spake vnto Corah and vnto all his companye sayenge : tomorow the
Lorde will shewe who is his and who is holy ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.689

and will take them vnto him , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.690

and whom so euer he hath chosen , he will cause to come to him .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.691

This doo : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.692

take fyrepannes , thou Corah and all thi companye ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.693

and do fyre therein TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.694

a~d put ce~s thereto before the Lorde tomorowe :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.695

And then whom soeuer the Lorde doeth chose , the same is holy .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.696

Ye make ynough to doo ye childern of Leui . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.697

And Moses sayed vnto Corah : heare ye childern of leui , Semeth it but a
small thynge vnto you , that y=e= God of Israel hath separated you fro~
the multitude of Israel to brynge you to him , to doo the seruyce of the
dwellynge place of the Lorde , and to stonde before the people to
minystre vnto them ? TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.698

he hath taken the to him and all thi brethern the sonnes of leui with
the , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.699

and ye seke the office of y=e= preast also . For which cause both thou
and all thi companye are gathered together agenst the Lorde :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.700

for what is Aaron , that ye shulde murmure agenst him .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.701

And Moses sent to call Dathan a~d Abiram the sonnes of Eliab ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.702

and they answered : we will not come . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.703

Semeth it a small thynge vnto the that thou hast broughte us out of a
londe that floweth with mylke and honye , to kyll us in y=e= wildernesse
. But that thou shuldest reygne ouer us also ?
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.704

More_ouer thou hast broughte us vnto no londe that floweth with mylke
and honye , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.705

nether hast geuen us possessions of feldes or of vynes .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.706

Ether wilt thou pull out the eyes of these men ?
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.707

we wyll not come . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.708

And Moses waxed very angrye TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.709

and sayed vnto the Lorde : Turne not vnto their offerynges .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.710

I haue not taken so moch as an asse from them ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.711

nether haue vexed any of them . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.712

Then Moses sayed vnto Corah : Be thou a~d all thy companye before the
Lorde : both thou , they and Aaron to morowe .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.713

And take euery man his censer TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.714

and put cens in them , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.715

& come before the Lorde euery man with hys censer :
two_hundred_and_fyftie censers , and Aaron with his censer .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.716

And they toke euery man his censer TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.717

and put fyre in them TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.718

& layed cens thereon , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.719

and stode in the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse , and Moses & Aaron
also . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.720

And Corah gathered all the congregacyon agenst them vnto the dore of the
tabernacle of witnesse . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.721

And the glorye of the Lorde appered vnto all the congregacion .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,1N.722

<P_16,20N>

And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayenge : separate youre selues
from this congregacion , that I maye consume them atonce .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.724

And they fell apon their faces TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.725

and sayed : O most myghtie God of the spirites of all fleshe , one ma~
hath synned , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.726

and wylt thou be wroth with all the multitude ?
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.727

And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayenge : speake vnto the congregacion
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.728

and saye : Gett you awaye from aboute the dwellynge of Corah , Dathan &
Abiram . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.729

And Moses rose vpp TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.730

and went vnto Dathan & Abira~ , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.731

& the elders of Israel folowed him . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.732

And he spake vnto the congregacyon sayenge : departe from the tentes of
these weked men TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.733

and twyche nothinge of theres : lest ye peryshe in all there synnes .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.734

And they gate them from the dwellynge of Corah , Dathan and Abiram , on
euery side . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.735

And Dathan and Abiram came out & stode in y=e= dore of there te~tes with
their wyues , their sonnes and their childern .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.736

And Moses sayed : Hereby ye shall knowe that the Lorde hath sent me to
doo all these workes , and that I haue not done them of myne awne mynde
: TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.737

Yf these men dye the comon deth of all men or yf they be visyted after
the visitacion of all men , then the Lorde hath not sent me .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.738

But and yf the Lorde make a new thinge , and the erth open hir mouthe
and swalowe them and all that pertayne vnto them , so that they goo
doune quycke in to hell : then ye shall vndersto~d , that these me~ haue
rayled apon the Lorde . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.739

And as soone as he had made an ende of speakynge all these wordes , the
grounde cloue asunder that was vnder them , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.740

and y=e= erth opened hir mouthe TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.741

and swalowed them and their housses and all the me~ that were with Corah
and all their goodes . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.742

And they and all that pertayned vnto them , went doune alyue vnto hell ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.743

and the erthe closed apon them , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.744

and they peryshed from amonge the congregacyon .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.745

And all Israel that were aboute them , fledde at the crye of them .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.746

For they sayed : The erthe myghte happelye swalowe vs also .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.747

And there came oute a fyre from the Lorde TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.748

and consumed the two_hundred_and_fyftye men that offred cens .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.749

And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayenge : Speake vnto Eleazer the sonne
of Aaron the preaste TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.750

and let him take vppe the censers oute of the burnynge and scater the
fyre here and there , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.751

for the censers of these synners are halowed in theyr deethes :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.752

and let them be beten in to thyne plates and fastened apon the altare .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.753

For they offred the~ before the Lorde , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.754

and therfore they are holye TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.755

and they shal@ @be a sygne vnto the childern of Israel .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.756

And Eleazar the preast toke the brasen censers which they that were
burnt had offered , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.757

and bet them TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,20N.758

and fastened them vppon the altare , <P_16,40N> to be a remembraunce
vnto the childern of Israel , that no straunger whiche is not of the
seed of Aaron , come nere to offer cens before the Lorde , that he be
not made like vnto Corah and his companye : as the Lorde sayed vnto him
by the hande of Moses . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.759

And on the morowe all the multitude of the childern of Israell murmured
agenste Moses and Aaron sayenge : ye haue kylled the people of the Lorde
. TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.760

And when the multitude was gathered agenste Moses and Aaron , they loked
towarde the tabernacle of witnesse . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.761

And beholde , the cloude had couered it TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.762

and the glorye of the Lorde appeared . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.763

And Moses and Aaron went before the tabernacle of witnesse .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.764

And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayenge : Gett you from this congregacyon
, that I maye consume them quyckelye . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.765

And they fell apon theyr faces . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.766

And Moses sayde vnto Aaron : take a censer TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.767

and put fyre therein out of the alter , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.768

and poure on cens , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.769

and goo quyckly vnto the co~gregacion TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.770

and make an attonement for the~ . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.771

For there is wrath gone oute from the Lorde ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.772

and there is a plage begone . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.773

And Aaron toke as Moses commaunded him , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.774

and ran vnto the congregacion : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.775

and beholde , the plage was begone amonge the people ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.776

and he put on cens , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.777

and made an attonement for the people . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.778

And he stode betwene the deed , and them that were alyue ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.779

and the plage ceased . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.780

And the numbre of them that dyed in the plage , were
xiiii._thousande_and_seuen_hundred : besyde them that dyed aboute the
busynes of Corah . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.781

And Aaron went agayne vnto Moses vnto the dore off the tabernacle of
witnesse , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.782

and the plage ceased . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,16,40N.783

<P_17,1N>

<heading>

XVII. CHAPTER . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.786

<$$heading>

And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayenge : speake vnto the childern of
Israel TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.788

and take of them , for euery pryncypall housse a rod , of their princes
ouer the housses of their fathers : euen .xii. roddes , and wryte euery
mans name apon his rod . And wryte Aarons name apon the staffe of Leui
: for euery heedman ouer the housses of their fathers shall haue a rod .
And put the~ in the tabernacle of witnesse where I wyll mete you . And
his rod whom I chose , shall blossome : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.789

So I wyll make cease from me the grudgynges of the childern of Israel
which they grudge agenst you . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.790

And Moses spake vnto the childern off Israel ,
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.791

and all the prynces gaue him for euery prynce ouer their fathers housses
, a rod : euen .xii. roddes , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.792

and the rod of Aaron was amonge the rodes . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.793

And Moses put y=e= roddes before the Lorde in the tabernacle of witnesse
. TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.794

And on the morowe , Moses went in to the tabernacle :
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.795

and beholde , the rod of Aaron of the housse of Leui was budded
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.796

& bare blosomes and almondes . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.797

And Moses broughte out all the staues from before the Lorde , vnto all
the childern of Israel , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.798

& thei loked apon them , TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.799

and toke euery man his staffe . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.800

And the Lorde sayed vnto Moses : Brynge Aarons rod agayne before the
witnesse to be kepte for a token vnto the childern of rebellyon , that
their murmurynges maye ceasse fro me , that they dye not .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.801

And Moses dyd as the Lorde commaunded him . TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.802

And the childern of Israel spake vnto Moses sayenge : beholde , we are
destroyed and all come to nought : TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.803

for whosoeuer cometh nye the dwellynge of the Lord , dyeth .
TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.804

Shall we vtterly consume awaye ? TYNDOLD-1530-E1-H,17,1N.805

