<BEGIN_vicary-1548-e1-h>

<P_28>

<heading>

CHAPTER IV VICARY-1548-E1-H,28.4

IN THIS CHAPTER IS DECLARED THE FIUE THINGES CONTEYNED WITHIN THE HEAD .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,28.5

<$$heading>

Next vnder the bones of the head withinfoorth , the first thing that
appeareth is Duramater ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,28.7

then is Piamater ; then the substaunce of the Brayne ; and then
Vermy-formes and Retemirabile . VICARY-1548-E1-H,28.8

But first to speake of Duramater , whereof and howe it is sprong and
made : VICARY-1548-E1-H,28.9

First , it is to be noted of the Veine and <P_29> Arteire that was
spoken of in the laste Chapter before , howe priuyly they entred through
the commissoris or seames of the head , VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.10

and there , by their vnion together , they doo not onely bring and geue
the spirite of lyfe and nutriment , VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.11

but also doo weaue them selues so togeather , that they make this
pannicle Duramater . VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.12

It is holden vp by certayne threedes of him selfe comming through the
sayd commissories , running into Pericranium or pannicle that couereth
the bones of the head . VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.13

And with the foresayde Veyne and Arteire , and these threedes comming
from Duramater , is wouen and made this Pericranium .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.14

Also , why this panicle Duramater is set from the skul , I note two
causes : VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.15

the first is , that if the Duramater shoulde haue touched the skul , it
shoulde lightly haue bene hurt with the hardnes of the bone :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.16

The seconde cause is , that the matter that commeth of woundes made in
the head pearsing the skul , shoulde by it the better be defended and
kepte from Piamater , and hurting of the brayne .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.17

And next vnto this panicle there is another pannicle called <font> Pia
mater <$$font> , or meeke mother , because it is so softe and tender
vnto the brayne . Of whose creation it is to be noted as of Duramater ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.18

for the original of their fyrst creation is of one kind , both from the
Hart and the Lyuer , VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.19

and is mother of the very substaunce of the brayne .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.20

Why it is called Piamater , is , for because it is so softe and tender
ouer the brayne , that it nourisheth the brayne and feedeth it , as doth
a louing mother vnto her tender childe or babe ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.21

for it is not so tough and harde as is Duramater .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,29.22

In this panicle Pia mater , is much to be noted of the great number of
<P_30> Veynes and Arteirs that are planted , ramefying throughout al his
substaunce , geuing to the brayne both spirite and lyfe .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.23

And this Pannicle doth circumuolue or lappe al the substaunce of the
brayne : VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.24

and in some places of the brayne the Veynes and the Arteirs goo foorth
of him , VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.25

and enter into the diuisions of the brayne , VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.26

and there drinketh of the brayne substaunce into them , asking of the
hart to them the spirite of lyfe or breath , and of the Lyuer ,
nutriment . VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.27

And the aforesayde spirite or breath taketh a further digestion ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.28

and there it is made animal ; by the elaboration of the spirite vital ,
is turned and made animall . VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.29

Furthermore , why there bee moo pannicles ouer the brayne then one , is
this : VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.30

If there had beene but one pannicle onely , eyther it must haue beene
harde , or soft , or meane betweene both . VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.31

If it had beene harde , it should haue hurt the braine by his hardnes :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.32

if it had beene soft , it shoulde haue beene hurt of the harde bone :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.33

and yf it had beene but meanely neyther hard nor soft , it should haue
hurt the braine by his roughnes , and also haue beene hurte of the harde
bone . VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.34

Therefore God and nature haue ordeyned two Pannicles , the one harde ,
and the other softe : VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.35

the harder to be a meane betweene the softe and the bone ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.36

and the softer to be a meane betweene the harder and the braine it selfe
. VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.37

Also these Pannicles be colde and dry of complexion , and spermatike .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.38

Next is the Brayne , of which it is marueylous to be considered and
noted , how this Piamater deuideth the substaunce of the Brayne , and
lappeth it into certen selles or diuisions , as thus :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.39

The substaunce of the braine is diuided into three partes or ventrikles
, of which the foremost part is the moste : VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.40

the seconde or middlemost is lesse : VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.41

the third or hindermost is the least . VICARY-1548-E1-H,30.42

And from eche one to other be issues or passages <P_31> that are called
<font> Meates <$$font> , through whom passeth the spirit of life too and
fro . VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.43

But here ye shal note that euery Ventrikle is diuided into two partes ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.44

and in euery parte God hath ordeyned and set singular and seueral
vertues , as thus : VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.45

First , in the foremost Ventrikle God hath founded and set the common
Wittes , otherwise called the fyue Wittes , as Hearing , Seeing ,
Feeling , Smelling , and tasting . VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.46

And also there is in one part of this Ventrikle , the vertue that is
called Fantasie , VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.47

and he taketh al the formes or ordinaunces that be disposed of the fiue
wittes , after the meaning of sensible thinges : VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.48

In the other parte of the same Ventrikle is ordeyned and founded the
Imaginatiue vertue , the whiche receyueth of the common Wittes the
fourme or shape of sensitiue thinges , as they were receyued of the
common wittes withoutfoorth , representing their owne shape and
ordinaunces vnto the memoratiue vertue . VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.49

In the middest sel or ventrikle there is founded and ordeyned the
Cogitatiue or estimatiue vertue : VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.50

for he rehearseth , sheweth , declareth , and deemeth those things that
be offered vnto him by the other that were spoken of before .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.51

In the thirde Ventrikle , and last , there is founded and ordeyned the
vertue Memoratiue : VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.52

in this place is registred and kept those things that are done and
spoken with the senses , VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.53

and keepeth them in his treasurie vnto the putting foorth of the fyue or
common wittes , or orgaynes , or instrumentes of animal workes , out of
whose extremities or lower partes springeth Mynuca , or marowe of the
spondels : of whom it shall be spoken of in the Anatomie of the necke
and backe . VICARY-1548-E1-H,31.54

Furthermore , it is to be noted that from the foremost Ventrikle of the
brayne springeth seuen payre of sensatiue or feeling senews , the which
be produced to the Eyes , the Eares , the <P_32> Nose , the Toung , and
to the Stomack , and to diuers other partes of the body : as it shal be
declared in their anatomies . VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.55

Also it is to bee noted , that aboute the middest ventrikle is the place
of Vermiformis , with curnelly fleshe that filleth ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.56

and Retemirabile , or wonderful caule vnder the Pannicles , is sette or
bounded with Arteirs onely , whiche come from the harte , in the whyche
the vitayle spirite , by his great labour is turned and made animal .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.57

And ye shal vnderstande , that these two be the best kept partes of al
the body ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.58

for a man shal rather dye , then any of these should suffer any manner
of greefes from withoutfoorth ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.59

and therefore God hath set them farre from the hart .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.60

Heere I note the saying of Haly Abbas , of the comming of smal Arteirs
from the hart , of whom <paren> sayth he <$$paren> is made a marueylous
net or caule , in the which caule is inclosed the Brayne ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.61

and in that place is layde the spirite of feeling ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.62

from that place hath the spirite of feeling his first creation ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.63

and from thence passeth to other members , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.64

Furthermore , ye shal vnderstand that the brayne is a member colde and
moyst of complexion , thinne , and meanely viscous , and a principal
member , and an official member , and spermatike .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.65

And fyrst , why he is a principal member , is , because he is the
gouernour or the treasurie of the fyue wittes : VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.66

And why he is an official member , is , because he hath the effect of
feeling and stering : VICARY-1548-E1-H,32.67

And why he is colde and moyst , is , that he shoulde , by his coldnes
and moystnes , abate and temper the exceeding heate and drought that
commeth <P_33> from the harte : VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.68

Also , why he is moyst , is , that it should be the more indifferenter
and abler to euery thing that shoulde be reserued or gotten into him :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.69

Also , why it is soft , is , that it should geue place and fauour to the
vertue of stering : VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.70

And why it is meanely viscous , is , that his senewes should be strong
and meanely toughe , and that they shoulde not be letted in their
working throughe his ouermuche hardnes . VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.71

Heere Galen demaundeth a question , which is this , Whether that feeling
and mouing bee brought to Nerues by one or by diuers ? or whether the
aforesayde thing be brought substancially or radically .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.72

The matter <paren> sayth he <$$paren> is so harde to searche and be
vnderstoode , that it were much better to let it alone and passe ouer it
. VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.73

Aristotle , intreating of the Brayne , sayth : The Brayne is a member
continually mouing and ruling al other members of the body , geuing vnto
them both feeling and mouing ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.74

for if the Brayne be let , al other members be let :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.75

and if the Brayne be wel , then al other members of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} the body be the better disposed .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.76

Also the brayne hath this propertie , that it moueth and followeth the
mouing of the Moone : VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.77

for in the waxing of the Moone , the Brayne followeth vpwardes ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.78

and in the wane of the Moone , the brayne discendeth downwardes ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.79

and vanisheth in substaunce of vertue : VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.80

for then the Brayne shrinketh togeather in it selfe ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.81

and is not so fully obedient to the spirit of feeling .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.82

And this is proued in menne that be lunatike or madde , and also in men
that be epulentike , or hauing the falling sicknesse , that be moste
greeued in the beginning of the newe Moone , and in the latter quarter
of the Moone . Wherefore <paren> sayth Aristotle <$$paren> when it
happeneth that the Brayne is eyther too drye or too moyst , then can it
not worke his kinde : VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.83

for then is the body made colde : VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.84

then are the spirites of lyfe melted and resolued away :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,33.85

<P_34> and then foloweth feebleness of the wittes , and of al other
members of the body , and at the laste death . VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.86

<heading>

CHAPTER V . VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.88

HEEREAFTER FOLOWETH THE ANATOMIE OF THE FACE . VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.89

<$$heading>

The Front or the Forhead conteyneth nothing but the Skinne and Musculus
fleshe , VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.91

for the panicle vnderneth it is of Pericranium , VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.92

and the bone is of the Coronal bone . VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.93

Howebeit there it is made broade , as yf ther were a double bone ,
whiche maketh the forme of the Browes . VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.94

It is called the Forhead or Front , from one Eare to the other , and
from the rootes of the Eares of the head before , vnto y=e= browes .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.95

But the cause why the Browes were set and reared vp , was , that they
shoulde defende the Eyes from noyaunce withoutfoorth :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.96

And they be ordeyned with heare , to put by the humour or sweat that
cometh from the head . VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.97

Also the Browes do helpe the Eyeliddes , VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.98

and do beautifie and make fayre the face ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.99

for he that hath not his Browes heyred , is not seemely .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.100

And Aristotle sayth , that ouer measurable Browes betokeneth an enuious
man : VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.101

Also high browes and thicke betokeneth hardnes : VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.102

and browes with little heare betokeneth cowardnes :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.103

and meanly , signifieth gentlenes of hart . VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.104

Incisions about these partes ought to be done according to the length of
the body , VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.105

for there the Muscle goeth from one Eare to the other .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,34.106

And there , if any incision should be made with the lenght of the Muscle
, it might happen the Browe to hang ouer the Eye without remedie , as it
is many times seene , the <P_35> more pitie ! VICARY-1548-E1-H,35.107

The browes be called Supercilium in Latin ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,35.108

and vnder , is the Eye liddes , which is called Cilium , and is
garnished with heyres . VICARY-1548-E1-H,35.109

Two causes I finde why the eye-liddes were ordeyned :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,35.110

The fyrst is , that they shoulde keepe and defende the Eye from duste
and other outwarde noyances : VICARY-1548-E1-H,35.111

the seconde is , when the eye is weery or heauy , then they should be
couered , and take rest vnderneath them . VICARY-1548-E1-H,35.112

Why the heyres were ordeyned in them , is , that by them is addressed
the formes or similitudes of visible thinges vnto the apple of the eye .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,35.113

<P_54>

The Brest or Thorax is the Arke or Chest of the spiritual members of man
, as sayth the Philosopher : where it is to be noted , that there be
foure thinges conteyning , and eyght conteyned , as thus :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,54.115

The foure conteyning are , the Skinne , Musculus fleshe , the <P_55>
Pappes , and the Bones : VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.116

The partes conteyned are , the Hart , the Lunges , Panikles , Ligamentes
, Nerues , Veines , Arteirs , Mire or Isofagus .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.117

Nowe the skinne and the fleshe are knowen in their Anatomie .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.118

It is to be noted , that the fleshe of the Pappes differeth from the
other fleshe of the body , VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.119

for it is white , glandulus , & spongeous : VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.120

and there is in them , both Nerues , Veines and Arteirs ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.121

and by them they haue Coliganes with the hart , the lyuer , the brayne ,
and the generatiue members . VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.122

Also there is in the brest , as old Authors make mention , lxxx. or
.xc. Muskles ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.123

for some of them be common to the necke , some to the shoulders , and to
the spades , some to Diafragma or y=e= Mydriffe , some to the Ribbes ,
some to the Backe , & some to the brest it selfe .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.124

But I fynde certayne profitablenes in the creation of y=e= Paps , as@
@wel in man as in woman : VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.125

for in man it defendeth the spirituals from annoyannce outwardly :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.126

and another , by their thicknes they comfort the natural heate in
defience of the spirites . VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.127

And in women there is the generation of milke : VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.128

for in women there commeth from the Matrix into their Brestes manye
Veines which bring into them menstrual blood , the whiche is turned
<paren> through the digestiue vertue <$$paren> from red colour into
white , like the colour of the Pappes , euen as Chylley comming from the
stomocke to the Lyuer is turned into the colour of the Lyuer .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.129

Nowe to speake of the bones of the Brest : VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.130

They be sayde to be triple or threefolde ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.131

and they be numbred to be seuen in the Brest before ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.132

and their length is according to the breadth of the brest ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.133

and their extremities or endes be grystlie , as the ribbes be .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,55.134

<P_56>

And in the vpper ende of Thorax is an hole or a concauitie , in which is
set the foote of the Furklebone , or Canel_bone ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.136

and in the nether ende of Thorax , agaynst y=e= mouth of the stomacke ,
hangeth a gristle called Ensiforme : VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.137

and this grystle was ordeyned for two causes : VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.138

One is , that it shuld defende the stomacke from hurte outwardly :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.139

The seconde is , that in time of fulnes it should geue place to the
stomacke in time of neede when it desireth , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.140

Nowe to speake of the parts of the backe behindefoorth :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.141

There be .xij. Spondels , through whom passeth Mynuca , of whom
springeth .xij. payre of Nerues , bringing
{COM:preceding_word_"bringing"_emended} both feeling and mouing to the
Muscles of the Brest aforesayde . VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.142

And here it is to be noted , that in euery syde there be .xij. Rybbes ;
that is to say , .vij. true , and .v. false , because these .v. be
not so long as the other .vij. be , and therefore be called false
Rybbes , as it may be perceiued by the sighte of the Eye .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.143

Likewise of the partes that be inwardly ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.144

and fyrst of the Hart , because he is the principal of al other members
, and the beginning of life : VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.145

he is set in the middest of the brest seuerally by him selfe , as Lord
and King of al members . VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.146

And as a Lorde or King ought to be serued of his subiectes that haue
their liuing of him , So are al other members of the body subiectes to
the Hart , VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.147

for they receyue their liuing of him , VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.148

and they doo seruice many wayes vnto him agayne .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,56.149

The substaunce of the Hart is , as it were , <P_57> Lazartus fleshe ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.150

but it is spermatike , and an official member , and the beginning of
life ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.151

and he geueth to euery member of the body both blood of life , and
spirite of breath and heate : VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.152

for if the Hart were of Lazartus fleshe , his mouing and steering should
be voluntarie , and not natural ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.153

but the contrarie is true , VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.154

for it were impossible that the Hart should be ruled by Wyl onely , and
not by nature . VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.155

The Harte hath the shape and forme of a Pyneapple ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.156

and the brode ende thereof is vpwardes , VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.157

and the sharpe ende is downewardes , depending a little towardes the
left side . VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.158

And here it is to be noted , that the Hart hath blood in his substaunce
, whereas al other members haue it but in their Veines & Arteirs :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.159

also the hart is bounde with certayne Ligamentes to the backepart of the
brest , VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.160

but these Lygamentes touche not the substaunce of the Hart ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.161

but in the ouerpart they spring foorth of him , VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.162

and is fastened , as is aforesayde . VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.163

Furthermore , the Hart hath two Ventrikles or concauities ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.164

and the left is hyer then the right ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.165

and the cause of this holownesse is this , for to keepe the bloud for
his nourishing , and the ayre to abate and temper the great heate that
he is in , the which is kept in his concauities .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,57.166

Nowe here it is to be noted , that to the right Ventrikle of the harte
commeth a veyne from the great veyne called Venakelis , that receyueth
al the <P_58> substaunce of the blood from the Lyuer .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.167

And this veine that commeth from Venakelis , entreth into the hart at
the right Ventrikle , as I sayde before ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.168

and in him is brought a great portion of the thickest blood to nourishe
the Hart with ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.169

& the residue that is left of this , is made subtil through the vertue
of the hart ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.170

and then this blood is sent into a concauitie or pytte in the myddest of
the Harte betweene the two Ventrikles , VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.171

and therein it is made hote and pured ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.172

and then it passeth into the left Ventrikle , VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.173

and there is ingendred in it a spirit that is clearer , brighter , and
subtiller then any corporal or bodely thing that is ingendred of the
foure Elementes ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.174

For it is a thing that is a meane betweene the body and the soule .
Wherfore it is likened of the Philosophers , to be more liker heauenly
thinges then earthly thinges . VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.175

Also it is to be noted , that from the left Ventrikle of the Hart
springeth two Arteirs : The one hauing but one cote ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.176

and therefore it is called Arterea venalis : VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.177

and this Arteir carieth blood from the Hart to the Lungs , the which
Blood is vaporous , that is tried and left of the Harte , and is brought
by this Artery to the Lunges , to geue hym nutriment :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.178

and there he receyueth of the Lunges ayre , VICARY-1548-E1-H,58.179

and bringeth it to the hart to refreshe him with . Wherefore Galen
<P_59> sayth , that he fyndeth that mans harte is natural and frendly to
the Lungs , VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.180

for he geueth him of his owne nutrimental to nourishe him with ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.181

and the Lunges rewarde him with ayre to refreshe him with agayne , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.182

The other Arterye that hath two cotes , is called vena Arterialis , or
the great Artery that ascendeth and dissendeth ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.183

and of him springeth al the other Arteirs that spreade to euery member
of the body , VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.184

for by him is vnified and quickneth al the members of the body .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.185

For the spirite that is reteyned in them , is the instrument or treasure
of al the vertue of the soule . VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.186

And thus it passeth vntil it come to the Brayne ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.187

& there he is turned into a further digestion , VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.188

and there he taketh another spirite , VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.189

and so is made animal , and at the Lyuer nutrimental , and at the
Testikles generatiue ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.190

and thus it is made a spirite of euery kinde , so that he , beeing meane
of al maner of operations and workinges , taketh effect .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.191

Two causes I fynde why these Arteirs haue two cotes :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.192

One is , that one cote is not sufficient nor able to withstande the
violent mouing and steering of the spirite of lyfe that is caryed in
them : VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.193

The seconde cause is , that the thing that is caried about from place to
place , is of so precious a treasure that it had the more neede of good
keeping . VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.194

And of some Doctors this Arteir is called Pulsatiue veyne , or the
beating veyne : VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.195

for by him is perceyued the power & might of the Hart , &c. Wherfore
God and Nature haue ordeyned that the Arteirs should haue two cotes .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.196

Also there is in the Harte three Pelikels , opening and closing the
gooing in of the Harte blood and spirite in conuenient time .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,59.197

Also the Hart hath two <P_60> little Eares , by whome commeth in and
passeth out the ayre that is prepared for the Lunges .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.198

Also there is founde in the Hart a Cartilaginus auditament , to helpe
and strength the selfe Harte . VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.199

Also the Harte is couered with a strong Pannikle , which is called of
some , Capsula cordeo , or Pericordium , the whiche is a strong case ,
vnto whome commeth Nerues , as to other inwarde members .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.200

And this Panicle Pericordium springeth of the vpper Pannicle of the
Midriffe . VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.201

And of him springeth another Panikle , called Mediastinum , the which
departeth the Brest in the middest , and keepeth that the Lunges fal not
ouer the Hart . VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.202

Also there is an other Pannikle that couereth the Ribbes inwardly , that
is called Plura , of whom the Midriffe taketh his beginning .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.203

And it is sayde of many Doctors , that Duramater is the originall of all
the Pannicles within the body : VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.204

and thus one taketh of another , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.205

<heading>

CHAPTER VIII . VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.207

THE ANATOMIE OF THE LUNGES . VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.208

<$$heading>

The Lunges is a member spermatike of his fyrst creation ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.210

and his natural complexion is colde and dry ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,60.211

and in his accidental complexion he is colde <P_61> and moyste , lapped
in a Nerueous Pannikle , bicause it should gather togeather the softer
substaunce of the Lunges , and that the Lunges might feele by the meanes
of the Pannicle , that whiche he might not feele in himselfe .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.212

Nowe to proue the Lunges to be colde and drye of kinde , it appeareth by
hys swift steering , VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.213

for he lyeth euer wauing ouer the hart , and about the harte .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.214

And that he is colde and moyst in rewarde , it appeareth wel , that he
receyueth of the brayne many cold matters , as Cataries , and Rumes ,
whose substaunce is thinne . VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.215

Also I fynde in the Lunges , three kinds of substaunce :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.216

One is a Veyne comming from the Liuer , bringing with him the Crude or
rawe parte of the Chylle to feede the Lunges : VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.217

Another is Arterea venalis , comming from the hart , bringing with him
the spirite of lyfe to nourishe him with : VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.218

The third is Trachia arteria , that bringeth in ayre to the Lunges ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.219

and it passeth through al the left part of them to doo his office .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.220

The Lunges is deuided into fiue Lobbes or Pellikels , or fiue portions ,
that is to say , three in the right side , and two in the left side .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.221

And it was done for this cause , that if there fel any hurt in the one
part , the others shoulde serue and doo their office .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.222

And three causes I finde why the Lunges were principally ordeyned :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.223

First , that they should drawe colde winde , and refreshe the hart :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,61.224

The seconde , that they shoulde <P_62> chaunge and alter , and purifie
the ayre before it come to y=e= hart , least the hart were hurte and
noyed with the quantitie of the ayre : VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.225

The thirde cause is , that they shoulde receyue from the harte the
fumous superfluities that he putteth foorth with hys breathing , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.226

Behinde the Lunges , towarde the Spondels , passeth Mire or Isofagus ,
of whom it is spoken of in the Anatomie of the necke .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.227

And also there passeth both Veynes and Arteirs ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.228

and al these with Trachia arteria doo make a Stoke , replete vnto the
Gullet with Pannikles , and strong Lygaments , and Glandulus fleshe to
fulfil the voyde places . VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.229

And last of al is the Midriffe ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.230

and it is an official member , made of two Pannikles , and Lazartus
flesh ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.231

and his place is in the middest of the body ouerthwart or in bredth
vnder the region of the spirituall members , departing them from the
matrix . VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.232

And three causes I finde why the Midriffe was ordeyned :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.233

First , that it should diuide the spirituals from the nutrates :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.234

The seconde , that it should keepe the vital colour or heate to dissende
downe to the nutrates : VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.235

The last is , that the malicious fumes reared vp from the nutrates ,
should not noye the spirituals or vytals , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.236

The wombe is the region or the citie of al the Intrils ; the whiche
reacheth from the Midriffe downe vnto the share inwardly , and outwardly
from the Reynes or Kydnes , downe to the bone Pecten , about the priuie
partes . VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.237

And thys wombe is compounde and made of two thinges , that is to say ,
of <font> Syfac <$$font> and <font> Myrac <$$font> .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,62.238

<font> Syfac <$$font> is a Pannicle , and a member spermatike , official
, <P_63> sensible , senowy , compound of subtil Wyl , and in complexion
colde and drye , hauing his beginning at the inner Pannicle of the
Midriffe . VICARY-1548-E1-H,63.239

And it was ordeyned because it shoulde conteyne and bind together al the
Intrals , and that he defende the Musculus so that he oppresse not the
natural members . VICARY-1548-E1-H,63.240

And that he is strong and tough ; it is because he should not be lightly
broken , and that those thinges that are conteyned goo not foorth , as
it happeneth to them that are broken , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-H,63.241

<font> Myrac <$$font> is compound and made of foure things , that is ,
of skin outwardly , of fatnes , of a carnous pannicle , and of Musculus
fleshe . VICARY-1548-E1-H,63.242

And that it is to be vnderstanded , that all the whole from Sifac
outwarde , is called Myrac , it appeareth wel by the wordes of Galen ,
where he commaundeth , that in al woundes of the wombe , to sewe the
Sifac with the Myrac ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,63.243

and by that it proueth , that there is nothing without the Sifac , but
Myrac . VICARY-1548-E1-H,63.244

And in this Myrac or vtter parte of the wombe , there is noted eyght
Muscles , two Longitudinals , proceeding from the sheelde of the
Stomache vnto Os Pecten : two Latitudinales comming from the
backe-wardes to the wombe : and foure Tranuerse , of the which , two of
them spring from the Ribbes on the right side , and go to the left side
, to the bones of the Haunches , or of Pecten : VICARY-1548-E1-H,63.245

and the other two spring from the Ribbes on the left syde ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,63.246

and come ouer the wombe to the righte partes , as the other before doth
. VICARY-1548-E1-H,63.247

Heere it is to be noted , that by the <P_64> vertue of the subtyl wyl
that is in the Musculus longitudinal , is made perfect the vertue
attractiue : VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.248

and by the musculus Tranuerse is made the vertue retentiue :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.249

and by the musculus Latitudinale is made the vertue expulsiue .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.250

It is thus to be vnderstoode , that by the vertue attractiue , is drawen
downe into the Intrals al superfluities , both water , wynde , and dyrt
: VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.251

By the vertue retentiue , all thinges are withholden and kept , vntil
nature haue wrought his kinde : VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.252

And by the vertue expulsiue , is put foorth al thinges when Nature
prouoketh any thing to be done . VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.253

Galen sayth that woundes or incisions be more perillous in the middest
of the wombe then about the sides , VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.254

for there the partes be more tractable , then any other partes be .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.255

Also he sayth , that in wounds persing the womb there shal not be made
good incarnation , except Sifac be sewed with Myrac .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.256

Nowe to come to y=e= parts conteyned within : VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.257

Fyrst , that which appeareth next vnder the Sifac is <font> Omentum
<$$font> , or <font> Zirbus <$$font> , the which is a pannicle couering
the stomacke and the Intrals , implanted with many Veynes and Arteirs ,
and not a little fatnes ordeyned to keepe moyst the inwarde partes .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.258

This Zirbus is an official member , VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.259

and is compound of a veyne and an Arteir , the which entreth and maketh
a line of the vtter tunikle of the stomacke , vnto whiche tunikle
hangeth the Zirbus , and couereth al the guttes downe to the shayre .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.260

Two causes I finde why they were ordeyned : VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.261

one is , that they shuld defend y=e= nutratiues outwardly :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.262

the seconde is , that through his owne power & vertue he should strength
and comfort the digestion of al the Nutrates , because they are more
feebler then other members be , bicause they haue but a thin wombe or
skinne , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-H,64.263

<P_65>

Next Zirbus , appeareth the Intrals or guttes , of which Galen saith ,
that the Guttes were ordeined in the fyrst creation to conuey the drosse
of the meate and drinke , & to clense the body of their superfluities .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.265

And here it is to be noted that there be sixe portions of one whole
Gutte , which both in man and beast beginneth at the nether mouth of the
stomacke , and so continueth foorth to the end of the Fundament .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.266

Neuerthelesse he hath diuers shapes and formes , and diuers operations
in the body ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.267

and therfore he hath diuers names . VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.268

And here-vpon the Philosophers say , that y=e= lower wombe of a man is
like vnto the wombe of a swine . VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.269

And lyke as the stomack hath two tunikles , in like maner haue al the
Guttes two tunikles . VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.270

The fyrst portion of the Guttes is called Duodenum ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.271

for he is .xij. ynches of length , VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.272

and couereth the nether parte of the stomacke , VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.273

and receyeth al the drosse of y=e= stomacke : VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.274

The second portion of the Guttes is called Ieiunium ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.275

for he is euermore emptie ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.276

for to him lyeth euermore the chest of the Gal , beating him sore ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.277

and draweth forth of him al the drosse , VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.278

and clenseth him clene : VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.279

The .iij. portion of gutte is called Yleon , or final gutte ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.280

and is in length .xv. or .xvj. Cubites . VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.281

In this gutte oftentimes falleth a disease called Yleaca passio .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,65.282

The .iiij. gut is called Monoculus , or blind <P_66> gut ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.283

and it seemeth to haue but one hole or mouth ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.284

but it hath two , one neere vnto the other ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.285

for by the one al thinges go in , VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.286

and by the other they goo out agayne : VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.287

The fyfth is called <font> Colon <$$font> , VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.288

and receyeth al the drosse depriued from al profitablenesse ;
VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.289

and therefore there commeth not to him any veynes Miseraices , as to the
other : VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.290

The syxte and last is called <font> Rectum <$$font> or Longaon ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.291

and he is ended in the Fundament , VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.292

and hath in his nether end foure Muscles , to holde , to open , to
shutte , and to put out , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.293

Next is to be noted of Mesenterium , the which is nothing else but a
texture of innumerable veynes Miseraices , ramefied of one veyne called
Porta epates , couered and defended of Pannicles and Ligamentes comming
to the Intrals , with the backe ful of fatnes and glandulus fleshe , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-H,66.294

The stomacke is a member compound and spermatike , <P_67> senowy and
sensible ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.295

and therein is made perfect the fyrst digestion of Chile .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.296

This is a necessarie member to al the body ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.297

for if it fayle in his working , al the members of the body shal
corrupte . Wherefore Galen sayth , that the stomacke was ordeyned
principally for two causes : VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.298

The first , that it shoulde be to al the members of the body , as y=e=
earth is to al that are ingendred of the earth , that is , that it
shoulde desire sufficient meate for al the whole body :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.299

The seconde is , that the stomacke should be a sacke or chest to al the
bodie for y=e= meate , and as a Cooke to al the members of the body .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.300

The stomacke is made of two pannicles , of which the inner is Nerueous ,
and the vtter Carneous . VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.301

This inner pannicle hath musculus longitudinales that stretcheth along
from the stomacke to the mouth , by the which he draweth to him meate
and drinke , as it were handes . VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.302

Also he hath Tranuers wyl , for to withholde or make retention .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.303

And also the vtter pannicle hath Latitudinal wyl , to expulse and put
out ; and that by his heate he shoulde helpe the digestiue vertue of the
Stomacke , and by other heates geuen by his neighbours , as thus :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.304

It hath the lyuer on the right side , chafing & heating him with his
lobes or figures : & the Splen on the left syde , with his fatnes , and
veynes sending to him melancolie , to exercise his appetites :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.305

and aboue him is the Harte , quickening him with his Arteries :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.306

Also the brayne , send to him a braunche of Nerues to geue him feeling .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,67.307

And <P_68> he hath on the hinder parte , dissending of the partes of the
backe , many Lygamentes , with the which he is bounde to the Spondels of
the backe . VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.308

The forme or figure of the Stomacke is long , in likenes of a gowrde ,
crooked : VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.309

and that both holes be in the vpper part of the body of it , is because
there should be no going out of it vnaduisedly of those thinges that are
receyued into it . VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.310

The quantitie of the stomacke commonly holdeth two pitchers of water ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.311

and it maye suffer many passions ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.312

and the nether mouth of the stomacke is narrower then the vpper ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.313

and that for three causes : VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.314

the first cause is , that the vpper receyueth meate great and boystrous
in substaunce , that there beeying made subtile , it might passe into
the nether : VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.315

The second is , for by him passeth al the meates , with their chilositie
, from the Stomacke to the Lyuer : VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.316

The thirde is , for that through him passeth al the drosse of the
Stomacke to the guttes . VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.317

And this suffiseth for the Stomacke , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.318

The Lyuer is a principal member , and official ; and of his first
creation , spermatike ; complete in quantitie of blood , of him self
insencible , VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.319

but by accidence he is sencible , VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.320

and in him is made the seconde digestion , VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.321

and is lapped in a Senowy pannicle . VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.322

And that he is a principall member , it appeareth openly by the
Philosophers , by Auicen and Galen . VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.323

And it is official , as is the stomacke ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.324

and it is of spermatike matter , and senowy , of the which is ingendred
his Veynes . VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.325

And because it was little in quantitie , nature hath added to it cruded
blood , to the accomplishment of sufficient quantity ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.326

and is lapped in a senowy pannicle . VICARY-1548-E1-H,68.327

And why the Lyuer is cruded , is , because y=e= Chile which <P_69>
commeth from the stomacke to the Lyuer , should be turned into the
colour of blood . VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.328

And why the Lyuer was ordeined , was , because that al the nutrimental
blood shoulde be ingendred in him . VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.329

The proper place of the Lyuer is vnder the false Ribbes in the righte
side . VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.330

The forme of the lyuer is gibbous or bunchy on the back side ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.331

& it is somewhat hollow , like the insyde of an hande .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.332

And why it is so shapen , is , that it should be plycable to the
stomacke , like as a hande dothe to an apple , to comforte her digestion
; VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.333

for his heate is to the stomacke as the heate of the fyre is to the
Potte or Cauldron that hangeth ouer it . VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.334

Also the Lyuer is bounde with his pellikles to the Diafragma , and with
strong Lygamentes . VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.335

And also he hath Colyganes with the Stomack and the Intrals , and with
the Hart and the Raines , the Testicles , and other members .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.336

And there are in hym fiue Pellikles like fiue fingers .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.337

Galen calleth the Lyuer Massasanguinaria , conteyning in it selfe foure
substances , Natural and Nutrimental . VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.338

The naturals is sent with the blood to all partes of the body to be
ingendred and nourished . VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.339

And the nutrimentals be sequestrate , and sent to places ordeyned for
some helpinges . VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.340

These are the places of the humors : the blood in the Lyuer , Choler in
the chest of gal , Melancolie to the Splen , Flegme to the Lunges and
the Iunctures , the watery superfluities to the Reynes and the Vesike .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,69.341

And they goo with y=e= <P_70> blood , VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.342

and sometime they putrifie VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.343

and make Feuers ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.344

and some be put out to the skin , VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.345

and be resolued by sweat , or by skab , by Pushes , or by Impostumes .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.346

And these foure natural humours , that is to say , Sanguin , Choler ,
Melancoly , & Fleme , be ingendred and distributed in this maner :
VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.347

First ye shal vnderstande , that from the Spermatike matter of the Liuer
inwardly , there is ingendred two greate veynes , of the whiche the
first and the greatest is called <font> Porta <$$font> , and commeth
from the concauitie of the Lyuer , of whom springeth al the smal veynes
<font> Miseraices <$$font> ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.348

and these <font> Miseraices <$$font> be to Vena porta as the braunches
of a tree be to the stocke or tree . VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.349

For some of them be conteyned with the botome of the stomacke , some
wyth Duodenum , some with Ieiunium , some with Yleon , & some with
Monoculus or Saccus . VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.350

And from al these guttes they bring to Vena porta the succozitie of
Chiley gooing from the stomacke , VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.351

& distribute it into the substaunce of the Lyuer .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.352

And these veynes <font> Miseraices <$$font> be innumerable .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.353

And in these vaynes is begon the seconde digestion , and ended in the
Lyuer , like as is in the Stomacke the fyrst digestion .
VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.354

So it proueth that Vena porta and vena Miseraices serue to bring al the
succozitie of the meate and drinke that passeth the Stomacke , to the
Liuer , VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.355

and they spreade them selues thorough the substaunce of the Liuer
inwardly ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.356

and al they stretche towards the gibbos or bowing part of the Liuer ,
VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.357

and there they meete VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.358

and goe al into one vnitie , VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.359

& make the seconde great veine called Venakelis , or Concaua , or Vena
ramosa , VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.360

al is one ; VICARY-1548-E1-H,70.361

and he with his rootes draweth out al the blood ingendred from the
<P_71> Lyuer , VICARY-1548-E1-H,71.362

and with his braunches ramefying vpwardes and downewardes , carieth and
conueyeth it to al other members of the body to be nourished with ,
where is made perfect the thirde digestion . VICARY-1548-E1-H,71.363

And also there goeth from the Lyuer , veines bearing the superfluities
of the thirde digestion to their proper places , as it shal be declared
hereafter . VICARY-1548-E1-H,71.364

