<BEGIN_wcecil-1587-e2-h>

<P_2.3,24>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCXXVI>

To my loving frend M=r=. D=r=. Legge Vicechancellor &c. and to the
rest of the Heads there . WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,24.4

Wheras the great excess and disorder of Apparell hath not only
impoverished the Realme , but hath bene a special cause of many other
vices and evil examples in all degrees ; for the due reformation whereof
it is <P_2.3,25> godly provided for in all persons and places , if due
execution were had accordingly : for want wherof , many have greatly
exceeded the prescription of Law , and left the ancient , grave , and
comely apparell generally used of all scholars in both Universities
heretofore ; whereby they were known and reverenced , every man in his
degree , both in the University and withoute , in Court and City ; by
wearing of that comely , decent , and wonted apparell ; the due
consideration whereof , is referred by her Majesties Proclamation to the
Chancellors of both Universities , supposing that their commandement
will work a perfect reformation of all disorders in both the said
Universities . Wherefore these are straitly to charge and command you
the Vicechancellor and Hedds of the Colleges in the University of
Cambridge , that the Statutes and Orders made in your University for the
special apparell to be worne of all degrees of scholars , made sithens
her Majestie's most gracious raigne , be duely observed and kept , and
that no hatt be worne of any Graduate or Scholer within the University ,
except it be when he shall journey out of the Town , the same Graduate
or Scholar having his name in any Table , or being in commons in any
House of Learning in the said University ; except in the time of his
sicknes . WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,25.5

And that all Scholers being Graduats upon the charges of any Howse , do
wear a square cap of clothe , and lykewise scholers of Howses that be no
Graduats , and all other Scholers that have taken no degree of Scholers
, and do lyve upon their <P_2.3,26> own charges , do weare in the said
University a round clothe_cap . Saving that it may be lawful for the
sons of Noblemen , or the sons and heirs of Knights , to wear round caps
of velvet , but no hats . WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,26.6

And also that every such aforesaid Scholer , being a Graduate , shall
wear abroad in the University , going out of his College , a gown and a
hoode of clothe , according to the order of his Degree . Provided that
it shall be lawfull for every Doctor of Divinity , and for the Master of
any College , to weare a scarlett tippet , or a tippet of velvet ,
according to the antient customs of the realme , and of the said
University : the which gown , tippet , and square cap , the said Doctors
and Hedds shall be lykewise bound to weare when they shall resorte
either to the Courte or to the City of London .
WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,26.7

And that the excess of Shirtbands and Ruffs exceeding one inche and
halfe <paren> saving for the sonns of Noblemen <$$paren> , the fashion
and colore of other then white , be avoyded presently . And no Scholer
nor Fellowe of the foundation of any Howse of Learninge do weare either
in the Universitye or without , so long as he retaine the livings of a
Fellowe or Scholer , any hose , stockings , dubletts , jackets , coats ,
or jerkins , or any other kinde of garment of velvet , satten , or silke
, or in the faceing of the same shall have above one quarter of a yard
of silke , or shall use any other light kynde of colore , or cutts , or
gards , or fashion , which shall be forbidden by the Chancellors , or in
their absence by the Vicechancellor <P_2.3,27> and the more part of the
Hedds of either of the said Universities . WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,27.8

And that no Scholer do weare any longe locks of heare upon his hedd ,
but that he be notted , polled , or rounded after the accustomed manner
of the gravest scholers of the said University , under the pain of six
shillings and eight pence for everye tyme that any graduate Fellow ,
Scholer , Pensioner , or Sizer shall offende in any of the foresaid
Orders . WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,27.9

The forfeycture for every publique offence committed without the College
to be collected , immediatelye after the offence done , by the bedells
or other Officers therunto appoynted within the said University ,
WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,27.10

and to be payd either to the Chancellor , or in his absence to the
Vicechancellor of the said University , to th'@ @onlye use of the same ,
WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,27.11

and by him to be accompted for at his general accompts for his yeare .
WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,27.12

And the punishments and forfeytures of all the aforesaid offences by any
of the aforenamed Students within any of the Colleges or Halls in the
said University , to be taken by the Hedds and Sub-Hedds of the said
Colleges and Halls where such offence is committed ,
WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,27.13

and to be converted to the use of the said College or Hall .
WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,27.14

And thes Orders , together with all other good Orders heretofore taken
for exercises of Learning within the aforesaid University , I require
you and every of you duely to observe and precisely to kepe according to
your Oath and duties , as you will retaine my favour <P_2.3,28> and
would have me to continue my careful government over you : which I
assuer you I will cast off , yf I fynde not a due and spedye reformation
of all disorders among you : WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,28.15

for her Majesty looketh for the same , both at myne and your hands ,
WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,28.16

and that forthwith . WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,28.17

So I bid you hartelye farewell , from my House in the Strand , this
7=th=. of Maye 1588 . WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,28.18

Your loving frend W. Burghley . WCECIL-1587-E2-H,2.3,28.19

