<BEGIN_wolsey-1529-e1-h>

<P_2.2,17>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_XCIX_CARDINAL_WOLSEY_TO_KING_HENRY_THE_EIGHTH_CHIEFLY_UPON_THE_DISCONTENT_EXPRESSED_AT_THE_MANNER_OF_SUPPRESSING_THE_SMALL_MONASTERIES_WITH_WHICH_HIS_COLLEGE_AT_OXFORD_WAS_TO_BE_ENDOWED>

To the King's Most noble Grace , Defensor of the Faith .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,17.4

S=r= . After my most humble & lowly recommendations , it may like your
Highness to understand that it hath been & is much to my rejoyce &
comfort , to perceive by the relation of S=r=. Tho. More how the
discourses & communications which I have had with the <P_2.2,18>
Chancellor of Alanson sent from my Lady the Fr. King's mother for
treaty of peace with your Highness , have been to your contentation &
pleasure ; wherein S=r=. as in all other your affairs , I have not , ne
shall pretermit any labor , diligence , study , or travail , which may
be to the conducing of the same to such end as shall be to your Highness
honor , exaltation , & benefit . WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,18.5

And where it hath pleased your Highness of your excellent goodness &
gracious favour , to advertise me by the said S=r=. Tho. More of such
reports as have ben made unto your Highness , consisting in two things ,
the one concerning the office of Clerk of the Market within the
liberties of the Monastery of St. Albans , & the other my officers in
the Suppression of certain exile & small Monasteries , wherein neither
God is served , ne religion kept , which , with your gracious ayde &
assistance , converting the same to a far better use , I purpose to
annex unto your intended College of Oxford , for the encrease of good
Letters & virtue . WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,18.6

I most humbly thank your Highness for that it hath pleased the same , so
like a good & gracious Master , to give unto me knowledge & admonition
therof , ascertaining your Grace , that as to the office of Clerk of the
Market within the liberties of the said Monastery , I never was minded
either to extend or to diminish , but in such manner to use the same as
I found the said Monastery possessed aforetime ;
WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,18.7

for at your last being there , the <P_2.2,19> Graunts made by your noble
Progenitors , confirmed also by the late King of famous memory , your
noble father , whose soule Jesus pardon , & also by your Highness , were
show'd unto your Councell , whereby they evidently perceived , that
neither the Marshall of England , ne the Steward of your most hon=ble=.
Household , ne also the office of Clerk of the Markets , shall be
exercised with the said liberties , by other then the officers of the
said Monastery , as by the Graunts & Confirmations , ready at your good
pleasure to be eftsone showed , doth right largely appear .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,19.8

Nevertheless , whereas the inquest & officers there , have not justly ,
discreetly , & indifferently assessed & taxed the prices of the Market ,
as to right , equity , & the good commodity of your Grace's servants
hath appertayned ; I who knew nothing thereof , am not only discontented
with them , for their misdemeanor in that behalf ,
WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,19.9

& shall with God's grace , see them ordered accordingly ,
WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,19.10

but also have no small cause most humbly to thank your Highness , whome
it hath pleased to see the said prices reformed , unto the due order &
direct course . WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,19.11

And God forbid that I should , or suffer any man to , encroach upon any
part of your jurisdiction royall , trusting verily , in consideration of
my poor service , that your Highness will be as good a Lord to that your
Monastery , as your noble Progenitors have been , as I most humbly , on
my knees , beseech your Highness to be . WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,19.12

And albeit S=r=. some folks , which be always more <P_2.2,20> prone to
speak evil & report the worst without knowledge of the truth , have
percase informed your Highness of some disorder that should be used by
my Commissaries in suppressing of the said Monasteries , yet most humbly
I shall beseech your Highness , after your noble & accustomed manner ,
to give no credence unto them unto such time as your Grace may hear my
declaration in that behalf . WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,20.13

For S=r=. Allmighty God I take to my record , I have not meant ,
intended , or gone about , ne also have willed mine Officers , to do any
thing concerning the said Suppressions , but under such forme & manner ,
as is & hath largely been to the full satisfaction , recompence , &
joyous contentation of any person which hath had , or could pretend to
have right or interest in the same , in such wise , that many of them
giving thanks & laude to God , for the good chance succeeded unto them
would for nothing , if they might , return or be restored , & put again
into their former State , as your Highness shall abundantly & largly
perceive , at my next repair unto the same . WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,20.14

Verily S=r=. I would be loath to be noted , that I should intend such a
vertuous foundation for the encrease of your Highnesses merit , profit
of your subjects , the advancement of good learning , & for the weale of
my poore soule , to be established or adquired ex rapinis .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,20.15

But , God willing , shall in such wise proceed to the perfection thereof
, with prejudice or derogation of any man's right or interest , that it
shall appear to all the <P_2.2,21> world , that I am minded to sett
forth that act sincerely , purely , & without injury , wrong , or damage
to any person . WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,21.16

Howbeit , S=r=. I account myself most bounden unto your Highness , in
that it hath pleased the same so favourably & benignly to advertise me ,
of the reports contrived in that behalf , which I trust in such wise to
avoyd , that your Highness shall not only be therwith contented , but
also they shall peradventure be the more circumspect , to make any such
like reports hereafter . WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,21.17

Finally , S=r= , I send herewith unto your Highness , a Copy of certain
Articles & Clauses excerpted & taken out of the Popes Letters now sent
unto his Oratour here resident , declaring in what terms he doth stand
with the French King , alledging that he hath nothing done , nor
intendeth to do , to the prejudice of your Highness & the Emperour .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,21.18

And albeit his Holynesses demeanor in that behalf , is not so laudable ,
ne of such sort , as I would it were , yet it is not so evill as it hath
ben bruted & reported , trusting that after the arrivall of my last
Letters , wherein I have ben rounde & plain , his said Holyness shall
alter his copie , & percase shew himself according to such expectation
as your Highness & I have had of him . WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,21.19

And thus Jesus preserve your most noble & royall estate .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,21.20

At my Howse besides Westminster WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,21.21

y=e= 5=th=. day of Febr. WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,21.22

by your most humble Chapleyn , T. Card=lis=. Ebor.
WOLSEY-1529-E1-H,2.2,21.23

