<BEGIN_wpaston2-1625-e2-h>

<P_64>

<heading:edcomment:32_WILLIAM_PASTON_TO_LADY_KATHERINE_PASTON>

To my most Deare and honored Mother , The Right Worshipfull The Lady
Paston att paston Hall . WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,64.4

May itt Speede Most honored and Deare mother , WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,64.5

The Lorde Be Thanked I haue had my health pretty well since I came
hether . WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,64.6

I am fainte to play the Sirgion , with my Tutors finger which was a
pitteful one , WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,64.7

But now I haue Brought itt to a fine passe , WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,64.8

and is euen well . WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,64.9

Deare mother I will euer haue your precepts in my minde puttinge them
allwaies in practice , WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,64.10

and I hope iff I obey them I shall still Keepe your accostomed Loue
which , next to the grace of god , I esteeme aboue anie thinge .
WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,64.11

The Kinge is expected heere one Candlemas day or the day after .
WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,64.12

We heare no newes att all this weeke WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,64.13

euery Saturday your Ladiship shall haue a Letter from me or my Tutor ,
if they doe not miscary By the carrier . WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,64.14

This 26 day I haue not <P_65> hearde from your Ladiship ruffes ,
WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,65.15

standinge comons , <paren> in pottage <$$paren> amounteth to a penny a
weeke . WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,65.16

The master is very thankfull to you ffor your greate gift ,
WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,65.17

Remembringe his hartiest sseruice to your Ladiship so with my humblest
dutie , to yovr sellfe , and my ffather , Beseeching god to showre downe
his Blessings one you : and all your housholde . I rest your Dutifull
and obedient sonne Will: Paston WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,65.18

College Corpus Christy WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,65.19

Ian 26 day WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,65.20

Good mother Remember my Best Loue to my Brother : Cosin Abigall . and
mrs Willson . mr Brende : WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,65.21

<P_76>

<heading:edcomment:48_WILLIAM_PASTON_TO_LADY_KATHERINE_PASTON>

To my much Honored good mother the Right Worshipfull the Lady Paston att
Paston halle Northfolke WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.24

Most deare and honored mother , you must giue me leaue To Epitomise my
letter into A short Compendium for mr Dikes . WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.25

hast will not Suffer me To Doe Anie otherwise .
WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.26

good mother my Tutor and I were att the courtt at newe markett yesterday
wher we saw the prince the Duke and mane other noble men , But not , the
Kinge By Reson he was not well . WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.27

God's name Be praysed we are all verie well . WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.28

onely Tom: Hartston contineweth after the olde sorte haueinge no vse of
his hande . WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.29

He is still in the Towne . WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.30

mr Dike is the Lord Lepington@ @s chaplen WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.31

Good mother I Remember my humles Dutie to my father your selfe my loue
to my Brother my Chozen Abigail mrs Wilson prayinge to god almitie to
protecte you now and euer WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.32

and Reste WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.33

if ther be no oranges att Norwich if your Ladiship will sende in your
next letter we will sende some by Iohnson : WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.34

your filliallay obediente sonne William Paston WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.35

Cambridge WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.36

<font> Corpus Christi College <$$font> WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.37

xxii feb 1624-5 WPASTON2-1625-E2-H,76.38

