<BEGIN_wplumpt-1538-e1-h>

<P_234>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_XII>

To my welbeloved son Robart Plompton at the Iner Temple in London be
this . WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,234.4

Son Robart Plompton , I hertely recommend me to you ,
WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,234.5

and sending you and your brother God blesing and mine .
WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,234.6

The cause of my writing to you now ; that I wold you should helpe this
bearrer , yong Letham , in such buisenes as he hath in the Court of
Augmentation , for certaine power for yong children of one Berkine ,
deceased , as conserning one farme hold , late belonging to the hold of
St. Robarts , which you know I did speake to the Ansurer for the use of
the said children , and he permised not to suit them .
WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,234.7

That notwithstanding , John Benson would have entred ;
WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,234.8

<P_235>

and now made many great riots upon the said children ,
WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.10

and therfore he is indited with divers persons with him .
WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.11

And now forther , he hath brought a preve seale against old Leathom and
yong Leathom , and also the eldest child ; WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.12

and for that divers and many of ther frinds hath moved me to wryte to
you to help them in the said matter . WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.13

And if it be that you can make any frinds , to shew Mr. Chaunceler the
planer and through in every thing <paren> and this bearrer can instruct
you <$$paren> , and then , I pray you , do the best for them .
WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.14

And also I would have you to speak with Mr. Latham , the goldsmith ,
Lanlord to Robart Oliver , and shew him how that he will not make his
diches and fences belonging to his farme , but that my corne and gras is
spoyled at Watterton by that meaner . WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.15

And if he will not seake remedy therof , let Mr. Fox enter a action of
trespas against the said Robart Oliver for dispoyling my gras at
Watterton to the valew of five mark . WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.16

And as far as I fele , Mr. Norton comith not up .
WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.17

I shall make your rents to be gathered , and send it to you as shortly
as I can . WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.18

And thus hartely far you well . WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.19

From Plompton , WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.20

this 14=th= day of November . WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.21

By your loving father , William Plompton . WPLUMPT-1538-E1-H,235.22

