<BEGIN_anhatton-1693-e3-p1>

<P_2,151>

<heading:edcomment:THE_COUNTESS_OF_NOTTINGHAM>

Thursday , y=e= 26 of June , 1690 {COM:preceding_word_"1690"_emended}

I find , when y=r= Losp. write y=rs= , you were ignorant of the
expectations we are here in of hearing every moment of some engagement
at sea between our fleet and the French , ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,151.5

for they have layn in sight of one another this 4 days .
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,151.6

W=t= will the consequence be wee are in great impatience to know .
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,151.7

I thinke from the first y=t= I heard it till to_day I have thought of
nothing else ; ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,151.8

but now indeed w=t= my uncle Hatton has by his foolishness brought
himself into is some concern to me , and I belive {COM:sic} will be so
to y=r= Losp. when you hear . ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,151.9

Upon suspicion and some discovery several people have been secured in
the Tower : my Lord <P_2,152> Clarendon and my Lord Newburgh , S=r= John
Fenwick , Charles Turner , and several more ;
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,152.10

and he , by the foolishness of his talk and the company he kept ,
together w=th= the accusation of one Brown , either a bookseller or
printer , who is in custody , who sayd he delivered him a booke , w=ch=
he published , called {COM:preceding_word_"called"_emended} an Anser to
a letter to a Bishop <paren> w=ch= was writ by the Bishop of St. Asaph
<$$paren> . ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,152.11

In y=e= anser to it there are , it is said , very scurolous things on
the Government ; ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,152.12

so , upon this , by the messenger of the press he was siezed {COM:sic}
on this morning and carried before the Councell , were he was soe
thorowlly bewichd as to owne the haveing writ it , w=ch= after all I do@
@nt thinke he did , when , if he had not owned it , there was but one
witness against him ; ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,152.13

but now he dexterously adds himself . ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,152.14

Y=r= Losp. speaking of coming up , tho you seem not to be more inclined
to it then business oblige you , may not be improper upon this account .
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,152.15

I hope it may be no prejudic {COM:sic} to y=r= health , because you say
nothing of it nor my brother and sisters . ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,152.16

I begg my humble dutty to my Lady and service to my Aunt .
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,152.17

I am y=r= Lsp. most obedient daughter , A. Nottingham .
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,152.18

<P_2,154>

<heading:edcomment:THE_COUNTESS_OF_NOTTINGHAM>

Thursday , y=e= 3 of July , 1690 {COM:preceding_word_"1690"_emended} .
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,154.21

My Lord has at this present so little time to himself , he hopes your
Lord=sp= will pardon his not writting to you ,
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,154.22

but will not be failling to doe what lyes in his power to serve him whom
y=r= Losp. recommends to him , whoes proceedings as been after his
usualle method , and would more have surprised had it been from anny
other body but himself . ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,154.23

We are all in towne {SIC:twone} full of what concerns the fleet , upon
w=ch= <P_2,155> account my Lord Torrington is very hardly spoke of ,
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.24

whither diservedly or no , I must have a better insight to sea fight
then I have at this distance to , to venter to judge whither he deserves
it or no ; ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.25

but wone thing is certaine , y=t= , after the engagement was begun , he
let all lye upon the Dutch squadron and did not engage at all w=th= the
French fleet , w=ch= squadron had certainly been quite lost , but y=t=
the Duke of Grafton , who in this expedition has got immortal fame ,
would fight , and wone ship more came to there assistance .
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.26

It pleased God to give y=t= success to there undertaking y=t= w=th=
twenty ships , w=ch= were the number of the Dutch and these two that
came to there assistance , they made there party so good w=th= the
French fleet , w=ch= was of eighty_two ships , y=t= but wone Dutch ship
was lost . ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.27

There is eight disabled , ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.28

but will in a little while be fitted up againe ;
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.29

of them , a Dutch Vice Admiral and a Rear_Admirall and two captaines are
killed ; and of our , wone Captaine Botham and Captaine Pomeroy .
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.30

There is a report y=t= six ships of the French are disabled , and y=t=
they are toing them towards some of there owne ports , and y=t= the
Plimouth squardon is gone after them . ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.31

My Lord Stweard and my Lord Pembroke have been so brave to offer their
service to the Queene , ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.32

and are gone downe to Dover . ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.33

I suppose my Lord Pembroke will command his owne Marine regiment ,
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.34

and my Lord Stwart will either be a volontier or have some command .
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.35

It is past ten a clock . ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.36

I am afraid the post will be gone . ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.37

I am yr Losp. most obedient daughter , A. Nottingham .
ANHATTON-1693-E3-P1,2,155.38

