<BEGIN_aplumpt-1503-e1-p1>

<P_172>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXXVII>

To master Thomas Everingam , be this bill delivered in hast .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,172.4

Cousin Thomas Everyngham , I recomennd me unto you , thanking you of
your good mynd and will at all tymes ; praying you , that ye will take
the labor and payne upon you to come and speake with me betwyxt this and
tewsday next , as my speciall trust is in you ; and that ye faylle not
therof , as I may dow for you as much in tyme to come .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,172.5

No more at this tyme , APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,172.6

but the Trenyte kepe you . APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,172.7

From Plompton in hast , this Sant Maury day . APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,172.8

By yours at my power {COM:15_Jan._1502-3} Dame Agnes Plompton .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,172.9

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2,_letters_149,_151_here}

<P_187>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLII>

To Sir Richard Plompton be thes byl delivered in hast .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.13

Sir Richard Plompton , I recomend me unto you , dessiring and prayng you
that ye will se some remydy for thes prosses , that they may be stopped
; and that ye will goe to my lord Dayrsse , and make on letter for me in
my name , and shew him how they delt with my housband tenaunts and
servants , and ye thinke it be to dowe . APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.14

And I pray you that ye will se that nether thes , nor none other prosses
, pas , but be stoppyd , as my speciall trust is in you .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.15

For I have sent up the copy of the capias , with one letter from William
Elesson and one other from Under Sherife , that ye may , after the scest
of them , labor as ye thinke best by your mynd .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.16

Also , Sir Richard , I pray you to remember my other {COM:sc._order} ;
APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.17

for Thomas Stabill hath taken the west Rod and the est Rod ,
APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.18

and hath mayd the fenses , APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.19

and so she hath no gresse to hir cattell ; APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.20

and also they sow hir land , APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.21

and will not let hir occupy nothing as yet , APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.22

and that discomfortheth them much . APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.23

No more , APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.24

but the Trinete kepe you . APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.25

From Plompton in hast , the xiii day of Aprill .
APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.26

{COM:13_April_1504}

By me Dame Agnes Plompton . APLUMPT-1503-E1-P1,187.28

