<BEGIN_armin-1608-e2-p1>

<P_5>

<heading>

A NEST OF NINNIES . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.4

<$$heading>

The World , wanton sick , as one surfetting on sinne <paren> in morning
pleasures , noone banquets , after_riots , night moriscoes , midnights
modicoms , and abundance of trash trickt up to all turbulent reuellings
<$$paren> is now leaning on her elbow , deuising what doctour may
deliuer her , what phisicke may free her , and what antidotes may
antissipate so dangerous a dolemma : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.6

shee now begins to grow bucksome as a lightning before death ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.7

and , gad , she will - ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.8

riches , her chamberlaine , could not keepe her in ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.9

beauty , her bed-fellow , was bold to perswade her ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.10

and sleepy securitie , mother of all mischiefe - tut , her prayers was
but meere prattle : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.11

out she would , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.12

tucks up her trinkets , like a Dutch tannikin sliding to market on the
ise , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.13

and away she flings - ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.14

and whither thinck you ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.15

{COM:verse_omitted}

shee daines her a friendly eye ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.17

but , of all , into a philosophers cell , who , because he was alwayes
poking at Fortune with his forefinger , the wise wittely namde him Sotto
, as one besotted - a grumbling sir ; one that was wise enough , and
fond enough , and solde all for a glasse prospective , because he would
wisely see into all men but himselfe , a fault generall in most ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,5.18

but <P_6> such was his , who thus busied , was tooke napping by the
weale publike , who smiles upon him with a wapper eye , a iealous
countenance , and bids him all haile ! ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.19

Mistresse <paren> sayes Sotto <$$paren> I will not say welcome , because
you come ill to him that would bee alone ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.20

but , since you are come , looke for such entertainement as my folly
fits you with , that is , sharp sauce with bitter dyet ; no swetnes at
al , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.21

for that were to mingle your pils with sugar : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.22

no , I am all one , winter in the head , and frost in the foot ; no
summer in me but my smiles , and that as soone gone as smiles .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.23

The bauble I play with is mens estates , which I so tumble from hand to
hand , that , weary with it , I see <paren> gluttingly and grieuedly ,
yet mingled with smiles too <$$paren> in my glasse prospectiue what
shall become of it . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.24

The World , curling her locks with her fingers , and anone scratching
her braine with her itching pin , as one little regarding , answeres ,
What then ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.25

Marry , sayes Hodge , I@ @le show thee . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.26

See , World , in whose bosome euer hath abundance beene poured , what
thy imps of impiety bee ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.27

for as they <paren> I <$$paren> all for the most part , as these which I
will present to thee in my glasse prospectiue : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.28

mark them well , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.29

and see what thou breedest in thy wantonnesse , sixe children like thee
, not the father that begat them - ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.30

Where were they nursed ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.31

in folly : fed with the flottin milke of nicetie and wantonnesse ,
curdled in thy wombe of water and bloud , vnseasoned , because thy
mother_bearing temper was euer vntrue , farre from the rellish of right
breede ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.32

and it is hard that the taste of one apple should distaste the whole
lumpe of this defused chaios . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.33

But marke me and my glasse : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.34

see into some <paren> and in them thy selfe <$$paren> whom I haue
discride , or describde , these sixe parts of folly in thee ; thou shalt
see them as cleare as day , how mistic thy clouds be , and what
rancknesse raines from them . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.35

The World , queasie_stomackt , as one fed with the earth's nectar and
delicates , with the remembrance of her own appetite , squinies at this
, ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.36

and lookes as one scorning ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,6.37

yet beholding what will follow , at length espies a tall blacke man ,
jearing <P_7> like himselfe , a foole in motley , muckinder hunge ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,7.38

euer and anon wipes his nose ; at whose girdle hangde a small black jack
of a quart , his vsual draft ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,7.39

his finger on his tongue , as if he blamde Nature that cut not the
strings of it in more large manner , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,7.40

but hindred by defect , hee still did gesse at wisedome , though seldome
attaining it . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,7.41

Well , he was gouty , bigge , poste_legged and of yeeres something many
, as in the right sequell followeth : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,7.42

{COM:verse_omitted}

The World , ready to disgorge at so homely a present , askt if it were
possible such breathde hers to commaunde ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,7.44

Oh , <P_8> saith our philosophicall Hodge , beare his iests , and what
an vnknowne habite liues in him , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,8.45

then returne iudgement . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,8.46

Marke our application . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,8.47

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_1_here}

<P_15>

These , quoth the World , are pretty toyes . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,15.50

I , quoth the philosopher , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,15.51

but marke the applyance . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,15.52

By Jack Oates is morrally meant many described like him ; though not
fooles naturall , yet most artificiall : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,15.53

they carde hence what their parents spin , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,15.54

and doe such apish tricks , that rapine ; ruine , and a_thousand
inconveniences , follow . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,15.55

By the knight is meant maintainers of foolery : by the hall , the inne
where the cards of vanity causeth many to be bewitcht ; as appears in
the serving men , who , busie in others braules , are as easily made
friends , as they were set together by the ears .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,15.56

By the second is meant <em> those who <$$em> reach at stars , ayming at
honour , lighting sometime on the eare of memory ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,15.57

but ill taken because badly meant - is rewarded with a deserved whipping
. ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,15.58

By the third is called to question most that musically fret their time
out in idle baubling , and will become <P_16> artificiall fooles to
outbraue fooles indeede , but stick often in their owne quick-sands ,
and are got out with repentance . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,16.59

But the fourth and last shews the deuouring of deuoutions dyet how_euer
come by , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,16.60

yet they will stand up to the arme-pits in daunger rather than to lack
their wills , to slacke or rebate the edge of their appetites .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,16.61

With this the World , a little humde and haide , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,16.62

said shee was not pleased that such liued , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,16.63

and did promise some amendment , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,16.64

but desired to see further . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,16.65

Now our philosophical poker pokte on , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,16.66

and poynted to a strange shew ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,16.67

the fat foole , not so tall , but this fat foole as low , whose
description runs in meeter thus : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,16.68

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_17>

The World , smiling at this rime , describing so unseemly a portackt ,
gaue leave to the rest , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.71

and desired greatly to be satisfied with something done , as one longing
to know what so round a trust lump could performe .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.72

The poking art's maister tels his doing thus . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.73

When the kings and nobles of Scotland had welcomed Jemy Camber to the
court , <paren> who was their countryman , borne in Sterlin , but twenty
miles from Edinborough , this kings birth-towne , as Greenvich was our
late queenes <$$paren> they reasoned with him to understand his wit ,
which indeed was just none at all , yet merry and pleasing , whereat the
king rejoiced : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.74

and , seeing he was so fat , caused his doctors and phisitians to
minister to him ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.75

but phisick could not alter nature ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.76

and he would neuer be but a S. Vincent's turnip , thicke and round .
Wherefore the doctors persuaded his grace that the purging of the sea
was good for him . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.77

Well , nothing was undone that might be done to make Jemy Camber a tall
, little , slender man , when yet he lookt like a Norfolke dumpling ,
thicke and short : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.78

well , to Leith was he sent , which is the harbour towne of such ships
as arrive at Edinborough ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.79

neerer they can@ @not come , which is some mile from the cittie .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.80

To sea they put in a ship , at whose departure they discharged ordinance
, as one that departed from the land with the kings fauour :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.81

the Earle Huntly was sent with him to sea to accompany him , so high he
was esteemed with the king , who , hearing the ordinance goe off , would
aske what doe they now ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.82

Marry , says the Earle , they shoot at our enemies .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.83

O , saies hee , hit , I pray God ! ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.84

Againe they discharge . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.85

What doe they now ? quoth hee . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,17.86

Marry , now the <P_18> enimie shoots at us . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.87

O , misse , I pray God ! <paren> sayes Jemy Camber <$$paren> .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.88

So euer after it was a jest in the Scottish court . Hit or misse ,
quoth Jemy Camber ; that if a maide had a barne , and did penance at the
crosse , in the high towne of Edinborough , What hath shee done ?
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.89

did she hit or misse ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.90

She hath hit , sayes the other : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.91

better she had mist , sayes the first ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.92

and so long time after this jest was in memory - yea , I have heard it
myselfe , and some will talke of it at this day .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.93

Well , to sea they put , on a faire , sunshine day , where Jemy stood
fearful of every calme billow , where it was no boote to bid him tell
what the ship was made of , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.94

for he did it dououtly . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.95

But see the chance : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.96

a sodaine flaw or gust rose ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.97

the winds held strong east and by west , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.98

and the ship was in great danger , insomuch as the Earle , maister and
all , began to feare the weather . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.99

By and by a stronger gale blew , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.100

and split their maine-maste , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.101

and gaue their ship a mighty leake , insomuch as the crack made them all
screeck out : which Jemy , hearing , was almost dead with feare .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.102

Some fell to pumping , others on their knees to praying ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.103

but the fat foole , seeing themselves in this daunger , thought there
was no way but one with them , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.104

and was half dead with feare : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.105

in the end the winde turned , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.106

and the raging of the sea began to cease . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.107

I warrant thee now <paren> quoth the maister <$$paren> Jemy , wee shall
not bee drowned . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.108

I , will ye warrant us ? sayes the foole . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.109

I , sayes the maister , I@ @le giue thee my ship for thy chaine , if we
bee drowned : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.110

beare witnesse , my lord , sayes hee , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.111

a plaine bargaine ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.112

and with that threw the maister his chaine , who would have given it to
the Earle , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.113

but joy of their escape made him delight in the jest ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.114

and therefore the maister enjoyed his bargaine .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.115

With much adoe they attained thether againe , where the king , feareful
before , awayted their landing now ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.116

and , seeing Jemy not a jot lesse of body then hee was <paren> onely
lightened of his chaine <$$paren> How now ? quoth hee ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.117

how dost thou , man ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.118

O ! sayes Jemy , well now , king ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.119

but till {COM:sic} had not the maister beene , who warranted our liues
for my chaine , the best bargaine that euer I made ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,18.120

for no way could <P_19> I haue been a looser . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.121

How ? sayes the king ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.122

Marry , I@ @le tell thee king , quoth hee : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.123

say we had beene drowned , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.124

his ship was forfeit to me for my chaine : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.125

Earle Huntley was a witness to the bargaine ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.126

and now we are not drowned , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.127

for my chaine did warrant our liues of the maister .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.128

Nay , says the earle , not our liues ; none but yours , Jemy :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.129

our liues was as safe warranted without a chaine .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.130

With this the foole had some feeling of sence , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.131

and on a sodaine cryed out mainly for his chaine , which was restored to
him by the maister ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.132

but hee lost nothing by that , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.133

for he attayned to a suit , as the story sayes , that he had beene three
yeeres about . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.134

Thus the king and nobles went to Edinborough , merrily talking of their
feare and welfare . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.135

Jemy , this fat foole , used every day to goe from the abbey , in the
low towne by the hill , into the citie of Edinborough ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.136

and one euening , above the rest , he met with a broken virgin , one
that had a barne <paren> as there they are known by their attire
<$$paren> wearing a loose kerchiefe , hanging downe backward :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.137

she , I saye , cried sallets , as thus - Buy any cibus salletea ?
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.138

Jemy , desirous of sallets , calles her to him .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.139

Lasse , sayes he , what shall I giue thee for a good sallet ?
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.140

Faire sire , sayes the wench <paren> for shee knew him for the kings
foole , and she could not please him better then to call him faire sir
<$$paren> you giue me an atchison . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.141

Now he , hauing nothing but sixe French crownes about him , Canst thou
change mee a crowne ? sayes he . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.142

Yea , sire , sayes shee . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.143

He gives her a crowne , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.144

and shee gives him a sallet for it , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.145

and shee went her way . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.146

Jemy thinks it was much to give a crowne for that , for which shee did
demand but an atchison , which in our money is but three farthings :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.147

he runnes after ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.148

and sayes , she had his fayrest crowne ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.149

but , sayes hee , giue mee that , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.150

and take your choice of these , thinking by that deuise to get the first
crowne againe . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.151

Will ye chaunge ? sayes the lasse : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.152

I , sayes the foole ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.153

so she takes all the fiue , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.154

and giues him one againe , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.155

and so laughing at his folly goes her way . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,19.156

It was in vaine - <P_20> to exclayme , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.157

for they will hold fast what they get ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.158

but my fat foole goes home to eate his sallet , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.159

and inuites the king to a deare dish , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.160

and made him laugh heartily at the jest . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.161

The king calls for winiger to his sallet , because his sweet meate
should haue sower sauce , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.162

and perswaded him it was well bought : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.163

otherwise , if the foole had repented his bargaine , it was his manner
to try for his money againe ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.164

yet , with it all , the court could not quiet him .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.165

Betwixt Edinborough Abbey , the king's place , and Leeth , there stands
an euen plaine greene meddow , in which the king used most of his sports
: amongst which he rode thether one day to run at the glove , or the
ring , as his grace should please . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.166

With him rides Jemy Camber on a trotting mule : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.167

it was then a maruailous hot day . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.168

O ! saies Jemy , how cold the wether is <paren> so wise was hee that
hee scarce knew hot from colde <$$paren> . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.169

No , sayes the king , it is hot ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.170

looke how I sweat . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.171

No , sayes Jemy , the sunne blowes very colde . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.172

No , sayes the king , the winde shines very hot .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.173

The foole was almost angry to be crossed , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.174

and said hee would be hanged at night , if hee did sweat that day .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.175

With this merry talke they rode on ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.176

but one of the king's footmen hearing this , told the king at their
return hee would make his grace laugh heartily .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.177

So the king very gallantly ranne that time , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.178

and neuer missed the glove , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.179

and so did the lords ; which Jemy seeing , said it was nothing to doe .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.180

The king bade him runne ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.181

he did so , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.182

but the gloue lay still ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.183

and Jemy could not doe it . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.184

The king's footman <paren> that matcht to doe him a good turne <$$paren>
said Jemy could doe it better blindfold . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.185

What , can he ? quoth the king : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.186

I will neuer beleeue it . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.187

You shall see else , quoth hee ; whereat Jemy maruelled much that
without sight a man could doe that , which with all his might and sight
he could not doe , was desirous to make tryall ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.188

so was blinded with a scarfe , while another tooke up the gloue ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.189

and was ready for the jest . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.190

Jemy runs : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.191

Now for my maisters , saies hee . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.192

They all shout aloud ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.193

and cry rarely well done , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.194

and one unblindes him , while another puts the glove on the speare .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,20.195

<P_21>

So simple hee was , that hee thought it was strange , and bragged all
that day not a little . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.197

The king did alight , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.198

and went to drink wine at the Lord Hume's house ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.199

and Jemy went with him , while the footeman had time to worke his will ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.200

and mingling a conceit with butter <paren> which I will not name , least
some one should practise the like <$$paren> clapt it under the saddle ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.201

and , as they rode to Edinborough , sayes the king , what say you to the
weather now , Jemy ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.202

Mee thinks it is hotter than it was . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.203

Nay , it is colder , sayes he , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.204

for I begin to sweat . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.205

The trotting of this mule made the mingled confection lather so , that
it got into his breeches , and wroght up to the crowne of his head , and
to the sole of his foote , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.206

and so he sweat profoundly . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.207

Still he whipt ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.208

and he whipt , sweating more and more : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.209

they laught a good to see him in that taking . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.210

Now you must be hanged , says the king , as your bargaine was ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.211

for you sweat very much . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.212

What remedie ? sayes hee . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.213

I am content to be hanged , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.214

but while I live after I@ @le never beleeue cold weather will make one
sweat . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.215

No more will I , sayes the king , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.216

but hot weather will . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.217

Hot or colde , sayes Jemy , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.218

I am warme now , I am sure : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.219

I would I were ouer head and eares in some riuer to coole mee .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.220

So simple hee was that he knew not wether it was the sunne or the winde
made him sweat . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.221

At night the king caused him to be washed and perfumed ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.222

yet he was scarce sweet twenty days after . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.223

Thus this fat foole chaft , but not in his owne grease .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.224

Jemy , who was , as you have heard , a tall low man , and was swift of
foote , on a time challenged the king's best footeman , for a wager , to
run with him from the abbey , up the hill , to Cannegate <paren> which
stood entering to Edenborough , as Ludgate doth to London , and the
King's place about Temple-barre . <$$paren> ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.225

The king being told of this challenge thought it would be good sport to
see it performed , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.226

still perswaded Jemy to dare his footeman , who before denyed him , and
knew fooles would talk any thing , though far unfit to perform any thing
. ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.227

Still the king would say he was made nimble to runne ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,21.228

and askt <P_22> euery nobleman's judgement , who likewise soothed the
king : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.229

it was so that they made him beleeue himself swift of foote , that I
think in the end Jemy perswaded himselfe that none but fat men could run
well , and nimble men , being light , would fall soonest ; considering
that light things , being of small substance , not feeling themselves ,
would surely fall . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.230

But here is the sport - ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.231

the footeman , seeing it was the king's pleasure to see the wager tryed
, dared him , which made Jemy mad , that he would run with him from
Edinborough to Barwicke <paren> which was forty miles <$$paren> in one
day ; a thing as unpossible as to pull down a church in one houre , and
to build it againe in another : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.232

for Jemy was lost in the king's company once of purpose , but fiue miles
from the citty , at the Earle Morton's castle at da Keth ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.233

and they thought hee would neuer haue come home againe :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.234

when the king heard euery houre hee was comming ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.235

and still as hee entreated euery passenger to let him ride , by the
king's watch in the high-way they had warning giuen to the contrary ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.236

for he was seauen days going the fiue myle : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.237

then , judge how long hee would be a running fortie .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.238

You will muse how hee did for meate all the time .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.239

I@ @le tell you how : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.240

he fasted all day , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.241

and went supperlesse to bed ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.242

but being in his first sound sleepe , meate was brought and laide by him
, and a choppin of wine <paren> for so they call it there <$$paren>
which made him at his coming to court tell the king that heauen was
gentler than earthly men who {COM:preceding_word_"who"_emended} would
shew him no favour , neyther to ride nor feede him ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.243

when he was euery night cast into a sound sleepe ; then when he wakt hee
was sure of meate from heauen to feede on , when the meate came from the
king's kitchen at Edenborough Abbey . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.244

But to goe forward with our challenge . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.245

The king said the first word should stand , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.246

and on Jemie's head he laid a_thousand marks : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.247

the Lady Carmichell , that laught to heare all this , wagered as much on
the footeman's head . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.248

The day was appointed the next morning , being Thursday , to begin at
fiue a'clock in the afternoone , in the coole of the euening ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,22.249

and <P_23> eury one to his race must make him ready .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.250

Jemy , as he had seene the king's footeman doe , washt his feet with
beere , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.251

and soakt them in butter ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.252

so all that night and the next day there was nothing but Jemy and his
prouision to that great journey . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.253

The time came - ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.254

Jemy was stript into his shirt , trust round for the purpose :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.255

the footeman and hee begins to runne ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.256

the footeman makes shew of great labour , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.257

and the foole made the substance , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.258

for he was quickly in a sweat . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.259

They puft ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.260

and they blowede ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.261

they ran as swifte as a pudding would creepe . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.262

Jemy thought himselfe no smal foole to outrun the footeman ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.263

and did in his minde assure himselfe to win . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.264

The king laughs to see the toyle he made , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.265

and the footeman made great shew and little paines .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.266

By and by , Jemy calls for drinck ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.267

and the king , loath hee should haue any harme with labour , caused him
to haue a mixed drincke to cast him into a sleepe ; who , when he had
drunck , as hee ran on his wager , he dropt downe in the streete , as
heauy as if a leaden plummet , that makes a jack turne a spit , had
fallen on the earth dab . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.268

There hee slept , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.269

and was carryed by commaund to the top of the hill ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.270

and laid downe againe : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.271

there hee slept halfe an houre , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.272

and when he wakt he remembered his journey . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.273

Seeing people still about him , up hee gets , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.274

away he jogs , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.275

and neuer lookes behinde him ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.276

and seeing Cannegate so neare him , had not the wit to wonder how hee
came there , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.277

but laid hold on the ring of the gate , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.278

and staid to bee seene . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.279

By and by the footeman comes sweating , with water poured on his face
and head . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.280

O , my heart ! sayes hee . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.281

O , my legs ! sayes Jemy : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.282

I will not doe so much for all Scotland againe .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.283

Well , Jemy cries Victory ! victory ! ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.284

and there was the king's coach at hand to carry him home ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.285

for himselfe he neuer could haue gone , had his life lain on it .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.286

But when hee came home , the bragge hee made , the glory hee got , how
hee outran the footman <paren> and ran so easily as if he had been a
sleepe <$$paren> was wonderfull . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.287

I , it was sport enough for the king , a month after , to heare him tell
it . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,23.288

Well , the king , wonne the wager , he <P_24> thought ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.289

and that was honour sufficient for him . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.290

Not three days after hee bad the king put away all his footemen ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.291

and hee would serue his turne to any place . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.292

The king thanked him for his good will , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.293

and said , when his neede was great , hee would make bold to use him .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.294

So Jemy , this fat foole , euer bragged of this wager .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.295

There was a laundres of the towne , whose daughter used often to the
court to bring home shirts and bands , which Jemy had long time loued
and solicited , but to no end : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.296

she would not yeeld him an inch of her maidenhead .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.297

Now Jemy vowed he would haue it all : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.298

well , she consented at last ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.299

and , to be short , soone at night , at nine a'clocke , being in the
winter , when shee knew her mother to bee gone to watch with a sick body
, he should come , and all that night lye with her .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.300

Jemy , though witlesse , wanted no knavish meaning ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.301

thought long till it was night . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.302

But in the afternoone , this mayd goes up to the castle
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.303

and gathers a great basket of nettles , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.304

and comming home strawes them under the bed . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.305

Night comes , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.306

nine a'clock strikes ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.307

Jemy on his horse comes riding forward , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.308

sets him up , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.309

and knockes at the doors : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.310

she lets him in , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.311

and bids him welcome , bonny man . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.312

To bed he goes ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.313

and Jemy euer used to lye naked , as is the use of a number , amongst
which number she knew Jemy was one ; who no sooner was in bed , but shee
herself knocked at the doore , and herself askt who was there ? - which
, Jemy hearing , was afraid of her mother . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.314

Alas ! sir <paren> sayes shee <$$paren> , my mother comes ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.315

creepe under the bed . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.316

Jemy bustled not a little - ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.317

under hee creepes , stark naked , where hee was stung with nettles .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.318

Judge , you that haue feeling of such matters : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.319

there hee lay , turning this way and that way ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.320

here hee stung his leg , there his shoulder , there his buttockes :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.321

but the mayde hauing lockt the doore to him , went to bed ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.322

and there lay he in durance <paren> as they saye <$$paren> till morning
. ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.323

When the day broke , up gets the maide , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.324

to court she goes , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.325

and tels the king's chamberlaine of the matter , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.326

and hee told the king , who laughed thereat right heartily .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,24.327

<P_25>

The chamberlaine was sent to see him there , who , when hee came , found
him fast a sleepe under the bed , starke naked , bathing in nettles ;
whose skinne , when he wakened him , was all blistered grievously .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.329

The king's chamberlaine bid him arise and come to the king .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.330

I will not , quoth hee : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.331

I will go make my graue . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.332

See how things chanced ! ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.333

he shape {COM:sic} truer than he was awar ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.334

for the chamberlaine going home without him tolde the king his answere .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.335

Jemy rose , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.336

made him ready , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.337

takes his horse ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.338

and rides to the church-yard in the high towne , where he found the
sexton <paren> as the custom is there <$$paren> making nine graues ,
three for men , three for women , and three for children ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.339

and whoso dyes next , first comes , first serued .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.340

Lend mee thy spade , sayes Jemy ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.341

and with that digs a hole , which hole hee bids him make for his graue ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.342

and doth giue him a French crowne . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.343

The man , willing to please him <paren> more for his gold than his
pleasure <$$paren> did so ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.344

and the foole gets on his horse , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.345

and rides to a gentleman of the towne , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.346

and on the sodaine within two hours after dyed ; of whom the sexton
telling , hee was buried there indeed . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.347

Thus you see fooles have a guess at wit sometime ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.348

and the wisest could haue done no more - not so much .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.349

But this fat foole fills a leane graue with his carkasse , upon which
graue the king caused a stone of marble to bee put , on which the poets
writ these lines in remembrance of him - ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.350

{COM:verse_omitted}

Is this possible , sayes the World , that I should bee so serued ?
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.352

Nay , thou art worse serued heareafter , sayes hee ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.353

for thou knowest not the following sceane ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.354

but attend it . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.355

By the foole is meant all fatnesse ; by the king , Nature , that nurst
him ; by the nobles , such as sooth him ; and by the ship , thee , in
which many dangers are floating , through the sense of sinne
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,25.356

<P_26>

and so , if life were awarranted fooles , fat ones , rich ones , would
give the chaine of their soules , that is linked to saluaion {COM:sic} ,
onely to inherit this earth in thy company ; when earth , though it bee
heauen to hell , by reason of the paines , yet the comparison auerts ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.358

it is hell to heauen in respect of pleasures . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.359

By the second is meant the surfets of soule and body , that fooles buy
with their gold , not sparing any price to please appetite , though the
edge of it slice frome the bosome of good old Abraham very heauen
itselfe . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.360

By the third , how the fat fooles of this age will gronte and sweat
under this massie burden , and purge to the crown from the foote ,
though their braine perish through the prevailing practise of busie
endeauour . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.361

The mule , morrally signifies the diuell , upon whose trot their
fatnesse takes ease , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.362

and rides a gallop to destruction . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.363

By the fourth taile is prefigned {COM:sic} the presumption of greatnesse
, who are willing to outrun speede itselfe through greedy desire .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.364

In this is showne how flattery feedes them , placing before them , as in
a sleepe , worke and wonder ; when , to say sooth , all is not worth the
wonder : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.365

their desire is more than abilitie to performe , and their practise
above all ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.366

yet the nimble overshoot them in act , leauing them a quicknesse in will
. ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.367

In the fifth , answere is made to the fourth , when often such forwarde
deedes meete with backward lurches , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.368

and they are stung with their own follyes , netling very lust with shame
and disgrace : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.369

it signifies adultery in fat ones , who <paren> aboue their owne
<$$paren> whoring after strange gods , make their religion ride hackney
to hell , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.370

and when shame takes them from the horse , they make their own graues ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.371

and are buried in their own shame , with this motto above written -
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,26.372

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_27>

This morrall motion gaue the World such a buffet , that she skrindge her
face as though shee were pincht home ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.375

yet , seeing no remedy but that the flat and fat fooles should draw in
her coach together , shee sets in the boote ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.376

and rides on . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.377

The crittick reacheth his glasse to her view , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.378

and presents the third . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.379

O ! this was a humorous sir , indeede , leane Leonard :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.380

they call him a foole of strange and prepostrous breeding , begot of
enuie , and out of doubt his base sonne : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.381

his description hath a straine of more wonder - ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.382

long , like a lath , and of proportion little better ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.383

but giue his report hearing - ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.384

{COM:verse_omitted}

You heare , maddam , sayes our cinnick , how he is markt :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.386

if ye meete him in your pottage-dish , yet know him .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.387

The World , though shee loued not the description , yet shee coueted his
condition , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.388

and began to woe his report ; which , making no bones of , the sweete
youth gaue his doings thus . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,27.389

<P_28>

In the merry forest of Shearewood dwells a kind gentleman , whose name I
omit , fearing I too much offend in meddling with his foole ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.391

but I trust he will pardon me , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.392

for sithence , he is so well knowne thereabouts , I thinke it not amisse
to tell it at London , that people seeing the strange workes of God , in
his differing creatures , we that haue perfect resemblance of God , both
in sence and similitude , may the better praise his name , that wee
differ from them whose humours we read , see , and heare , are not so
strange as true . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.393

I say againe this gentleman had a foole , Leonard they called
{COM:preceding_word_"called"_emended} him , leane of body , looking like
enuie , whose conditions agree with his countenance .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.394

One time aboue all other , hee lockt himselfe into a parlour , where all
alone hee played at slide groat , as his manner was :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.395

peices or counters he had none ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.396

yet , casting his hand empty from him , fly , saies hee : short with a
vengeance ! ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.397

then , play , saies hee <paren> to his fellow <$$paren> when , indeede ,
there is none but himselfe ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.398

but thus with supposes he playes alone , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.399

swaggers with his game fellow , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.400

out-sweares him with a_thousand oaths , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.401

challenges him the field to answere him if hee bee a man ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.402

appoynts the place and all , that if any one not knowing his conditions
should stand without and heare him , would thinke two swaggerers were
fighting in the roome . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.403

To his play againe he fals , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.404

seauen up for twelve pence , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.405

for that is his game still : ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.406

well , they fall out , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.407

they go together by the eares , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.408

and such a hurly-burly is in the roome , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.409

that passes . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.410

At last the stooles they flye about , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.411

the pots they walke , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.412

the glasses they goe together ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.413

nay , the prayer-bookes they flie into the fire , that such a noise
there was that the whole house wondered at his folly .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.414

Persuasions wer to no purpose ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.415

doores hee would open none , till they violently brake them open ,
though they were of gold ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.416

and so they did , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.417

and entered the parlour , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.418

found all this leuell coyle , and his pate broken , his face scratcht ,
and leg out of joynt ; as a number say to this houre that hee is a
play-fellow for the diuelle , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.419

and in game they can@ @not agree . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.420

But that is otherwise ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,28.421

for , in the great hall , at the seruing <P_29> man's request , he will
play by himselfe , if they will not play with him ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,29.422

and whoso playes with him , though they play for nothing , and with
nothing , all is one , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,29.423

they must fall out ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,29.424

and if others be not by to part them , mischiefe may bee done ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,29.425

for he will lay it on , take it off who will : so that at his first
comming he endaungered many , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,29.426

and now take heed is a faire thing , ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,29.427

for few will come neere him . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,29.428

Thus you see that fooles that want wit to gouerne themselves well , have
a wilfull will to goe forward in folly . ARMIN-1608-E2-P1,29.429

