<BEGIN_asch-1566-e1-p1>

<P_3R>

{COM:p._29_in_reprint}

But , to go forward , as you perceiue , your scholer to goe better and
better on awaie , first , with vnderstanding his lesson more quicklie ,
with parsing more readelie , with translating more spedelie and
perfitlie then he was wonte , after , giue him longer lessons to
translate ASCH-1566-E1-P1,3R.4

and withall , begin to teach him , both in nownes , and verbes , what is
<font> Proprium <$$font> , and what is <font> Translatum <$$font> , what
<font> Synonymum <$$font> , what <font> Diuersum , <$$font> which be
<font> Contraria , <$$font> and which be most notable Phrases in all his
lecture . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,3R.5

As : {COM:latin_omitted} ASCH-1566-E1-P1,3R.6

<P_3V>

{COM:p._30_in_reprint}

Your scholer then , must , haue the third paper booke : in the which ,
after he hath done his double translation , let him write , after this
sort foure of these forenamed sixe , diligentlie marked out of euerie
lesson . {COM:latin_omitted} Or else , three , or two , if there be no
moe : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,3V.9

and if there be none of these at all in some lecture , yet not omitte
the order , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,3V.10

but write these . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,3V.11

<P_4R>

This diligent translating , ioyned with this heedefull marking , in the
foresaid Epistles , and afterwarde in {COM:p._31_in_reprint} some plaine
Oration of <font> Tullie <$$font> , as , <font> pro lege Manil : pro
Archia Poeta <$$font> , or in those three <font> ad. C. Caes: <$$font>
shall worke soch a right choise of wordes , so streight a framing of
sentences , soch a true iudgement , both to write skilfullie , and
speake wittlelie , as wise men shall both praise , and maruell at .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4R.13

If your scholer do misse sometimes , in marking rightlie these foresaid
sixe thinges , chide not hastelie : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4R.14

for that shall , both dull his witte , and discorage his diligence :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4R.15

but monish him gentelie : which shall make him , both willing to amende
, and glad to go forward in loue and hope of learning .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4R.16

I haue now wished , twise or thrise , this gentle nature , to be in a
Scholemaster : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4R.17

And , that I haue done so , neither by chance , nor without some reason
, I will now declare at large , why , in mine opinion , loue is fitter
then feare , ientlenes better then beating , to bring vp a childe
rightlie in learninge . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4R.18

With the common vse of teaching and beating in common scholes of England
, I will not greatlie contend : which if I did , it were but a small
grammaticall controuersie , neither belonging to heresie nor treason ,
nor greatly touching God nor the Prince : although in very deede , in
the end , the good or ill bringing vp of children , doth as much serue
to the good or ill seruice , of God , our Prince , and our whole
countrie , as any one thing doth beside . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4R.19

I do gladlie agree with all good Scholemasters in these pointes : to
haue children brought to good perfitnes in learning : to all honestie in
maners : to haue all faultes {SIC:fautes} rightlie amended : to haue
euerie vice seuerelie corrected : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4R.20

but for the order and waie that leadeth rightlie to these pointes , we
somewhat differ . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4R.21

For commonlie , many scholemasters , some , as I haue seen , moe , as I
haue heard tell , be of so crooked a nature , as , when they meete with
a hard_witted scholer , they rather breake him , than bowe him , rather
marre him , then mend him . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4R.22

For whan the scholemaster is angrie <P_4V> with some other
{COM:p._32_in_reprint} matter , then will he sonest faul to beate his
scholer : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.23

and though he him selfe should be punished for his folie , yet must he
beate some scholer for his pleasure though there be no cause for him to
do so , nor yet fault in the scholer to deserue so .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.24

These ye will say , be fond scholemasters , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.25

and fewe they be , that be found to be soch . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.26

They be fond in deede , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.27

but surelie ouermany soch be found euerie where . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.28

But this will I say , that euen the wisest of your great beaters , do as
oft punishe nature , as they do correcte faultes .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.29

Yea , many times , the better nature , is sorer punished :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.30

For , if one , by quicknes of witte , take his lesson readelie , an
other , by hardnes of witte , taketh it not so speedelie : the first ,
is alwaies commended , the other is commonlie punished : whan a wise
scholemaster , should rather discretelie consider the right disposition
of both their natures , and not so moch wey what either of them is able
to do now , as what either of them is likelie to do hereafter .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.31

For this I know , not onelie by reading of bookes in my studie , but
also by experience of life , abrode in the world , that those , which be
commonlie the wisest , the best learned , and best men also , when ,
they be olde , were neuer commonlie the quickest , of witte , when they
were yonge . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.32

The causes why , amongest other , which be many , that moue me thus to
thinke , be these fewe , which I will recken . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.33

Quicke wittes commonlie , be apte to take , vnapte to keepe : soone hote
and desirous of this and that : as colde and sone wery of the same
againe : more quicke to enter spedelie , than hable to pearse farre :
euen like ouer sharpe tooles , whose edges be verie soone turned .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.34

Soch wittes delite them selues in easie and pleasant studies ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.35

and neuer passe farre forward in hie and hard sciences .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.36

And therefore the quickest wittes commonlie may proue the best Poetes ,
but not the wisest Orators : readie of tonge to speak boldlie , not
deepe of judgement , either for good counsell or wise writing .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,4V.37

Also , for maners {COM:p._33_in_reprint} and life , quicke wittes
commonlie , be , in desire , newfangled {SIC:newfangle} in purpose ,
vnconstant , light to promise any thing , readie to forget <P_5R> euery
thing : both benefite and iniurie : and therby neither fast to frend ,
nor fearefull to foe : inquisitiue of euery trifle , not secret in
greatest affaires : bolde , with any person : busie , in euery matter :
soothing {SIC:sothing} , soch as be present : nipping any that is absent
: of nature also , alwaies , flattering their betters , enuying their
equals , despising their inferiors : and , by quicknes of witte , verie
quicke and readie , to like none so well as them selues .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5R.38

Moreouer commonlie , men , very quicke of witte , be also , verie light
of conditions : and thereby , very readie of disposition , to be caried
ouer quicklie , by any light cumpanie , to any riot and vnthriftines
when they be yonge : and therfore seldome , either honest of life , or
riche in liuing , when they be olde . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5R.39

For , quicke in witte , and light in maners , be , either : seldome
troubled , or verie sone weary {SIC:weery} , in carying a verie heuie
purse . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5R.40

Quicke wittes also be , in most part of all their doinges , ouer quicke
, hastie , rashe , headie , and brainsicke . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5R.41

These two last wordes , Headie , and Brainsicke , be fitte and proper
wordes , rising naturallie of the matter , and tearmed aptlie by the
condition , of ouer moch quickenes of witte . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5R.42

In yougthe also they , be , readie scoffers , priuie mockers ; and euer
ouer light and merry {SIC:mery} . In aige , sone testie , very waspishe
, and alwaies ouer miserable : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5R.43

and yet fewe of them cum to any great aige , by reason of their
misordered life when they were yong : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5R.44

but a greate deale fewer of them cum to shewe any great countenance , or
beare any great authoritie abrode in the world , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5R.45

but either liue obscurelie , men know not how , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5R.46

or dye obscurelie , men marke not whan . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5R.47

They be like trees , that shewe forth , faire blossoms and broad leaues
in spring time , but bring out small and not long_lasting fruite in
haruest time : and that onelie soch , as fall , and rotte , before they
be ripe , and so , neuer , or seldome , cum to any good at all .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5R.48

For this ye shall finde most true by experience , that amongest a
{COM:p._34_in_reprint} number of quicke wittes in youthe , fewe be found
, in the end , either verie fortunate for them selues , or verie
profitable to serue the common wealth , but <P_5V> decay and vanish ,
men know not which way : except a very fewe , to whom peraduenture blood
and happie parentage , may perchance purchace a long standing vpon the
stage . The which felicitie , because it commeth by others procuring ,
not by their owne deseruinge , and stand by other mens feete , and not
by their own , what owtward brag so euer is borne by them , is in deed ,
of it selfe , and in wise mens eyes , of no great estimation .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5V.49

Some wittes , moderate enough by nature , be many tymes marde by ouer
moch studie and vse of some sciences , namelie , Musicke , Arithmetick ,
and Geometrie . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5V.50

Thies sciences , as they sharpen mens wittes ouer moch , so they change
mens maners ouer sore , if they be not moderatlie mingled , and wiselie
applied to som good vse of life . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5V.51

Marke all Mathematicall heades , which be onely and wholy bent to those
sciences , how solitarie they be themselues , how vnfit to liue with
others , and how vnapte to serue in the world . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5V.52

This is not onelie knowen now by common experience , but vttered long
before by wise mens Iudgement and sentence . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5V.53

<font> Galene <$$font> saith , moch Musick marreth mens maners :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5V.54

and <font> Plato <$$font> hath a notable place of the same thing in his
bookes <font> de Rep. <$$font> well marked also , and excellentlie
translated by <font> Tullie <$$font> himself . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5V.55

Of this matter , I wrote once more at large , xx. yeare a_go , in my
booke of shoting : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5V.56

now I thought but to touch it , to proue , that ouer moch quicknes of
witte , either giuen by nature , or sharpened by studie , doth not
commonlie bring forth , eyther greatest learning , best maners , or
happiest life in the end . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,5V.57

Contrariewise , a witte in youth , that is not ouer dulle , heauie ,
knottie and lumpishe , but hard , rough , and though somwhat staffishe ,
as <font> Tullie <$$font> wisheth <font> otium , quietum , non languidum
<$$font> : and <font> negotium cum labore , non cum periculo <$$font> ,
such a witte I {COM:p._35_in_reprint} say , if it be , at the first well
handled by the mother , and rightlie smoothed {TEXT:smothed} and wrought
as it should , not ouerthwartlie {SIC:ouerwhartlie} , and against the
wood , by the scholemaster , both for learning , and hole course of
liuing , <P_6R> proueth alwaies the best . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.58

In woode and stone , not the softest , but hardest , be alwaies aptest ,
for portrature , both fairest for pleasure , and most durable for
proffit . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.59

Hard wittes be hard to receiue , but sure to keepe : painefull without
werinesse , hedefull without wauering , constant without newfanglenes :
bearing heauie thinges , thoughe not lightlie , yet willinglie ; entring
hard thinges , though not easelie , yet depelie ; ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.60

and so cum to that perfitnes of learning in the ende , that quicke
wittes , seeme in hope , but do not in deede , or else verie seldome ,
euer attaine vnto . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.61

Also , for maners and life , hard wittes commonlie , are {SIC:ar}
hardlie caried , either to desire euerie new thing , or else to maruell
at euery strange thinge : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.62

and therefore they be carefull and diligent in their own matters , not
curious and busey in other mens affaires : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.63

and so , they becum wise them selues , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.64

and also are {SIC:ar} counted honest by others . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.65

They be graue , stedfaft , silent of tong , secret of hart .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.66

Not hastie in making , but constant in keeping {SIC:keping} any promise
. ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.67

Not rashe in vttering , but warye {SIC:ware} in considering euery matter
: and therby , not quicke in speaking , but deepe of judgement , whether
they write , or giue counsell in all waightie affaires .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.68

And theis be the men , that becum in the end , both most happie for
themselues , and alwaise best estemed abrode in the world .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.69

I haue bene longer in describing , the nature , the good or ill successe
, of the quicke and hard witte , than perchance som will thinke , this
place and matter doth require . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.70

But my purpose was hereby , plainlie to vtter , what iniurie is offered
to all learninge , and to the common welthe also , first , by the fond
father in choking but chieflie by the lewd scholemaster in beating and
driuing away the best natures from learning . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.71

A childe that is still , silent , {COM:p._36_in_reprint} constant , and
somwhat hard of witte , is either neuer chosen by the father to be made
a scholer , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.72

or else , when he commeth to the schole , he is smally regarded , little
looked vnto , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.73

he lacketh teaching , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.74

he lacketh coraging , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6R.75

he lacketh all thinges , onelie he neuer lacketh beating , nor any word
, that may moue him <P_6V> to hate learninge , nor any deed that may
drive him from learning , to any other kinde of liuing .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.76

And when this sadde_natured , and hard_witted child , is bette from his
booke , and becummeth after eyther student of the common lawe , or page
in the Court , or seruingman , or bound prentice to a merchant , or to
som handiecrafte , he proueth in the ende , wiser , happier and many
tymes honester too , than many of theis quick wittes do , by their
learninge . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.77

Learning is , both hindred and iniured too {SIC:to} by the ill choice of
them , that send yong scholers to the vniuersities . Of whom must nedes
cum all oure Diuines , Lawyers , and Physicions . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.78

Thies yong scholers be chosen commonlie , as yong apples be chosen by
children , in a faire garden about <font> S. Iames <$$font> tyde :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.79

a childe will chose a sweeting , because it is presentlie faire and
pleasant , and refuse a Runnet , because it is than grene , hard , and
sowre , whan the one , if it be eaten , doth breed , both wormes and ill
humors : the other if it stand his tyme , be ordered and kepte as it
should , is holsom of it self , and helpeth to the good digestion of
other meates : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.80

Sweetinges , will receyue wormes , rotte , and dye on the tree ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.81

and neuer or seldom cum to the gathering for good and lasting store .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.82

For verie greafe of hearte I will not applie the similitude :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.83

but hereby , is plainlie seen , how learning is robbed of hir best
wittes , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.84

first by the greate beating , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.85

and after by the ill chosing of scholers , to go to the vniuersities .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.86

Whereof cummeth partelie , that lewde and spitefull prouerbe , sounding
to the greate hurte of {COM:p._37_in_reprint} learning , and shame of
learned men , that , the greatest Clerkes be not the wisest men .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.87

And though I , in all this discourse , seem plainlie to prefer , hard
and roughe wittes , before quicke and light wittes , both for learnyng
and maners , yet am I not ignorant that som quicknes of witte , is a
singuler gifte of God , and so most rare emonges men ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,6V.88

and namelie such a witte , as is quicke <P_7R> without lightnes , sharpe
without brittlenes , desirous of good thinges without newfanglenes ,
diligent in painfull thinges without werisomnes , and constant in good
will to do all thinges well , as I know was in Syr John Cheke , and is
in som , that yet liue , in whome all theis faire qualities of witte are
{SIC:ar} fullie mette togither . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.89

But it is notable and trewe , that <font> Socrates <$$font> saith in
<font> Plato <$$font> to his frende <font> Crito <$$font> . That , that
number of men is fewest , which far excede , either in good or ill , in
wisdom or folie , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.90

but the meane betwixt both , be the greatest number : which he proueth
trewe in diuerse other thinges : as in greyhoundes , emonges which ,
fewe are found , exceding greate , or exceding litle , exceding swift ,
or exceding slowe : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.91

And therfore , I speaking of quick and hard wittes , I ment , the common
number of quicke and hard wittes , emonges the which , for the most
parte , the hard witte , proueth manie times , the better learned ,
wiser and honester man : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.92

and therfore , do I the more lament , that soch wittes commonlie be
either kepte from learning , by fond fathers , or beate from learning by
lewde scholemasters . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.93

And speaking thus moche of the wittes of children for learning , the
opportunitie of the place , and goodnes of the matter might require to
haue here declared the most speciall notes of a good witte for learning
in a childe , after the maner and custume of a good horsman , who is
skilfull , to know , and hable to tell others , how by certein sure
signes , a {COM:p._38_in_reprint} man may choise a colte , that is like
to proue an other day , excellent for the saddle .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.94

And it is pitie {SIC:pittie} , that commonlie , more care is had , yea
and that emonges verie wise men , to finde out rather a cunnynge man for
their horse , than a cunnyng man for their children .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.95

They say nay in worde , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.96

but they do so in dede . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.97

For , to the one , they will gladlie giue a stipend of 200. Crounes by
the {TEXT:missing_"the"} yeare , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.98

and loth to offer to the other , 200. shillinges .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.99

God , that sitteth in heauen laugheth their choice to skorne ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.100

and rewardeth their liberalitie as it should : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7R.101

for he suffereth them , to haue , tame and well ordered <P_7V> horse ,
but wilde and vnfortunate Children : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7V.102

and therfore in the ende they finde more pleasure in their horse , than
comforte in their children . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7V.103

But concerning the trewe notes of the best wittes for learning in a
childe , I will reporte , not myne own opinion , but the very iudgement
of him , that was counted the best teacher and wisest man that learning
maketh mention of , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7V.104

and that is <font> Socrates <$$font> in <font> Plato <$$font> , who
expresseth orderlie thies seuen plaine notes to choise a good witte in a
child for learninge . {COM:greek_omitted} ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7V.105

And bicause I write English , and to Englishemen , I will plainlie
declare in Englishe both , what thies wordes of <font> Plato <$$font>
meane , and how aptlie they be linked , and how orderlie they follow
{SIC:folow} one an other . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7V.106

1 . {COM:greek_omitted} Is he , that is apte by goodnes of witte , and
appliable by readines of will , to learning , hauing all other qualities
of the minde and partes {COM:p._39_in_reprint} of the bodie , that must
an other day serue learning , not troubled {SIC:trobled} , mangled , and
halfed , but sounde , whole , full , and hable to do their office : as ,
a tong , not stamering , or ouer hardlie drawing forth wordes , but
plaine , and redie to deliuer the meaning of the minde : a voice , not
softe , weake , piping , womannishe , but audible , stronge , and
manlike : a countenance , not werishe and crabbed , but faire and cumlie
: a personage , not wretched and deformed , but taule and goodlie :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,7V.107

for surelie a cumlie countenance , with a goodlie <P_8R> stature ,
geueth credit to learning , and authoritie to the person :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.108

otherwise commonlie , either open contempte , or priuie diffauour doth
hurte , or hinder , both person and learning . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.109

And , euen as a faire stone requireth to be sette in the finest gold ,
with the best workmanshyp , or else it leseth moch of the Grace and
price , euen so , excellencye in learning , and namely Diuinitie ,
ioyned with a cumlie personage , is a meruelous Iewell in the world .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.110

And how can a cumlie bodie be better employed , than to serue the
fairest exercise of Goddes greatest gifte , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.111

and that is learning . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.112

But commonlie , the fairest bodies , are {SIC:ar} bestowed on the
foulest purposes . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.113

I would it were not so : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.114

and with examples herein I will not medle : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.115

yet I wishe , that those shold , both mynde it , and medle with it ,
which haue most occasion to looke to it , as good and wise fathers shold
do , and greatest authoritie to amend it , as good and wise magistrates
ought to do : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.116

And yet I will not let , openlie to lament the vnfortunate case of
learning herein . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.117

For , if a father haue foure sonnes , three faire and well formed both
mynde and bodie , the fourth , wretched , lame , and deformed , his
choice shal@ @be , to put the worst to learning , as one good enoughe to
becum a scholer . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.118

I haue spent the most parte of my life in the Vniuersitie ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.119

and therfore I can beare good witnes that many fathers commonlie do thus
: wherof , I haue hard {COM:p._40_in_reprint} many wise , learned , and
as good men as euer I knew , make great , and oft complainte :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.120

a good horseman will choise no soch colte , neither for his own , nor
yet for his masters sadle . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.121

And thus moch of the first note . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.122

2 . {COM:greek_omitted} Good of memorie , a speciall parte of the first
note {COM:greek_omitted} , and a mere benefite of nature :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.123

yet it is so necessary for learning : as <font> Plato <$$font> maketh it
a separate and perfite note of it selfe , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.124

and that so principall a note , as without it , all other giftes of
nature do small seruice to learning , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8R.125

<font> Afranius <$$font> , that olde Latine Poete maketh Memorie the
mother of learning and wisedome , saying thus . <P_8V> <font> Vsus me
genuit , Mater peperit memoria <$$font> , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8V.126

and though it be the mere gifte of nature , yet is memorie well
preserued by vse , and moch encreased by order , as our scholer must
learne an other day in the Vniuersitie : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8V.127

but , in a childe , a good memorie is well known , by three properties :
that is , if it be , quike in receyuing , sure in keping , and redie in
deliuering forthe againe . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8V.128

3

{COM:greek_omitted}

Giuen to loue learning : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8V.131

for though a child haue all the giftes of nature at wishe , and
perfection of memorie at will , yet if he haue not a speciall loue to
learning , he shall neuer attaine to moch learning .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8V.132

And therfore <font> Isocrates <$$font> , one of the noblest
scholemasters , that is in memorie of learning , who taught Kinges and
Princes , as <font> Halicarnassaeus <$$font> writeth , and out of whose
schole , as <font> Tullie <$$font> saith , came forth , mo noble
Capitanes , mo wise Councelors , than did out of <font> Epeius <$$font>
horse at <font> Troie <$$font> . This <font> Isocrates <$$font> , I say
, did cause to be written , at the entrie of his schole , in golden
letters , this golden sentence , {COM:greek_omitted} which excellentlie
said in <font> Greeke <$$font> , is thus rudelie in Englishe , if thou
louest learning , thou shalt attayne to moch learning .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8V.133

{COM:p._41_in_reprint}

4

{COM:greek_omitted} Is he , that hath a lust to labor , and a will to
take paines . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8V.136

For , if a childe haue all the benefites of nature , with perfection of
memorie , loue , like , and praise learning neuer so moch , yet if he be
not of him selfe painfull , he shall neuer attayne vnto it .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8V.137

And yet where loue is present , labor is seldom absent , and namelie in
studie of learning , and matters of the mynde : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8V.138

and therfore did {SIC:therefored_id} <font> Isocrates <$$font> rightlie
iudge , that if his scholer were {COM:greek_omitted} he cared for no
more . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8V.139

<font> Aristotle <$$font> , variing from <font> Isocrates <$$font> , in
priuate affaires of life , but agreing with <font> Isocrates <$$font> ,
in common iudgement of learning , for loue and labor in learning , is of
the same opinion , vttered in these wordes , in his Rhetorike ad
Theodectem . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,8V.140

Libertie kindleth <P_9R> loue : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.141

Loue refuseth no labor : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.142

and labor obteyneth what so euer it seeketh . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.143

And yet neuerthelesse , Goodnes of nature may do little good :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.144

Perfection of memorie , may serue to small vse : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.145

All loue may be employed in vayne : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.146

Any labor may be sone graualed , if a man trust alwaies to his own
singuler witte , and will not be glad somtyme to heare , take aduise ,
and learne of an other : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.147

And therfore doth <font> Socrates <$$font> very notablie adde the fifte
note . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.148

5

{COM:greek_omitted}

He , that is glad to heare and learne of an other .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.151

For otherwise , he shall sticke with great troble , where he might go
easelie forwarde : and also catche hardlie a verie litle by his owne
toyle , whan he might gather quicklie a good deale , by an others mans
teaching . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.152

But now there be some , that haue great loue to learning , good lust to
labor , be willing to learne of others , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.153

yet , either of a fonde shamefastnes , or else of a proud folie , they
dare not , or will not , go to learne of an nother :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.154

And therfore doth <font> Socrates <$$font> wiselie adde the sixte note
of a good witte in a childe for learning , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.155

and that is . {COM:p._42_in_reprint} 6 {COM:greek_omitted}
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.156

He , that is naturallie bold to aske any question , desirous to searche
out any doubte {SIC:doute} , not ashamed to learne of the meanest , not
affraide to go to the greatest , vntill he be perfitelie taught , and ,
fullie satisfiede . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.157

The seuenth and last poynte is . 7 {COM:greek_omitted} He , that loueth
to be praised for well_doing , at his father , or masters hand .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.158

A childe of this nature , will earnestlie loue learnyng , gladlie labor
for learning , willinglie learne of other , boldlie aske any doubte
{SIC:doute} . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9R.159

And thus , by <font> Socrates <$$font> iudgement , a good father , and a
wise scholemaster shold chose a childe to make a scholer of , that hath
by nature , the foresayd perfite qualities , and cumlie furniture , both
of mynde and <P_9V> bodie , hath memorie , quicke to receyue , sure to
keape , and readie to deliuer : hath loue to learning : hath lust to
labor : hath desire to learne of others : hath boldnes to aske any
question : hath mynde holie bent , to wynne praise by well_doing .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.160

The two firste poyntes be speciall benefites of nature which
neuerthelesse , be well preserued , and moch encreased by good order .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.161

But as for the fiue laste , loue , labor , gladnes to learne of others ,
boldnes to aske doubtes {SIC:doutes} , and will to wynne praise , be
wonne and maintened by the onelie wisedome and discretion of the
scholemaster . Which fiue poyntes , whether a scholemaster shall work
sooner {SIC:soner} in a childe , by fearefull beating , or curtese
handling , you that be wise , iudge . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.162

Yet some men , wise in deede , but in this matter , more by seueritie of
nature , than any wisdome at all , do laugh at vs , when we thus wishe
and reason , that yong children should rather be allured to learning by
ientilnes and loue , than compelled to learning , by beating and feare :
They say , our reasons serue onelie to breede forth talke , and passe
a_waie tyme , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.163

but we neuer saw good scholemaster do so ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.164

nor neuer red of wise man that thought so . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.165

{COM:p._43_in_reprint}

Yes forsothe : as wise as they be , either in other mens opinion , or in
their owne conceite , I will bring the contrarie iudgement of him , who
, they them selues shall confesse , was as wise as they are , or else
they may be iustlie thought to haue small witte at all :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.167

and that is <font> Socrates <$$font> , whose iudgement in <font> Plato
<$$font> is plainlie this in these wordes : which , bicause they be
verie notable , I will recite them in his owne tonge {COM:greek_omitted}
, ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.168

in Englishe , thus , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.169

No learning ought to be learned with bondage : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.170

For , bodelie labors , wrought by compulsion , hurt not the bodie :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.171

but any learning learned by compulsion , tarieth not long in the mynde :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.172

And why ? ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.173

For what soeuer the mynde doth learne vnwillinglie with feare , the same
it doth quicklie forget without care . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,9V.174

And lest proude wittes , that loue not to be contraryed , <P_10R> but
haue lust to wrangle or trifle away troth , will say , that <font>
Socrates <$$font> meaneth not this of childrens teaching , but of som
other higher learnyng , heare , what <font> Socrates <$$font> in the
same place doth more plainlie say : {COM:greek_omitted} ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.175

that is to say , and therfore , my deare frend , bring not vp your
children in learning by compulsion and feare , but by playing and
pleasure . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.176

And you , that do read <font> Plato <$$font> , as ye shold , do well
perceiue , that these be no Questions asked by <font> Socrates <$$font>
, as doutes , but they be Sentences , first affirmed by <font> Socrates
<$$font> , as mere trothes , and after , giuen forth by <font> Socrates
<$$font> , as right Rules , most necessarie to be marked , and fitte to
be folowed of all them , that would haue children taughte , as they
should . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.177

And in this counsell , iudgement , and authoritie of <font> Socrates
<$$font> I will repose my selfe , vntill I meete with a man of the
contrarie mynde , whom I may iustlie take to be wiser , than I thinke
<font> Socrates <$$font> was . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.178

Fonde scholemasters , neither can vnderstand , nor will folow this good
counsell of <font> Socrates <$$font> , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.179

but wise ryders , in their office , can and will {COM:p._44_in_reprint}
do both : which is the onelie cause , that commonly , the yong ientlemen
of England , go so vnwillinglie to schole , and run so fast to the
stable : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.180

For in verie deede fond scholemasters , by feare , do beate into them ,
the hatred of learning , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.181

and wise riders , by ientle allurementes , do breed vp in them , the
loue of riding . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.182

They finde feare , and bondage in scholes , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.183

They feele libertie and freedome in stables : which causeth them ,
vtterlie to abhore {SIC:abhorre} the one , and most gladlie to haunt the
other . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.184

And I do not write this , that in exhorting to the one , I would
dissuade yong ientlemen from the other : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.185

yea I am sorie , with all my harte , that they be giuen no more to
riding , then they be : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.186

For , of all outward qualities , to ride faire , is most cumelie for him
selfe , most necessarie for his contrey , ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.187

and the greater he is in blood , the greater is his praise , the more he
doth excede {SIC:excede} all other therein . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.188

It was one of the three excellent praises , amongest the noble ientlemen
the old <font> Persians <$$font> , Alwaise to say troth , to ride faire
, and shote well : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10R.189

and so it was engrauen <P_10V> vpon <font> Darius <$$font> tumbe , as
<font> Strabo <$$font> beareth witnesse . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10V.190

<font> Darius the king , lieth buried here , Who in riding and shoting
had neuer Peare . <$$font> ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10V.191

But , to our purpose , yong men , by any meanes , leesing the loue of
learning , whan by tyme they cum to their owne rule , they carie
commonlie , from the schole with them , a perpetuall hatred of their
master , and a continuall contempt of learning .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10V.192

If ten Ientlemen be asked , why they forget so sone in Court , that
which they were learning so long in schole , eight of them , or let me
be blamed , will laie the fault on their ill handling , by their
scholemasters . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10V.193

<font> Cuspinian <$$font> doth report , that , that noble Emperor <font>
Maximilian <$$font> , would lament verie oft , his misfortune herein .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10V.194

Yet , some will say , that children of nature , loue pastime , and
mislike learning : {COM:p._45_in_reprint} bicause , in their kinde , the
one is easie and pleasant , the other hard and werison : which is an
opinion not so trewe , as some men weene : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10V.195

For , the matter lieth not so much in the disposition of them that be
yong , as in the order and maner of bringing vp , by them that be old ,
nor yet in the difference of learnyng and pastime .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10V.196

For , beate a child , if he daunce not well , and cherish him , though
he learne not well , ye shall haue him , vnwilling to go to daunce , and
glad to go to his booke . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10V.197

Knocke him alwaies , when he draweth his shaft ill , and fauour
{SIC:fauor} him againe , though he fault {SIC:faut} at his booke , ye
shall haue hym verie loth to be in the field , and verie willing to be
in the schole . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10V.198

Yea , I saie more , and not of my selfe , but by the iudgement of those
, from whom few wisemen will gladlie dissent , that if euer the nature
of man be giuen at any tyme , more than other , to receiue goodnes , it
is , in innocencie of yong yeares , before , that experience of euill ,
haue taken roote in hym . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10V.199

For , the pure cleane witte of a sweete yong babe , is like the newest
wax , most hable to receiue the best and fayrest printing : and like a
new bright siluer dishe neuer occupied , to receiue and kepe cleane ,
anie good thyng that is put into it . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,10V.200

<P_11R>

And thus , will in children , wiselie wrought withall , maie easelie be
won to be verie well willing to learne . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.202

And witte in children , by nature , namelie memorie , the onely keie and
keper of all learning , is readiest to receiue , and surest to kepe anie
maner of thing , that is learned in yougth : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.203

This , lewde and learned , by common experience , know to be most trewe
. ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.204

For we remember nothyng so well when we be olde , as those things whiche
we learned when we were yong : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.205

And this is not straunge , but common in all natures workes .
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.206

Euery man sees <paren> as I sayd before <$$paren> new wax is best for
printyng : new claie , fittest for working : new@ @shorene woll
{COM:sic} , aptest for sone and surest dying : new fresh flesh , for
good and durable salting . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.207

And this similitude is not {COM:p._46_in_reprint} rude , nor borowed of
the larder house , but out of his scholehouse , of whome , the wisest of
England , neede not be ashamed to learne . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.208

Yong Graftes grow not onelie sonest , but also fairest ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.209

and bring alwayes forth the best and sweetest frute :
ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.210

yong whelpes learne easelie to carie : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.211

yong Popingeis learne quicklie to speake : ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.212

And so , to be short , if in all other thinges , though they lacke
reason , sense , and life , the similitude of youth is fittest to all
goodnesse , surelie nature , in mankinde , is most beneficiall and
effectuall in this behalfe . ASCH-1566-E1-P1,11R.213

