<BEGIN_aungier-1674-e3-p1>

<P_60,A>

<heading:edcomment:XLV_FRANCIS_LORD_AUNGIER_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

Lond. AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,60,A.4

Mar. y=e= 15=th= , 1672-3 . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,60,A.5

May it please y=r= Ex=cye= , I am but just now return'd out of y=e=
country , where I have spent fower dayes , AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,60,A.6

& therefore am not so well instructed in ye affaires w=ch= have pass'd
in Parliam=t= since my last as to be able to give y=r= Ex=cye= a
particular acc=t= of them . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,60,A.7

But calling upon S=r= Arthur Forbes , I have glean'd from him what I am
now to tell y=r= Ex=c=ye= , viz. 1=st= That y=e= Bill for his Ma=ties=
supply was this day reported from y=e= Committee , & ordered to be
engrost , but not to have its last reading till Fryday next , by w=ch=
time y=e= House of Com~ons will see what fortune {SIC:forturne} y=e=
Bill ag=t= y=e= groweth of Popery is like to have in the Howse of Lords
, from whence they will take their future measures .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,60,A.8

2=ly= That there have beene some hints given in y=e= howse of y=e= late
encouragem=t= w=ch= has beene given to y=e= Papists in Ire=ld= by
admitting them into y=e= Com=r= of Peace & Corporations .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,60,A.9

And that my Lord Arundell of Warder , Father Patrick , & Co=ll= Rich=d=
Talbot were this day named in the Howse as y=e= Cheife promoters of it ,
& consequently very unfit persons to be so neare His Ma=ties= & His
Royall Highnesses persons . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,60,A.10

But this was only sayd by one member only , & not seconded by any of
y=e= Howse . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,60,A.11

These particulars S=r= Arthur desired me to acquainte y=r= Ex=cy= w=th=
, he being not yett so well recovered as to be able to write himselfe ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,60,A.12

and he further intreated me in his name to tell y=r= Ex=cy= that since
<font> y=e= Papists are faln upon by y=e= Parliam=t= , he fears They may
grow desperate and endeavour to disturb y=e= govern=t= There . <$$font>
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,60,A.13

And therefore he humbly submitts it to y=r= Ex=cys= consideration ,
whether in this conjuncture it be not necessary for y=r= Ex=cye= to
<font> order y=e= Officers of y=e= Army to their charges and to mind
carefully their guards <$$font> ; w=ch= I <P_61,A> presume to write to
y=r= Ex=cye= in Cypher , because he desired me so to doe , & to beseech
y=r= Ex=cy= to conceale y=e= advizer . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,61,A.14

I have directed my Brother Cuffe to attend y=r= Ex=cy= w=th= his Cypher
, w=ch= will w=th=out giveing y=r= Ex=cy= any greate trouble unlocke
what I have written , for w=ch= notw=th=standing I humbly aske yo=r=
Ex=cyes= pardon . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,61,A.15

<P_74,A>

<heading:edcomment:LVII_LORD_AUNGIER_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

Lond. AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,74,A.18

Apr. 12=th= , 1673 . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,74,A.19

May it please yor Ex=cye= , On Wenesday last Co=ll= Talbot appeared
publiquely in His Ma=ties= Bedchamber , where he attended to deliver his
petition , w=ch= having don as his Ma=tie= was passing through to
Councill , he there waited His Ma=ties= & Councill@ @'s resolution upon
it . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,74,A.20

His Petition purported his greate surprize at y=e= severe Sentence of
y=e= Howse of {SIC:of_of} Com~ons ag=t= him unheard specifyed in their
addresse to His Ma=tie= , w=ch= he humbly beg'd His Ma=tie= would not
comply in putting it in execution ag=t= him .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,74,A.21

Because , not being conscious to himselfe of haveing com~itted any crime
, he would give securitye to stande and abide the judge=mt= of y=e=
Howse of Com~ons at their next meeting , then whome he did not desire to
appeare to other or better judges , & to whose judgem=t= he had at their
last meeting submitted himselfe , if there had beene time or
opportunitye for it before their riseing . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,74,A.22

He therefore humbly beseeched His Ma=tie= , who was no stranger to his
loyalltye & services , to suspend y=e= execution of y=e= severe sentence
of Banishm=t= out of his Royall presence , till y=e= meeting of y=e=
Parliam=t= , before whome he was willing to appeare ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,74,A.23

& did not doubt but to cleare & justifye himselfe in any crime that
should be objected ag=t= him . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,74,A.24

His Petition was that day read at Councill , AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,74,A.25

but other affaires of greater importance intervening , the further
consideration of it was putt of till yesterday , when the addresse being
taken into consideration , it is sayd the Preamble wh=ch= mentions y=e=
late insolencyes of y=e= Papists grounded upon His Ma=ties= Indulgencies
will be referred to y=r= Ex=cyes= Examination & <P_75,A> Reporte
thereupon . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,75,A.26

As for the Com=n= of Inquirye , the extraordinary powers wh=ch= the
Parliam=t= observ'd to be in it are referred to y=e= Lords Com=rs= , who
calling to their assistance those of His M=ties= Privy Councill of
Ire=ld= who are Members of y=e= Howse of Com~ons , are on Thursday next
to take them into consideration & reporte their opinion to His Ma=tie=
and Councill . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,75,A.27

As for the disarming of y=e= Papists , His Ma=tie= declared his
resolution to comply w=th= the Howse of Com~ons in y=t= particular ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,75,A.28

& in order to it yo=r= Ex=cy= will have directions to disarme theme
{COM:sic} and all others whom yo=r= Ex=cy= shall finde cause to suspect
. AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,75,A.29

As for the discharge of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} all Papists
out of all Com~ands both Military and Civill , His Ma=tie= observed ,
though the Howse of Com~ons had lesse cause to complaine of this now
then in y=e= Reignes of any of his Auncestors , there be only one & y=t=
Co=ll= Talbot in y=e= Armye , whereas in Queene Elizabeth's time , King
James , & his Father's , there were at all times severall of y=e= Popish
Religion in y=e= Standing Armye , and though he were very well satisfyed
w=th= Co=ll= Talbot for his loyalty & good Services , yett he was
resolv'd alsoe to give the Howse of Com~ons Satisfaction in y=t= poynt
by takeing away his comand for w=ch= he would make him a recompence some
other way . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,75,A.30

As for y=e= remaineing particulars of the addresse the consideration of
it is putt of till Wenesday next , when His Maj=tie= will declare his
pleasure in them alsoe . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,75,A.31

I had almost forgott to observe to yo=r= Ex=cy= , that it is sayd Co=ll=
Talbot withdrew his Petition a few minutes before His Maj=tie= went
yesterday to Councill , w=ch= makes some conjecture his appeareing in
Courte for y=e= future will not be very frequent ;
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,75,A.32

I beg yo=r= Ex=cyes= pardon for this long lr~e ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,75,A.33

& crave leave to honor myselfe w=th= the title of
{COM:rest_of_sentence_omitted} AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,75,A.34

The Speaker of y=e= Howse of Com~ns was on Wenesday last sworne of His
Maj=ties= Privy Councill . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P1,75,A.35

