<BEGIN_bacon-1605-e2-p1>

<P_1,1R>

The First Booke of Francis Bacon ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,1R.3

Of the proficience and aduancement of Learning , diuine , and humane .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,1R.4

To the King . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,1R.5

There were vnder the Lawe <paren> excellent King <$$paren> both dayly
Sacrifices , and free will Offerings ; The one proceeding upon ordinarie
obseruance ; The other vppon a deuout cheerefulnesse :
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,1R.6

In like manner there belongeth to Kings from their Seruants , both
Tribute of dutie , and presents of affection : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,1R.7

In the former of these , I hope I shal not liue to be wanting ,
according to my most humble dutie , and the good pleasure of your
Maiesties employments : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,1R.8

for the later , I thought it more respective to make choyce of some
oblation , which might rather referre to the proprietie and excellencie
of your indiuiduall person , than to the businesse of your Crowne and
State . Wherefore representing your Maiestie many times vnto my mind ,
and beholding you not with <P_1,1V> the inquisitiue eye of presumption ,
to discouer that which the Scripture telleth me is inscrutable ; but
with the obseruant eye of dutie and admiration : leauing aside the other
parts of your vertue and fortune , I haue been touched , yea and
possessed with an extreame woonder at those your vertues and faculties ,
which the Philosophers call intellectuall : The largenesse of your
capacitie , the faithfulnesse of your memorie , the swiftnesse of your
apprehension , the penetration of your Iudgement , and the facilitie and
order of your elocution ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,1V.9

and I have often thought , that of all the persons living , that I haue
knowne , your Maiestie were the best instance to make a man of <font>
Platoes opinion , that all knowledge is but remembrance , and that the
minde of man by nature knoweth all things , and hath but her owne natiue
and originall motions <paren> which by the strangenesse and darkenesse
of this Tabernacle of the bodie are seqestred <$$paren> againe reuiued
and restored : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,1V.10

such a light of Nature I haue obserued in your Maiestie , and such a
readinesse to take flame , and blaze from the least occasion presented ,
or the least sparke of anothers knowledge delivered .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,1V.11

And as the Scripture sayth of the wisest King : <font> That his heart
was as the sands of the Sea <$$font> , which though it be one of the
largest bodies , yet it co~sisteth of the smallest & finest portions :
So hath God given your Maiestie a co~position of vndersstanding
admirable , being able to compasse & comprehend the greatest matters , &
neuerthelesse to touch and apprehend the least ; <P_1,2R> wheras it
should seeme an impossibility in Nature , for the same Instrument to
make it selfe fit for great and small workes . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,2R.12

And for your gift of speech , I call to minde what <font> Cornelius
Tacitus <$$font> sayth of <font> Augustus Caesar <$$font> : <font>
Augusto prostuens & quae principem deceret , eloquentia fuit : <$$font>
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,2R.13

For if we note it well , speech that is vttered with labour and
difficultie , or speech that sauoreth of the affectation of art and
precepts , or speech that is framed after the imitation of some patterne
of eloquence , though neuer so excellent : All this hath somewhat
seruile , and holding of the subiect . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,2R.14

But your Maiesties manner of speech is indeed Prince-like , flowing as
from a fountaine , and yet streaming & branching it selfe into Natures
order , full of facilitie , & felicitie , imitating none & ininimitable
by any . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,2R.15

And as in your ciuile Estate there appeareth to be an emulation &
contentio~ of your Maiesties vertue with your fortune , a vertuous
disposition with a fortunate regiment , a vertuous expectation <paren>
when time was <$$paren> of your greater fortune , with a prosperous
possession thereof in the due time ; a vertuous obseruation of the lawes
of marriage , with most blessed and happie fruite of marriage , a
vertuous and most christian desire of peace , with a fortunate
inclination in your neighbour Princes thereunto ; So likewise in these
intellectuall matters , there seemeth to be no lesse contention betweene
the excellencie of your Maiesties gifts of Nature , and the
vniuersalitie and profection of your learning BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,2R.16

For I am well assured , that this which <P_1,2V> I shall say is no
amplification at all , but a positiue and measured truth : which is ,
that there hath not beene since Christs time any King or temporall
Monarch which hath ben so learned in all literature & erudition , diuine
& humane . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,2V.17

For let a man seriously & diligently reuolue and peruse the succession
of the Emperours of Rome , of which <font> Caesar <$$font> the Dictator
who liued some yeeres before Christ , and <font> Marcus Antoninus
<$$font> were the best learned : and so descend to the Emperours of
<font> Grecia <$$font> , or of the West , and then to the lines of
<font> Fraunce , Spaine , England , Scotland <$$font> and the rest , and
he shall finde this iudgement is truly made . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,2V.18

For it seemeth much in a King , if by the compendious extractions of
other mens wits and labours , he can take hold of any superficiall
Ornaments and shewes of learning , or if he countenance and preferre
learning and learned men : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,2V.19

But to drinke indeed of the true Fountaines of learning , nay , to haue
such a fountaine of learning in himselfe , in a King , and in a King
borne , is almost a Miracle . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,2V.20

And the more , because there is met in your Maiesty a rare Coniunction ,
as@ @well of diuine and sacred literature , as of prophane and humane ;
So as your Maiestie standeth inuested of that triplicitie , which in
great veneration , was ascribed to the ancient <font> Hermes <$$font> ;
the power and fortune of a King ; the knowledge and illumination of a
Priest ; and the learning and vniuersalitie of a Philosopher .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,2V.21

This propriety inherent and indiuiduall attribute in your Maiestie
deserueth to be expressed , not onely in the fame and <P_1,3R>
admiration of the present time , nor in the Historie or tradition of the
ages succeeding ; but also in some solide worke , fixed memoriall , and
immortall monument , bearing a Character or signature , both of the
power of a king , and the difference and perfection of such a king .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,3R.22

Therefore I did conclude with my selfe , that I could not make unto your
Maiesty a better oblation , then of some treatise tending to that end ,
whereof the summe will consist of these two partes : The former
concerning the excellencie of learning and knowledge , and the
excellencie of the merit and true glory , in the Augmentation and
Propagation thereof : the latter , what the particular ages and workes
are , which haue been embraced and vndertaken for the advancement of
learning : And againe what defects and vndervalewes I finde in such
particuler actes : to the end , that though I can@ @not positively or
affirmatiuelie aduise your Maiestie , or propound unto you framed
particulars ; yet I may excite your princely Cogitations to visit the
excellent treasure of your owne mind , and thence to extract particulars
for this purpose agreeable to your magnanimitie and wisedome .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,3R.23

In the entrance to the former of these ; to cleare the way , & as it
were to make silence , to have the true testimonies concerning the
dignitie of Learning to be better heard , without the interruption of
tacite obiections ; I thinke good to deliuer it from <P_1,3V> the
discredites and disgraces which it hath received ; all from ignorance ;
but ignorance seuerally disguised , appearing sometimes in the zeale and
iealousie of Divines ; sometimes in the seueritie and arrogancie of
Politiques , and sometimes in the errors and imperfections of learned
men themselues . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,3V.24

I heare the former sort say , that knowledge is of those things which
are to be accepted of with great limitation and caution , that th'@
@aspiring to overmuch knowledge , was the originall temptation and sinne
, whereupon ensued the fal of Man that knowledge hath in it somewhat of
the Serpent , and therefore where it entreth into a man , it makes him
swel . <font> Scientia inflat <$$font> . That <font> Salomon <$$font>
giues a Censure , <font> That there is no end of making Bookes , and
that much reading is weariness of the flesh <$$font> . And againe in
another place , <font> That in spatious knowledge , there is much
contristation , and that he that encreaseth knowledge , encreaseth
anxietie <$$font> : that <font> Saint Paul <$$font> giues a Caueat ,
<font> that we be not spoyled through vaine Philosophie <$$font> : that
experience demonstrates , how learned men , haue beene Arch-heretiques ,
how learned times haue been enclined to Atheisme , and how the
contemplation of second Causes doth derogate fro~ our dependance vpon
God , who is the first cause . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,3V.25

To discouer then the ignorance & error of this opinion , and the
misunderstanding in the grounds thereof , it may well appeare these men
doe not obserue or co~sider , that it was not the pure knowledg of
nature and vniuersality , a knowledge by the light <P_1,4R> whereof man
did give names unto other creatures in Paradise , as they were brought
before him , according unto their proprieties , which gave the occasion
to the fall ; but it was the proude knowledge of good and euill , with
an intent in man to give law unto himselfe , and to depend no more upon
Gods commaundements , which was the fourme of the temptation ;
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4R.26

neither is it any quantitie of knowledge how great soeuer that can make
the minde of man to swell ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4R.27

for nothing can fill , much lesse extend the soule of man , but God ,
and the contemplation of God ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4R.28

and therfore <font> Salomon <$$font> speaking of the two principall
sences of Inquisition , the Eye , and the Eare , affirmeth that the Eye
is never satisfied with seeing , nor the Eare with hearing ; and if
there be no fulnesse , then is the Continent greater , than the Content
; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4R.29

so of knowledge it selfe , and the minde of man , whereto the sences are
but Reporters , he definith likewise in these wordes , placed after that
Kalender or Ephemerides , which he maketh of the diuersities of times
and seasons for all actions and purposes ; and concludeth thus :
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4R.30

<font> God hath made all thinges beautifull or decent in the true
returne of their seasons . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4R.31

Also hee hath placed the World in Mans heart , BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4R.32

yet can@ @not Man finde out the worke which God worketh from the
beginning to the end <$$font> : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4R.33

Declaring not obscurely , that God hath framed the minde of man as a
mirrour , or glasse , capable of the Image of the vniuersall world , and
ioyfull to receive the impression thereof , as the <P_1,4V> Eye ioyeth
to receiue light , and not onely delighted in beholding the varietie of
thinges and vicissitude of times , but raysed also to finde out and
discerne the ordinances and decrees which throughout all those Changes
are infallibly obserued . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4V.34

And although hee doth insinuate that the supreame or summarie law of
Nature , which he calleth , The worke which God worketh from the
beginning to the end , is not possible to be found out by man ; yet that
doth not derogate from the capacities of the minde ;
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4V.35

but may bee referred to the impediments as of shortnesse of life , ill
coniunction of labours , ill tradition of knowledge over from hand to
hand , and many other Inconueniences , whereunto the condition of Man is
subiect . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4V.36

For that nothing parcell of the world , is denied to Mans enquirie and
inuention : hee doth in another place rule ouer ; when hee sayth <font>
The Spirite of man is as the Lampe of God , wherewith hee searcheth the
inwardnesse of all secrets <$$font> . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4V.37

If then such be the capacitie and receit of the mind of Man , it is
manifest , that there is no daunger at all in the proportion or
quantitie of knowledge howe large soever ; least it should make it swell
or outcompasse it selfe ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,4V.38

no , but it is meerely the quallitie of knowledge , which be it in
quantitie more or lesse , if it bee taken without the true corrective
thereof hath in it some Nature of venome or malignitie , and some
effects of that venome which is ventositie <P_1,5R> or swelling .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5R.39

This correctiue spice , the mixture whereof maketh knowledge so
soueraigne , is Charitie , which the Apostle imediately addeth to the
former clause BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5R.40

for so he sayth <font> Knowledge bloweth vp , BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5R.41

but Charitie buildeth vp <$$font> ; not unlike unto that which hee
deliuereth in another place : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5R.42

<font> If I spake <paren> sayth hee <$$paren> with the tongues of men
and Angels and had not Charitie , it were but as a tinckling Cymball
<$$font> ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5R.43

not but that it is an excellent thinge to speake with the tongues of Men
and Angels , but because if it bee seuered from Charitie , and not
referred to the good of Men and Mankind , it hath rather a sounding and
vnworthie glorie , than a meriting and substantiall vertue .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5R.44

And as for that Censure of <font> Salomon <$$font> concerning the
excesse of writing and reading Bookes , and the anxietie of spirit which
redoundeth from knowlegde , and that admonition of Saint <font> Paule
<$$font> : <font> That wee bee not seduced by vayne Philosophie <$$font>
; let those places bee rightly vnderstoode , BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5R.45

and they doe indeede excellently sette foorth the true bounds and
limitations , whereby humane knowledge is confined and circumscribed :
and yet without any such contracting or coarctation , but that it may
comprehend all the vniuersall nature of thinges :
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5R.46

for these limitations are three : The first , <font> That wee doe not so
place our felicitie in knowledge , as wee forget our mortalitie <$$font>
. The second , <font> that we make application of our knowledge to giue
our selues repose and contentment , and not distast or repining <$$font>
. <P_1,5V> The third : that we doe not presume by the contemplation of
Nature , to attaine to the misteries of God ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5V.47

for as touching the first of these , Salomon doth excellently expound
himselfe in another place of the same Booke , where hee sayth ; <font> I
sawe well that knowledge recedeth as farre from ignorance , as light
doth from darkenesse and that the wise mans eyes keepe watch in his head
whereas the foole roundeth about in darkenesse :
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5V.48

But withall I learned that the same mortalitie inuolueth them both
<$$font> . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5V.49

And for the second , certaine it is , there is no vexation or anxietie
of minde , which resulteth from knowledge otherwise than meerely by
accident ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5V.50

for all knowledge and wonder <paren> which is the seede of knowledge
<$$paren> is an impression of pleasure in it selfe ;
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5V.51

but when men fall to framing conclusions out of their knowledge ,
applying it to their particuler , and ministring to themselues thereby
weake feares , or vast desires , there groweth that carefulnesse and
trouble of minde , which is spoken of : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5V.52

for then knowledge is no more <font> Lumen siccum <$$font> whereof
<font> Heraclitus <$$font> the profound sayd , <font> Lumen siccum
optima anima <$$font> , BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5V.53

but it becometh <font> Lumen madidum <$$font> , or <font> maceratum
<$$font> , being steeped and infused in the humors of the affections .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5V.54

And as for the third point , it deserueth to be a little stood vpon ,
and not to be lightly passed ouer : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,5V.55

for if any man shall thinke by view and enquiry into these sensible and
material things to attaine that light , whereby he may reueale vnto
himselfe the nature or will of God : then indeed is he <P_1,6R> spoyled
by vaine Philosophie : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6R.56

for the contemplation of Gods Creatures and works produceth <paren>
hauing regard to the works and creatures themselues <$$paren> knowledge
, but hauing regard to God , no perfect knowledg , but wonder , which is
broke~ knowledge : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6R.57

And therefore it was most aptly sayd by one of <font> Platoes <$$font>
Schoole , <font> that the sence of man caryeth a resemblance with the
Sunne , which <paren> as we see <$$paren> openeth and revealeth all the
terrestrial Globe ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6R.58

but then againe it obscureth and concealeth the stars & celestiall Globe
: BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6R.59

So doth the Sence discouer naturall thinges , BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6R.60

but it darkeneth and shutteth vp Diuine . <$$font>
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6R.61

And hence it is true that it hath proceeded that diuers great learned
men haue beene hereticall , whilest they haue sought to flye vp to the
secrets of the Deitie by the waxen winges of the Sences :
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6R.62

And as for the conceite that too much knowledge should encline a man to
Atheisme , and that the ignorance of second causes should make a more
deuoute dependance vppon God , which is the first cause ; First , it is
good to aske the question which <font> Iob <$$font> asked of his friends
; <font> Will you lye for God , as one man will doe for another to
gratifie him ? <$$font> BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6R.63

for certaine it is , that God worketh nothing in Nature , but by second
causes , BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6R.64

and if they would haue it otherwise beleeued , it is meere imposture ,
as it were in fauour towardes God ; and nothing else , but to offer to
the Author of truth , the vncleane sacrifice of a lye .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6R.65

But further , it is an assured truth , and a conclusion of experience ,
that a little or superficiall <P_1,6V> knowledge of Philosophie may
encline the minde of Man to Atheisme , BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6V.66

but a further proceeding therein doth bring the mind backe againe to
Religion : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6V.67

for in the entrance of Philosophie , when the second Causes , which are
next vnto the sences , do offer themselues to the minde of Man , if it
dwell and stay there , it may induce some oblivion of the highest cause
; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6V.68

but when a man passeth on further , and seeth the dependance of causes ,
and the workes of providence ; then according to the allegorie of the
Poets , he will easily beleeue that the highest Linke of Natures chaine
must needes be tyed to the foote of <font> Iupiters <$$font> chaire .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6V.69

To conclude therefore , let no man vppon a weake conceite of sobrietie ,
or an ill applyed moderation thinke or maintaine , that a man can search
too farre , or bee too well studied in the Booke of Gods word , or in
the Booke of Gods workes ; Diuinitie or Philosophie ;
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6V.70

but rather let men endeauour an endlesse progresse or proficience in
both : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6V.71

only let men beware that they apply both to Charitie , and not to
swelling ; to vse , and not to ostentation ; and againe , that they doe
not vnwisely mingle or confound these learnings together .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,6V.72

And as for the disgraces which learning receiueth from Politiques , they
bee of this nature ; that learning doth soften mens mindes , and makes
them more vnapt for the honour and exercise of Armes ; that it doth
marre and pervert mens dispositions for <P_1,7R> matter of gouernement
and policie ; in making them too curious and irresolute by varietie of
reading ; or too peremptorie or positiue by stricktnesse of rules and
axiomes ; or too immoderate and overweening by reason of the greatnesse
of examples ; or too incompatible and differing from the times , by
reason of the dissimilitude of examples ; or at least , that it doth
divert mens trauailes {SIC:trauaies} from action and businesse , and
bringeth them to a loue of leasure and priuatenesse ; and that it doth
bring into States a relaxation of discipline , whilst euerie man is more
readie to argue , than {he_is} to obey and execute .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,7R.73

Out of this conceit , <font> Cato <$$font> surnamed the Censor , one of
the wisest men indeed that euer liued , when <font> Carneades <$$font>
the Philosopher came in Embassage to Rome , and that the young men of
Rome began to flocke about him , being allured with the sweetnesse and
Maiestie , of his eloquence and learning , gave counsell in open Senate
, that they should give him his dispatch with all speede , least hee
should infect and inchaunt the mindes and affections of the youth , and
at vnawares bring in an alteration of the manners and Customes of the
State . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,7R.74

Out of the same conceite or humor did <font> Virgill <$$font> , turning
his penne to the advantage of his Countrey , and the disaduantage of his
owne profession , make a kind of separation betweene policie and
gouernement , and betweene Arts and Sciences , in the verses so much
renowned , attributing and challenging the one to the Romanes , and
<P_1,7V> leauing & yeelding the other to the Grecians , <font> Tu regere
imperio populos Romane meme~to , Hae tibi eru~t artes ; &c. <$$font>
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,7V.75

so likewise we see that <font> Anytus <$$font> the accuser of Socrates
layd it as an Article of charge & accusation against him , that he did
with the varietie and power of his discourses and disputations withdraw
young men from due reuerence to the Lawes and Customes of their Countrey
: and that he did professe a dangerous and pernitious Science , which
was to make the worse matter seeme the better , and to suppresse truth
by force of eloquence and speech . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,7V.76

But these and the like imputations haue rather a countenance of grauitie
, than any ground of Iustice : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,7V.77

for experience doth warrant , that both in persons and in times , there
hath beene a meeting , and concurrence in learning and Armes ,
flourishing and excelling in the same men , and the same ages .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,7V.78

For as for men , there can@ @not be a better nor the like instance as of
that payre <font> Alexander <$$font> the Great , and <font> Iulius
Caesar <$$font> the Dictator , whereof the one was <font> Aristotles
<$$font> Scholler in Philosophie , and the other was <font> Ciceroes
<$$font> Riuall in eloquence ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,7V.79

or if any man had rather call for Schollers , that were great Generals ,
then Generals that were great Schollers ; let him take <font>
Epaminondas <$$font> the Thebane , or <font> Xenophon <$$font> the
Athenian , whereof the one was the first that abated the power of <font>
Sparta <$$font> ; and the other was the first that made way to the
ouerthrow of the Monarchie of <font> Persia <$$font> :
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,7V.80

And this concurrence is yet more visible in times than in persons , by
how much an age is greater obiect <P_1,8R> than a Man .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8R.81

For both in <font> Aegypt , Assyria , Persia , Grecia <$$font> , and
<font> Rome <$$font> the same times that are most renowned for Armes ,
are likewise most admired for learning ; so that the greatest Authors
and Philosophers and the greatest Captaines and Gouernours haue liued in
the same ages : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8R.82

neither can it otherwise be ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8R.83

for as in Man , the ripenesse of strength of the bodie and minde commeth
much about an age , saue that the strength of the bodie commeth somewhat
the more early ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8R.84

So in States , Armes and Learning , whereof the one correspondeth to the
bodie , the other to the soule of Man , haue a concurrence or nere
sequence in times . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8R.85

And for matter of police and gouernement , that Learning should rather
hurt , than inable thereunto , is a thing verie improbable :
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8R.86

we see it is accounted an errour , to commit a naturall bodie to
Emperique Phisitions , which commonly haue a fewe pleasing receits ,
whereupon they are confident and aduenturous , but know neither the
causes of diseases , nor the complexions of Patients , nor perill of
accidents , nor the true methode of Cures ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8R.87

We see it is a like error to rely upon Aduocates or Lawyers , which are
onely men of practice , and not grounded in their Bookes , who are many
times easily surprised , when matter falleth out besides their
experience , to the preiudice of the causes they handle :
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8R.88

so by like reason it can@ @not be but a matter of doubtfull consequence
, if States bee managed by <P_1,8V> Emperique Statesmen , not well
mingled with men grounded in Learning . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8V.89

But contrary wise , it is almost without instance contradictorie , that
euer any gouernement was disatrous that was in the hands of learned
Gouernors . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8V.90

For howsoever it hath beene ordinarie with politique men to extenuate
and disable learned men by the names of <font> Pedantes <$$font> : yet
in the Records of time it appeareth in many particulers , that the
Gouernements of Princes in minority <paren> notwithstanding the infinite
disaduantage of that kinde of State <$$paren> haue neuerthelesse
excelled the gouernement of Princes of mature age , euen for that
{SIC:hat} reason , which they seek to traduce , which is , that by that
occasion the state hath been in the hands of <font> Pedantes <$$font> :
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8V.91

for so was the State of Rome for the first fiue yeeres , which are so
much magnified , during the minoritie of <font> Nero <$$font> , in the
handes of <font> Seneca <$$font> a <font> Pedanti <$$font> :
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8V.92

So it was againe for ten yeres space or more during the minoritie of
<font> Gordianus <$$font> the younger , with great applause and
contentation in the hands of <font> Misitheus <$$font> a <font> Pedanti
<$$font> : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8V.93

so was it before that , in the minoritie of <font> Alexander Seuerus
<$$font> in like happinesse , in hands not much vnlike , by reason of
the rule of the women , who were ayded by the Teachers and Preceptors ,
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,8V.94

Nay , let a man looke into the gouernement of the Bishops {SIC:Bihops}
of Rome , as by name , into the gouernement of <font> Pius Quintus
<$$font> , and <font> Sextus Quintus <$$font> , in our times , who were
both at their entrance esteemed , but as Pedanticall Friers and he shall
find that such Popes doe greater thinges , and proceed vpon truer
<P_1,9R> principles of Estate , than those which haue ascended to the
Papacie from an education & breeding in affaires of Estate , and Courts
of Princes ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9R.95

for although men bred in Learning , are perhaps to seeke in points of
conuenience , and accommodating for the present which the Italians call
<font> Ragioni di stato <$$font> , whereof the same <font> Pius Qvintus
<$$font> could not heare spoken with patience , tearming them Inuentions
against Religion and the morall vertues ; yet on the other side to
recompence that , they are perfite in those same plaine grounds of
Religion , Iustice , Honour , and Morall vertue ; which if they be well
and watchfully pursued , there will bee seldome vse of those other , no
more than {there_will_be_use} of Phisicke in a sound or well dieted
bodie ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9R.96

neither can the experience of one mans life , furnish examples and
presidents for the events of one mans life . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9R.97

For as it happeneth sometimes , that the Graund child , or other
descendant , resembleth the Ancestor more than the Sonne : so many times
occurrences of present times may sort better with ancient examples ,
than with those of the later or immediate times ;
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9R.98

and lastly , the wit of one man , can no more counteruaile learning ,
than one mans meanes can hold way with a common purse .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9R.99

And as for those particular seducements or indispositions of the minde
for policie and gouernement , which learning is pretended to insinuate ;
if it be graunted that any such thing be , it must be remembred withall
, that learning ministreth in euery <P_1,9V> of them greater strength of
medicine or remedie , than it offereth cause of indisposition or
infirmitie ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9V.100

For if by a secret operation , it make men perplexed and irresolute , on
the other side by plaine precept , it teacheth them when , and vpon what
ground to resolue : yea , and how to carrie thinges in suspence without
preiudice , till they resolue : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9V.101

If it make men positiue and reguler , it teacheth them what thinges are
in their nature demonstratiue & what are coniecturall ; and as@ @well
the vse of distinctions , and exceptions , as the latitude of principles
and rules . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9V.102

If it mislead by disproportion , or dissimilitude of Examples , it
teacheth men the force of Circumstances , the errours of comparisons ,
and all the cautions of application : so that in all these it doth
rectifie more effectually , than it can peruert .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9V.103

And these medicines it conueyeth into mens minds much more forcibly by
the quicknesse and penetration of Examples : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9V.104

for let a man looke into the errours of <font> Clement <$$font> the
seuenth , so liuely described by <font> Guicciardine <$$font> , who
serued under him , or into the errours of <font> Cicero <$$font> painted
out by his owne pensill in his Epistles to <font> Atticus <$$font> , and
he will flye apace from being irresolute . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9V.105

Let him looke into the errors of <font> Phocion <$$font> , and he will
beware how he be obstinate or inflexible BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9V.106

Let him but read the Fable of <font> Ixion <$$font> , and it will hold
him from being vaporous or imaginatiue ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9V.107

let him look into the errors of <font> Cato <$$font> the second , and he
will neuer be one of the <font> Antipodes <$$font> , to tread opposite
to the present world . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,9V.108

And for the conceite that Learning should dispose <P_1,10R> men to
pleasure and priuatenesse , and make men slouthfull : it were a strange
thing if that which accustometh the minde to a perpetuall motion and
agitation , should induce slouthfulnesse , whereas contrariwise it may
bee tritely affirmed , that no kinde of men loue businesse for it selfe
, but those that are learned ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,10R.109

for other persons loue it for profite as an hireling that loues the
worke for the wages ; or for honour ; as because it beareth them vp in
the eyes of men , and refresheth their reputation , which otherwise
would weare ; or because it putteth them in mind of their fortune , and
giueth them occasion to pleasure and displeasure ; or because it
exerciseth some faculty , wherein they take pride , and so entertaineth
them in good humor , and pleasing conceits toward themselues ; or
because it aduanceth any other their ends . So that as it is sayd of
untrue valors , that some mens valors are in the eyes of them that look
on ; So such mens industries are in the eyes of others , or at least in
regard of their owne designements ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,10R.110

onely learned men loue businesse , as an action according to nature , as
agreable to health of minds , as exercise is to health of bodie , taking
pleasure in the action it selfe , & not in the purchase : So that of all
men , they are the most indefatigable , if it be towards any businesse ,
which can hold or detaine their minde . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,10R.111

And if any man be laborious in reading and study , and yet idle in
busines & action , it groweth fro~ some weakenes of body , or softnes of
spirit ; such as <font> Seneca <$$font> <P_1,10V> speaketh of : <font>
Quidam tam sunt vmbratiles , vt putent in turbido esse , quicquid in
luce est <$$font> ; and not of learning ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,10V.112

wel may it be , that such a point of a mans nature may make him giue
himselfe to learning , BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,10V.113

but it is not learning that breedeth any such point in his Nature .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,10V.114

And that learning should take vp too much time or leasure , I answere ,
the most actiue or busie man that hath been or can bee , hath <paren> no
question <$$paren> many vacant times of leasure , while he expecteth the
tides and returnes of businesse <paren> except he be either tedious ,
and of no dispatch , or lightly and vnworthily ambitious , to meddle in
thinges that may be better done by others <$$paren>
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,10V.115

and then the question is , but how those spaces and times of leasure
shall be filled and spent : whether in pleasures , or in studies ; as
was wel answered by <font> Demosthenes <$$font> to his aduersarie <font>
Aeschynes <$$font> , that was a man giuen to pleasure , and told him ,
<font> That his orations did smell of the Lampe <$$font> :
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,10V.116

<font> Indeede <$$font> <paren> sayd <font> Demosthenes <$$paren> there
is a great difference betweene the thinges that you and I doe by
Lampe-light <$$font> : so as no man neede doubt , that learning will
expulse businesse , BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,10V.117

but rather it will keepe and defend the possession of the mind against
idlenesse and pleasure , which otherwise , at vnawares , may enter to
the preiudice of both . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,10V.118

Againe , for that other conceit , that learning should vndermine the
reuerence of Lawes and gouernement , it is assuredly a meere deprauation
and calumny without all shadowe of truth : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,10V.119

for to say that a blind custome of obedience should be a surer <P_1,11R>
obligation , than dutie taught and vnderstood ; it is to affirme that a
blind man may tread surer by a guide , than a seeing man can by a light
: BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11R.120

and it is without all controuersie , that learning doth make the minds
of men gentle , generous , maniable , and pliant to gouernment , whereas
Ignorance makes them churlish thwart , and mutinous ;
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11R.121

and the euidence of time doth cleare this assertion , considering that
the most barbarous , rude , and vnlearned times haue beene most subiect
to tumults , seditions , and changes . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11R.122

And as to the iudgement of <font> Cato <$$font> the Censor , he was well
punished for his blasphemie against learning in the same kinde wherein
hee offended ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11R.123

for when he was past threescore yeeres old , he was taken with an
extreame desire to goe to Schoole againe , and to learne the Greeke
tongue , to the end to peruse the Greeke Authors ; which doth well
demonstrate , that his former censure of the Grecian Learning , was
rather an affected grauitie , than according to the inward sence of his
owne opinion . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11R.124

And as for <font> Virgils <$$font> verses , though it pleased him to
braue the world in taking to the Romanes , the Art of Empire , and
leauing to others the arts of subiects : yet so much is manifest , that
the Romanes neuer ascended to that height of Empire , till the time they
had ascended to the height of other Arts : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11R.125

For in the time of the two first <font> Caesars <$$font> , which had the
art of gouernement in greatest perfection , there liued the best Poet
<font> Virgilius Maro <$$font> , the best Historiographer <font> Titus
Liuius <$$font> , the best Antiquarie <font> Marcus Varro <$$font> and
<P_1,11V> the best or second Orator <font> Marcus Cicero <$$font> , that
to the memorie of man are knowne . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11V.126

As for the accusation of <font> Socrates <$$font> , the time must be
remembred , when it was prosecuted ; which was vnder the thirtie Tyrants
, the most base , bloudy , and enuious persons that have gouerned ;
which reuolution of State was no sooner over , but <font> Socrates
<$$font> , whom they had made a person criminall , was made a person
heroycall , and his memorie accumulate with honors divine and humane ;
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11V.127

and those discourses of his which were then tearmed corrupting , of
manners , were after acknowledged for soueraigne Medicines of the minde
and manners , BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11V.128

and so haue beene received euer sence till this day .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11V.129

Let this therefore serue for answere to Politiques , which in their
humorous seueritie , or in their feyned grauitie haue presumed to throwe
imputations vpon learning , which redargution neuerthelesse <paren> saue
that wee know not whether our labours may extend to other ages <$$paren>
were not needefull for the present , in regard of the loue and reuerence
towards Learning , which the example and countenance of twoo so learned
Princes Queene Elizabeth , and your Maiestie ; being as <font> Castor
<$$font> and <font> Pollux <$$font> , <font> Lucida Sydera <$$font> ,
Starres of excellent light , and most benigne influence , hath wrought
in all men of place and authoritie in our Nation .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11V.130

Now therefore , we come to that third sort of discredite , or diminution
of credite , that groweth unto learning from learned men themselues ,
which commonly cleaueth fastest ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,11V.131

It is either from their <P_1,12R> Fortune , or fro~ their Manners , or
from the nature of their Studies : BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12R.132

for the first , it is not in their power ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12R.133

and the second is accidentall ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12R.134

the third only is proper to be ha~dled BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12R.135

but because we are not in hand with true measure , but with popular
estimation & conceit , it is not amisse to speak somewhat of the two
former . Tho derogations therfore , which grow to learning from the
fortune or condition of learned men , are either in respect of scarsity
of meanes , or in respect of priuatenesse of life , and meanesse of
employments . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12R.136

Concerning want , and that it is the case of learned men , vsually to
beginne with little , and not to growe rich so fast as other men , by
reason they conuert not their labors chiefely to luker , and encrease ;
it were good to leave the common place in commendation of pouertie to
some Frier to handle , to whom much was attributed by <font> Macciauell
<$$font> in this point , when he sayd , <font> That the Kingdome of the
Cleargie had beene long before at an end , if the {SIC:he} reputation
and reuerence towards the pouertie of Friers had not borne out the
scandall of the superfluities and excesses of Bishops and Prelates .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12R.137

So a man might say , that the felicitie and delicacie of Princes and
great Persons , had long since turned to Rudenes and Barbarisme , if the
pouertie of Learning had not kept vp Ciuilitie and Honor of life ;
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12R.138

But without any such advantages , it is worthy the obseruation , what a
reverent and honoured thing pouertie of fortune was , for som aages in
the Romane State , which neuerthelesse was a state without paradoxes .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12R.139

For we see what <font> Titus Liuius <$$font> <P_1,12V> sayth in his
introduction . <font> Caeterum aut me amor negotij suscepti fallit ,
aut nulla vnquam respublica , nec maior , nec sanctior , nec bonis
exemplis ditior fuit ; nec in quam tam serae auaritia luxuriaque
immigrauerint , nec vbi tantus ac tam diu paupertati ac parsinomniae
honor fuerit <$$font> . BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12V.140

We See likewise after that the State of Rome was not it selfe , but did
degenerate ; BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12V.141

how that person that tooke vpon him to be Counsellor to <font> Iulius
Caesar <$$font> , after his victorie , where to begin his restauration
of the State , maketh it of all points the most summarie to take away
the estimation of wealth . <font> Verum haec & omnia mala pariter cum
honore pecuniae desinent ; Si neque Magistratus , neque alia vulgo
cupienda venalia erunt . <$$font> BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12V.142

To conclude this point , as it was truely sayd , that <font> Rubor est
virtutis color <$$font> , though sometime it come from vice : So it may
be fitly sayd , that <font> Paupertas est virtutis fortuna <$$font> .
Though some times it may proceede from misgouernement and accident .
BACON-1605-E2-P1,1,12V.143

