<BEGIN_behn-1668-e3-p1>

<P_147>

<heading>

OROONOKO ; OR THE HISTORY OF THE ROYAL SLAVE BEHN-1668-E3-P1,147.4

<$$heading>

I do not pretend , in giving you the history of this royal slave , to
entertain my reader with adventures of a feign'd hero , whose life and
fortunes fancy may manage at the poet's pleasure ; nor in relating the
truth , design to adorn it with any accidents , but such as arrived in
earnest to him : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,147.6

And it shall come simply into the world , recommended by its own proper
merits , and natural intrigues ; there being enough of reality to
support it , and to render it diverting , without the addition of
invention . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,147.7

I was myself an eye-witness to a great part of what you will find here
set down ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,147.8

and what I cou'd not be witness of , I receiv'd from the mouth of the
chief actor in this history , the hero himself , who gave us the whole
transactions of his youth : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,147.9

And though I shall omit , for brevity's sake , a_thousand little
accidents of his life , which , however pleasant to us , where history
was scarce , and adventures very rare , yet might prove tedious and
heavy to my reader , in a world where he finds diversions for every
minute , new and strange . But we who were perfectly charm'd with the
character of this great man , were curious to gather every circumstance
of his life . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,147.10

The scene of the last part of his adventures lies in a colony in <font>
America <$$font> , called <font> Surinam <$$font> , in the <font>
West-Indies <$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,147.11

But before I give you the story of this gallant slave , 't@ @is fit I
tell you the manner of bringing them to these new colonies ; those they
make use of there , not being natives of the place :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,147.12

for those we live with in perfect <P_148> amity , without daring to
command 'em ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,148.13

but , on the contrary , caress 'em with all the brotherly and friendly
affection in the world ; trading with them for their fish , venison ,
buffalo's skins , and little rarities ; as marmosets , a sort of monkey
, as big as a rat or weasel , but of a marvellous and delicate shape ,
having face and hands like a human creature ; and cousheries , a little
beast in the form and fashion of a lion , as big as a kitten , but so
exactly made in all parts like that noble beast , that it is it in
minature . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,148.14

Then for little paraketoes , great parrots , muckaws , and a_thousand
other birds and beasts of wonderful and surprizing forms , shapes , and
colours . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,148.15

For skins of prodigious snakes , of which there are some threescore
yards in length ; as is the skin of one that may be seen at his
Majesty's antiquary's ; where are also some rare flies , of amazing
forms and colours , presented to 'em by my self ; some as big as my fist
, some less ; and all of various excellencies , such as art can@ @not
imitate . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,148.16

Then we trade for feathers , which they order into all shapes , make
themselves little short habits of 'em , and glorious wreaths for their
heads , necks , arms and legs , whose tinctures are unconceivable .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,148.17

I had a set of these presented to me , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,148.18

and I gave 'em to the King's Theatre , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,148.19

and it was the dress of the <font> Indian Queen <$$font> , infinitely
admir'd by persons of quality ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,148.20

and was unimitable . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,148.21

Besides these , a_thousand little knacks , and rarities in nature ; and
some of art , as their baskets , weapons , aprons , &c.
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,148.22

We dealt with 'em with beads of all colours , knives , axes , pins and
needles ; which they us'd only as tools to drill holes with in their
ears , noses and lips , where they hang a great many little things ; as
long beads , bits of tin , brass or silver beat thin , and any shining
trinket . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,148.23

The beads they weave into aprons about a quarter of an ell long , and of
the same breadth ; working them very prettily in flowers of several
colours ; which apron they wear just before 'em , as <font> Adam
<$$font> and <font> Eve <$$font> did the figleaves ; the men wearing a
long stripe of linen , <P_149> which they deal with us for .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.24

They thread these beads also on long cotton-threads ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.25

and make girdles to tie their aprons to , which come twenty times , or
more , about the waste , and then cross , like a shoulder-belt , both
ways , and round their necks , arms , and legs . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.26

This adornment , with their long black hair , and the face painted in
little specks or flowers here and there , makes 'em a wonderful figure
to behold . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.27

Some of the beauties , which indeed are finely shap'd , as almost all
are , and who have pretty features , are charming and novel ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.28

for they have all that is called beauty , except the colour , which is a
reddish yellow ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.29

or after a new oiling , which they often use to themselves , they are of
the colour of a new brick , but smooth , soft and sleek .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.30

They are extreme modest and bashful , very shy , and nice of being
touch'd . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.31

And though they are all thus naked , if one lives for ever among 'em ,
there is not to be seen an undecent action , or glance :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.32

and being continually us'd to see one another so unadorn'd , so like our
first parents before the fall , it seems as if they had no wishes ,
there being nothing to heighten curiosity ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.33

but all you can see , you see at once , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.34

and every moment see ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.35

and where there is no novelty , there can be no curiosity .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.36

Not but I have seen a handsome young <font> Indian <$$font> , dying for
love of a very beautiful young <font> Indian <$$font> maid ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.37

but all his courtship was , to fold his arms , pursue her with his eyes
, BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.38

and sighs were all his language : While she , as if no such lover were
present , or rather as if she desired none such , carefully guarded her
eyes from beholding him ; and never approach'd him , but she look'd down
with all the blushing modesty I have seen in the most severe and
cautious of our world . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.39

And these people represented to me an absolute idea of the first state
of innocence , before man knew how to sin : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.40

And 't@ @is most evident and plain , that simple nature is the most
harmless , inoffensive and vertuous mistress . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.41

'T@ @is she alone , if she were permitted , that better instructs the
world , than all the inventions of man : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,149.42

religion wou'd here but destroy that tranquillity they possess <P_150>
by ignorance ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.43

and laws wou'd but teach 'em to know offence , of which now they have no
notion . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.44

They once made mourning and fasting for the death of the English
governor , who had given his hand to come on such a day to 'em , and
neither came nor sent ; believing , when a man's word was past , nothing
but death cou'd or shou'd prevent his keeping it :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.45

And when they saw he was not dead , they ask'd him what name they had
for a man who promis'd a thing he did not do ? BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.46

The governor told them , Such a man was a lyar , which was a word of
infamy to a gentleman . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.47

Then one of 'em reply'd , <font> Governor , you are a lyar , and guilty
of that infamy <$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.48

They have a native justice , which knows no fraud ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.49

and they understand no vice , or cunning , but when they are taught by
the white men . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.50

They have plurality of wives ; which , when they grow old , serve those
that succeed 'em , who are young , but with a servitude easy and
respected ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.51

and unless they take slaves in war , they have no other attendants .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.52

Those on that continent where I was , had no king ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.53

but the oldest war-captain was obey'd with great resignation .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.54

A war-captain is a man who has led them on to battle with conduct and
success ; of whom I shall have occasion to speak more hereafter , and of
some other of their customs and manners , as they fall in my way .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.55

With these people , as I said , we live in perfect tranquillity , and
good understanding , as it behoves us to do ; they knowing all the
places where to seek the best food of the country , and the means of
getting it ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.56

and for very small and unvaluable trifles , supply us with that 't@ @is
impossible for us to get : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.57

for they do not only in the woods , and over the Sevana's , in hunting ,
supply the parts of hounds , by swiftly scouring through those almost
impassable places , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.58

and by the mere activity of their feet run down the nimblest deer , and
other eatable beasts ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,150.59

but in the water , one wou'd think they were gods of the rivers , or
fellow-citizens of the deep ; so rare an art they have in swimming ,
<P_151> diving , and almost living in water ; by which they command the
less swift inhabitants of the floods . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.60

And then for shooting , what they can@ @not take , or reach with their
hands , they do with arrows ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.61

and have so admirable an aim , that they will split almost an hair , and
at any distance that an arrow can reach : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.62

they will shoot down oranges , and other fruit , and only touch the
stalk with the dart's point , that they may not hurt the fruit . So
that they being on all occasions very useful to us , we find it
absolutely necessary to caress 'em as friends , and not to treat 'em as
slaves , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.63

nor dare we do other , their numbers so far surpassing ours in that
continent . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.64

Those then whom we make use of to work in our plantations of sugar , are
negroes , black slaves all together , who are transported thither in
this manner . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.65

Those who want slaves , make a bargain with a master , or a captain of a
ship , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.66

and contract to pay him so much apiece , a matter of twenty pound a head
, for as many as he agrees for , and to pay for 'em when they shall be
deliver'd on such a plantation : So that when there arrives a ship laden
with slaves , they who have so contracted , go a-board , and receive
their number by lot ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.67

and perhaps in one lot that may be for ten , there may happen to be
three or four men , the rest women and children .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.68

Or be there more or less of either sex , you are obliged to be contented
with your lot . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.69

<font> Coramantien <$$font> , a country of blacks so called , was one of
those places in which they found the most advantageous trading for these
slaves , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.70

and thither most of our great traders in that merchandize traffick ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.71

for that nation is very warlike and brave : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.72

and having a continual campaign , being always in hostility with one
neighbouring prince or other , they had the fortune to take a great many
captives : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.73

for all they took in battle were sold as slaves ; at least those common
men who cou'd not ransom themselves . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.74

Of these slaves so taken , the general only has all the profit ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,151.75

and of these <P_152> generals our captains and masters of ships buy all
their freights . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,152.76

The king of <font> Coramantien <$$font> was himself a man of an_hundred
and odd years old , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,152.77

and had no son , tho he had many beautiful black wives :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,152.78

for most certainly there are beauties that can charm of that colour .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,152.79

In his younger years he had had many gallant men to his sons , thirteen
of whom died in battle , conquering when they fell ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,152.80

and he had only left him for his successor , one grand-child , son to
one of these dead victors , who , as soon as he could bear a bow in his
hand , and a quiver at his back , was sent into the field to be train'd
up by one of the oldest generals to war ; where , from his natural
inclination to arms , and the occasions given him with the good conduct
of the old general , he became , at the age of seventeen , one of the
most expert captains , and bravest soldiers that ever saw the field of
<font> Mars <$$font> : so that he was ador'd as the wonder of all that
world , and the darling of the soldiers BEHN-1668-E3-P1,152.81

Besides , he was adorn'd with a native beauty , so transcending all
those of his gloomy race , that he struck an awe and reverence , even
into those that knew not his quality ; as he did into me , who beheld
him with surprize and wonder , when afterwards he arrived in our world .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,152.82

He had scarce arrived at his seventeenth year , when , fighting by his
side , the general was kill'd with an arrow in his eye , which the
Prince <font> Oroonoko <$$font> <paren> for so was this gallant <font>
Moor <$$font> call'd <$$paren> very narrowly avoided ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,152.83

nor had he , if the general who saw the arrow shot , and perceiving it
aimed at the prince , had not bow'd his head between , on purpose to
receive it in his own body , rather than it should touch that of the
prince , and so saved him . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,152.84

'T@ @was then , afflicted as <font> Oroonoko <$$font> was , that he was
proclaimed general in the old man's place : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,152.85

and then it was , at the finishing of that war , which had continued for
two years , that the prince came to court , where he had hardly been a
month together , from the <P_153> time of his fifth year to that of
seventeen ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.86

and 't@ @was amazing to imagine where it was he learn'd so much humanity
: or , to give his accomplishments a juster name , where 't@ @was he got
that real greatness of soul , those refined notions of true honour ,
that absolute generosity , and that softness that was capable of the
highest passions of love and gallantry , whose objects were almost
continually fighting men , or those mangled or dead , who heard no
sounds but those of war and groans . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.87

Some part of it we may attribute to the care of a <font> Frenchman
<$$font> of wit and learning , who finding it turn to very good account
to be a sort of royal tutor to this young black , and perceiving him
very ready , apt , and quick of apprehension , took a great pleasure to
teach him morals , language and science ; and was for it extremely
belov'd and valu'd by him . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.88

Another reason was , he lov'd when he came from war , to see all the
<font> English <$$font> gentlemen that traded thither ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.89

and did not only learn their language , but that of the <font> Spaniard
<$$font> also , with whom he traded afterwards for slaves .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.90

I have often seen and conversed with this great man , and been a witness
to many of his mighty actions ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.91

and do assure my reader , the most illustrious courts could not have
produced a braver man , both for greatness of courage and mind , a
judgment more solid , a wit more quick , and a conversation more sweet
and diverting . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.92

He knew almost as much as {he_would_have_known} if he had read much :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.93

He had heard of and admired the <font> Romans <$$font> :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.94

He had heard of the late civil wars in <font> England <$$font> , and the
deplorable death of our great monarch ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.95

and wou'd discourse of it with all the sense and abhorrence of the
injustice imaginable . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.96

He had an extreme good and graceful mien , and all the civility of a
well-bred great man . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.97

He had nothing of barbarity in his nature , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.98

but in all points address'd himself as if his education had been in some
<font> European <$$font> court . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,153.99

This great and just character of <font> Oroonoko <$$font> gave me an
extreme curiosity to see him , especially when I knew he spoke <font>
French <$$font> and <font> English <$$font> , and that I could talk with
<P_154> him . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.100

But though I had heard so much of him , I was as greatly surprized when
I saw him , as if I had heard nothing of him ; so beyond all report I
found him . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.101

He came into the room , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.102

and addressed himself to me , and some other women , with the best grace
in the world . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.103

He was pretty tall , but of a shape the most exact that can be fancy'd :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.104

The most famous statuary cou'd not form the figure of a man more
admirably turn'd from head to foot . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.105

His face was not of that brown rusty black which most of that nation are
, but of perfect ebony , or polished jett . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.106

His eyes were the most awful that cou'd be seen , and very piercing ;
the white of 'em being like snow , as were his teeth .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.107

His nose was rising and <font> Roman <$$font> , instead of <font>
African <$$font> and flat . His mouth the finest shaped that could be
seen ; far from those great turn'd lips , which are so natural to the
rest of the negroes . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.108

The whole proportion and air of his face was so nobly and exactly form'd
, that bating his colour , there could be nothing in nature more
beautiful , agreeable and handsome . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.109

There was no one grace wanting , that bears the standard of true beauty
. BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.110

His hair came down to his shoulders , by the aids of art , which was by
pulling it out with a quill , and keeping it comb'd ; of which he took
particular care . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.111

Nor did the perfections of his mind come short of those of his person ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.112

for his discourse was admirable upon almost any subject :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.113

and whoever had heard him speak , wou'd have been convinced of their
errors , that all fine wit is confined to the white men , especially to
those of Christendom ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.114

and wou'd have confess'd that <font> Oroonoko <$$font> was as capable
even of reigning well , and of governing as wisely , had as great a soul
, as politick maxims , and was as sensible of power , as any prince
civiliz'd in the most refined schools of humanity and learning , or the
most illustrious courts . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,154.115

This prince , such as I have describ'd him , whose soul and body were so
admirably adorned , was <paren> while yet he was in the court of his
grandfather , as I said <$$paren> as capable of love , as 't@ @was
possible for a brave and <P_155> gallant man to be ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,155.116

and in saying that , I have named the highest degree of love :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,155.117

for sure great souls are most capable of that passion .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,155.118

I have already said , the old general was kill'd by the shot of an arrow
by the side of this prince in battle ; and that <font> Oroonoko <$$font>
was made general . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,155.119

This old dead hero had one only daughter left of his race , a beauty ,
that to describe her truly , one need say only , she was female to the
noble male ; the beautiful black <font> Venus <$$font> to our young
<font> Mars <$$font> ; as charming in her person as he , and of delicate
vertues . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,155.120

I have seen a_hundred white men sighing after her , and making
a_thousand vows at her feet , all in vain , and unsuccessful .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,155.121

And she was indeed too great for any but a prince of her own nation to
adore . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,155.122

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_1_here}

<P_162>

What reports of the prince's conduct were made to the king , he thought
good to justify as far as possibly he cou'd by his actions ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,162.125

and when he appear'd in the presence of the king , he shew'd a face not
at all betraying his heart : so that in a little time , the old man ,
being entirely convinc'd that he was no longer a lover of <font> Imoinda
<$$font> , he carry'd him with him , in his train , to the otan , often
to banquet with his mistresses . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,162.126

But as soon as he enter'd , one day , into the apartment of <font>
Imoinda <$$font> , with the king , at the first glance from her eyes ,
notwithstanding all his determined resolution , he was ready to sink in
the place where he stood ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,162.127

and had certainly done so , but for the support of <font> Aboan <$$font>
, a young man who was next to him ; which , with his change of
countenance , had betray'd him , had the king chanc'd to look that way .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,162.128

And I have observ'd , 't@ @is a very great error in those who laugh when
one says , <font> A negro can change colour <$$font> :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,162.129

for I have seen 'em as frequently blush , and look pale , and that as
visibly as ever I saw in the most beautiful white .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,162.130

And 't@ @is certain , that both these changes were evident , this day ,
in both these lovers . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,162.131

And <font> Imoinda <$$font> , who saw with some joy the change in the
prince's face , and found it in her own , strove to divert the king from
beholding either , by a forc'd caress , with which she met him ; <P_163>
which was a new wound in the heart of the poor dying prince .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,163.132

But as soon as the king was busy'd in looking on some fine thing of
<font> Imoinda <$$font> 's making , she had time to tell the prince ,
with her angry , but love-darting eyes , that she resented his coldness
, and bemoan'd her own miserable captivity . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,163.133

Nor were his eyes silent , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,163.134

but answer'd hers again , as much as eyes cou'd do , instructed by the
most tender and most passionate heart that ever lov'd :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,163.135

And they spoke so well , and so effectually , as <font> Imoinda <$$font>
no longer doubted but she was the only delight and darling of that soul
she found pleading in 'em its right of love , which none was more
willing to resign than she . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,163.136

And 't@ @was this powerful language alone that in an instant convey'd
all the thoughts of their souls to each other ; that they both found
there wanted but opportunity to make them both entirely happy .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,163.137

But when he saw another door open'd by <font> Onahal <$$font> <paren> a
former old wife of the king's , who now had charge of <font> Imoinda
<$$font> , <$$paren> and saw the prospect of a bed of state made ready ,
with sweets and flowers for the dalliance of the king , who immediately
led the trembling victim from his sight , into that prepar'd repose ;
what rage ! what wild frenzies seiz'd his heart ! which forcing to
keep within bounds , and to suffer without noise , it became the more
insupportable , and rent his soul with ten_thousand pains .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,163.138

He was forced to retire to vent his groans , where he fell down on a
carpet , and lay struggling a long time , and only breathing now and
then - Oh <font> Imoinda <$$font> ! BEHN-1668-E3-P1,163.139

When <font> Onahal <$$font> had finished her necessary affair within ,
shutting the door , she came forth , to wait till the king called ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,163.140

and hearing some one sighing in the other room , she past on ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,163.141

and found the prince in that deplorable condition , which she thought
needed her aid . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,163.142

She gave him cordials , but all in vain ; till finding the nature of his
disease , by his sighs , and naming <font> Imoinda <$$font> , she told
him he had not so much cause as he imagined to afflict himself : for if
he knew the king so well as she did , he wou'd not lose a moment in
jealousy ; and that she was confident <P_164> that <font> Imoinda
<$$font> bore , at this minute , part in his affliction .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.143

<font> Aboan <$$font> was of the same opinion , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.144

and both together persuaded him to re-assume his courage ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.145

and all sitting down on the carpet , the prince said so many obliging
things to <font> Onahal <$$font> , that he half-persuaded her to be of
his party : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.146

and she promised him , she would thus far comply with his just desires ,
that she would let <font> Imoinda <$$font> know how faithful he was ,
what he suffer'd , and what he said . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.147

This discourse lasted till the king called , which gave <font> Oroonoko
<$$font> a certain satisfaction ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.148

and with the hope <font> Onahal <$$font> had made him conceive , he
assumed a look as gay as 't@ @was possible a man in his circumstances
could do : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.149

and presently after , he was call'd in with the rest who waited without
. BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.150

The king commanded musick to be brought , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.151

and several of his young wives and mistresses came all together by his
command , to dance before him ; where <font> Imoinda <$$font> perform'd
her part with an air and grace so surpassing all the rest , as her
beauty was above 'em , and received the present ordained as a prize .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.152

The prince was every moment more charmed with the new beauties and
graces he beheld in this fair one ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.153

and while he gazed , and she danc'd , <font> Onahal <$$font> was retired
to a window with <font> Aboan <$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.154

This <font> Onahal <$$font> , as I said , was one of the cast-mistresses
{COM:sic} of the old king ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.155

and 't@ @was these <paren> now past their beauty <$$paren> that were
made guardians or governantees to the new and the young ones , and whose
business it was to teach them all those wanton arts of love , with which
they prevail'd and charmed heretofore in their turn ; and who now
treated the triumphing happy ones with all the severity as to liberty
and freedom , that was possible , in revenge of their honours they rob
them of ; envying them those satisfactions , those gallantries and
presents , that were once made to themselves , while youth and beauty
lasted , and which they now saw pass , as it were regardless by , and
paid only to the bloomings . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,164.156

And certainly , nothing is more afflicting to a decay'd beauty , than to
behold in it self declining <P_165> charms , that were once ador'd ; and
to find those caresses paid to new beauties , to which once she laid
claim ; to hear them whisper , as she passes by , that once was a
delicate woman . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.157

Those abandon'd ladies therefore endeavour to revenge all the despights
and decays of time , on these flourishing happy ones .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.158

And 't@ @was this severity that gave <font> Oroonoko <$$font> a_thousand
fears he should never prevail with <font> Onahal <$$font> to see <font>
Imoinda <$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.159

But , as I said , she was now retir'd to a window with <font> Aboan
<$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.160

This young man was not only one of the best quality , but a man
extremely well made , and beautiful ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.161

and coming often to attend the king to the otan , he had subdu'd the
heart of the antiquated <font> Onahal <$$font> , which had not forgot
how pleasant it was to be in love . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.162

And though she had some decays in her face , she had none in her sense
and wit ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.163

she was there agreeable still , even to <font> Aboan <$$font> 's youth :
so that he took pleasure in entertaining her with discourses of love .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.164

He knew also , that to make his court to these she-favourites , was the
way to be great ; these being the persons that do all affairs and
business at court . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.165

He had also observed that she had given him glances more tender and
inviting than she had done to others of his quality .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.166

And now , when he saw that her favour cou'd so absolutely oblige the
prince , he fail'd not to sigh in her ear , and to look with eyes all
soft upon her , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.167

and gave her hope that she had made some impressions on his heart .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.168

He found her pleas'd at this , and making a_thousand advances to him :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.169

but the ceremony ending , and the king departing , broke up the company
for that day , and his conversation . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.170

<font> Aboan <$$font> fail'd not that night to tell the prince of his
success , and how advantageous the service of <font> Onahal <$$font>
might be to his amour with <font> Imoinda <$$font> .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.171

The prince was over-joy'd with this good news , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.172

and besought him if it were possible to caress her so , as to engage her
entirely , which he could not fail to do , if he comply'd with her
desires : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,165.173

For then <paren> said the prince <$$paren> her life lying at your mercy
, she must grant you the request you make in my <P_166> behalf .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.174

<font> Aboan <$$font> understood him , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.175

and assur'd him he would make love so effectually , that he would defy
the most expert mistress of the art , to find out whether he dissembled
it , or had it really . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.176

And 't@ @was with impatience they waited the next opportunity of going
to the otan . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.177

The wars came on , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.178

the time of taking the field approached ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.179

and 't@ @was impossible for the prince to delay his going at the head of
his army to encounter the enemy ; so that every day seem'd a tedious
year , till he saw his <font> Imoinda <$$font> : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.180

for he believed he cou'd not live , if he were forced away without being
so happy . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.181

'T@ @was with impatience therefore that he expected the next visit the
king wou'd make ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.182

and according to his wish it was not long . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.183

The parley of the eyes of these two lovers had not pass'd so secretly ,
but an old jealous lover could spy it ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.184

or rather , he wanted not flatterers who told him they observ'd it : so
that the prince was hasten'd to the camp , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.185

and this was the last visit he found he should make to the otan ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.186

he therefore urged <font> Aboan <$$font> to make the best of this last
effort , and to explain himself so to <font> Onahal <$$font> , that she
deferring her enjoyment of her young lover no longer , might make way
for the prince to speak to <font> Imoinda <$$font> .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.187

The whole affair being agreed on between the prince and <font> Aboan
<$$font> , they attended the king , as the custom was , to the Otan ;
where , while the whole company was taken up in beholding the dancing ,
and antick postures the women-royal made , to divert the king , <font>
Onahal <$$font> singled out <font> Aboan <$$font> , whom she found most
pliable to her wish . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.188

When she had him where she believ'd she cou'd not be heard , she sigh'd
to him , and softly cry'd , <font> Ah <$$font> , Aboan ! <font> when
will you be sensible of my passion ? BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.189

I confess it with my mouth , because I would not give my eyes the lye ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.190

and you have but too much already perceived they have confess'd my flame
: BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.191

nor would I have you believe , that because I am the abandoned mistress
of a king , I esteem my self altogether divested of charms :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,166.192

No <$$font> , Aboan ; <P_167> <font> I have still a rest of beauty
enough engaging , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.193

and have learn'd to please too well , not to be desirable .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.194

I can have lovers still , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.195

but will have none but <$$font> Aboan . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.196

<font> Madam <$$font> , <paren> reply'd the half-feigning youth
<$$paren> <font> you have already , by my eyes , found you can still
conquer ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.197

and I believe 't@ @is in Pity of me you condescend to this kind
confession . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.198

But , madam , words are used to be so small a Part of our
country-courtship , that 't@ @is rare one can get so happy an
opportunity as to tell one's heart ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.199

and those few minutes we have , are forced to be snatch'd for more
certain Proofs of love than speaking and sighing ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.200

and such I languish for . <$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.201

He spoke this with such a tone , that she hoped it true ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.202

and cou'd not forbear believing it ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.203

and being wholly transported with joy for having subdued the finest of
all the king's subjects to her desires , she took from her ears two
large pearls , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.204

and commanded him to wear 'em in his . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.205

He would have refused 'em , crying , <font> Madam , these are not the
Proofs of your love that I expect ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.206

't@ @is opportunity , 't@ @is a lone-@ @hour only , that can make me
happy <$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.207

But forcing the pearls into his hand , she whisper'd softly to him ;
<font> Oh ! do not fear a woman's invention , when love sets her a
thinking <$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.208

And pressing his hand , she cry'd , <font> This night you shall be happy
: BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.209

Come to the gate of the orange-grove , behind the otan , and I will be
ready about mid-night to receive you . <$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.210

'T@ @was thus agreed , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.211

and she left him , that no notice might be taken of their speaking
together . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.212

The ladies were still dancing , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.213

and the king laid on a carpet with a great deal of pleasure was
beholding them , especially <font> Imoinda <$$font> , who that day
appear'd more lovely than ever , being enliven'd with the good tidings
<font> Onahal <$$font> had brought her , of the constant passion the
prince had for her . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.214

The prince was laid on another carpet at the other end of the room ,
with his eyes fixed on the object of his soul ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.215

and as she turned or moved , so did they : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.216

and she alone gave his eyes and soul their motions .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,167.217

Nor did <font> Imoinda <$$font> employ her eyes to any other use , than
in beholding with infinite pleasure <P_168> the joy she produced in
those of the prince . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.218

But while she was more regarding him , than the steps she took , she
chanced to fall ; and so near him , as that leaping with extreme force
from the carpet , he caught her in his arms as she fell :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.219

and 't@ @was visible to the whole presence , the joy wherewith he
received her . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.220

He clasped her close to his bosom , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.221

and quite forgot that reverence that was due to the mistress of a king ,
and that punishment that is the reward of a boldness of this nature .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.222

And had not the presence of mind of <font> Imoinda <$$font> <paren>
fonder of his safety , than her own <$$paren> befriended him , in making
her spring from his arms , and fall into her dance again , he had at
that instant met his death ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.223

for the old king , jealous to the last degree , rose up in rage ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.224

broke all the diversion , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.225

and led <font> Imoinda <$$font> to her apartment ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.226

and sent out word to the prince , to go immediately to the camp ; and
that if he were found another night in court , he shou'd suffer the
death ordained for disobedient offenders . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.227

You may imagine how welcome this news was to <font> Oroonoko <$$font> ,
whose unseasonable transport and caress of <font> Imoinda <$$font> was
blamed by all men that loved him : BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.228

and now he perceived his fault , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.229

yet cry'd , <font> That for such another moment he would be content to
die . <$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.230

All the otan was in disorder about this accident ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.231

and <font> Onahal <$$font> was particularly concern'd , because on the
prince's stay depended her happiness ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.232

for she cou'd no longer expect that of <font> Aboan <$$font> :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.233

So that e'er they departed , they contrived it so , that the prince and
he should both come that night to the grove of the otan , which was all
of oranges and citrons , and that there they wou'd wait her orders .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.234

They parted thus with grief enough till night , leaving the king in
possession of the lovely maid . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.235

But nothing could appease the jealousy of the old lover ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.236

he wou'd not be imposed on , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.237

but would have it , that <font> Imoinda <$$font> made a false step on
purpose to fall into <font> Oroonoko <$$font> 's bosom , and that all
things looked like a design on both sides ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.238

and 't@ @was in vain she protested her innocence :
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.239

He was old and obstinate , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.240

and left her more than half assur'd that his fear was true .
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,168.241

<P_169>

The king going to his apartment , sent to know where the prince was ,
and if he intended to obey his command . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.243

The messenger return'd , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.244

and told him , he found the prince pensive , and altogether unprepar'd
for the campaign ; that he lay negligently on the ground , and answer'd
very little . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.245

This confirmed the jealousy of the king , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.246

and he commanded that they should very narrowly and privately watch his
motions ; and that he should not stir from his apartment , but one spy
or other shou'd be employ'd to watch him : So that the hour approaching
, wherein he was to go to the citrongrove ; and taking only <font> Aboan
<$$font> along with him , he leaves his apartment ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.247

and was watched to the very gate of the Otan ; where he was seen to
enter , and where they left him , to carry back the tidings to the king
. BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.248

<font> Oroonoko <$$font> and <font> Aboan <$$font> were no sooner
enter'd , but <font> Onahal <$$font> led the prince to the apartment of
<font> Imoinda <$$font> ; who , not knowing any thing of her happiness ,
was laid in bed . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.249

But <font> Onahal <$$font> only left him in her chamber , to make the
best of his opportunity , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.250

and took her dear <font> Aboan <$$font> to her own ; where he shew'd the
height of complaisance for his prince , when , to give him an
opportunity , he suffer'd himself to be caress'd in bed by <font> Onahal
<$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.251

The prince softly waken'd <font> Imoinda <$$font> , who was not a little
surpriz'd with joy to find him there ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.252

and yet she trembled with a_thousand fears . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.253

I believe he omitted saying nothing to this young maid , that might
persuade her to suffer him to seize his own , and take the rights of
love . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.254

And I believe she was not long resisting those arms where she so long'd
to be ; BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.255

and having opportunity , night , and silence , youth , love and desire ,
he soon prevail'd , BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.256

and ravished in a moment what his old grandfather had been endeavouring
for so many months . BEHN-1668-E3-P1,169.257

