<BEGIN_blundev-1597-e2-p1>

<P_51V>

<heading>

How to find out by the saide tables , the distance betwixt two places
differing both in Longitude and Latitude , making the totall Sine to be
no more but 60$$000. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,51V.4

<$$heading>

This is done by finding out two numbers , whereof the one is called in
Latine <font> Primum inuentum <$$font> , that is to say , the first
found number , and the other is called <font> Secundum inuentum <$$font>
, that is the second found number in such order as followeth .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,51V.6

First then knowing the Longitude of either place , take the differe~ce
of their Longitudes by subtracting the lesser Longitude out of the
greater , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,51V.7

that done , multiply the right Sine of that difference into the Sine of
the complement of the lesser Latitude , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,51V.8

and diuide the product of that Mutiplycation by the totall Sine ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,51V.9

and then seeke out the arch of that quotient according to the rule
before taught , so shall you haue the first found number :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,51V.10

That done , multiply the right Sine of the lesser Latitude by the totall
Sine , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,51V.11

and hauing diuided the product thereof by the right Sine of the
complement of the first found number , subtract the arch of that
quotient out of the greater Latitude , and you shall haue the second
found number : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,51V.12

Then multiply the right Sine of the complement of the first found number
into the right Sine of the complement of the second found number ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,51V.13

and hauing diuided the product of that Multiplycation by the totall Sine
, seeke the Arke of that quotient in the tables ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,51V.14

and take that Arke out of the whole Quadrant , and the degrees that doe
remaine , are degrees of the great Circle , which if you multiply by 60.
the product of y=t= Multiplycation will shew you how many Italian miles
the one place is distant from the other , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,51V.15

or if you would haue Germane miles , the~ multiply the foresaid degrees
of the great Circle by 15. or else diuide the product <P_52R> of the
Itailian miles by 4. and you shall haue your desire .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.16

As for example , you would know what distance is betwixt Hierusalem and
Noremberg a famous towne in Germanie , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.17

Hierusalem according to <font> Appian <$$font> his tables , hath in
Longitude 66. degrees , 0@ @' , and in Latitude 31. degrees , 4 ' 0.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.18

Againe Noremberg hath in Longitude 28. degrees , 2 ' 0. and in
Latitude 49. degrees , 2 ' 4. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.19

the difference of their Longitudes is 37. degrees , 4 ' 0. the right
Sine whereof is 36$$664 BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.20

for in this example <font> Appian <$$font> maketh 60$$000. to be the
total Sine , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.21

and therefore he reiecteth the two last figures on the right hand found
in the first tables of <font> Monte Regio <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.22

Now you must multiply 36$$664 into the right Sine of the complement of
the lesser Latitude which Sine is 51$$067 , the product of which two
Sines being multiplyed the one by the other , amounteth to
1$$872$$320$$488. which if you diuide by the totall Sine . 60$$000 ,
you shall find in the quotient 31$$205. whose arch is 31. degrees , 2
' 0. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.23

and this shal be your first found number . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.24

This done , multiply the right Sine of the lesser Latitude which is
31$$498. by the totall Sine 60$$000. and the product thereof will be
1$$889$$880$$000. which summe if you diuide by the Sine of the
complement of the first found number which Sine is 51$$249. you shall
find in the quotient 36876. the Arke whereof is 37. degrees 5 ' 5.
which arch being subtracted out of the greater Latitude , there will
remaine 11. degreees , 2 ' 9. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.25

and that shall be your second found number , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.26

then multiply the foresaid Sine of the complement of the first found
number which is 51$$249. by the Sine of the complement of the second
found number which is 58$$798. and the product therof will amount to
3$$013$$338$$702. which if you diuide by the totall Sine , you shall
find in the quotient 50$$222. the arch whereof is 56. degrees , 5 ' 0.
which being subtracted out of the whole Quadrant which is 90. degrees ,
there will remaine 33. degrees , 1 ' 0. of the the greater Circle ,
which 33. degrees , if you multiply by 60. it will make 1980. miles ,
whereunto you must adde for y=e= 1 ' 0. 10. miles ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.27

so shall you find the distance betwixt the two foresaid places to be
1990. Italian miles , which if you would reduce into Germaine miles ,
then diuide that number by 4. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.28

for 4. Italian miles doe make but one Germaine mile ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52R.29

so shall you haue 497. Germaine miles , and two Italian miles remaining
, which is halfe a Germaine mile , which summe agreeth with that which
<P_52V> <font> Appian <$$font> setteth downe in his Geographie , where@
@as hee vseth the selfe same example , and worketh it in like manner
<font> Per tabulas sinuum <$$font> . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.30

<heading>

The Altitude of the sunne being knowne , how to find out the Longitude
of the shadow both right and verse of any body yeelding shadow by helpe
of the foresaid tables . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.32

<$$heading>

First you haue to vnderstand that euery bodily thing yeelding shadow ,
is diuided into 12. equall partes , and euery such part into 60.
minutes , and every minute into 60. seconds , and so forth :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.34

Againe , of shadowes there bee 2. kindes , that is , <font> Vmbra recta
<$$font> , and <font> Vmbra versa : <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.35

<font> Vmbra recta <$$font> is that which proceedeth from some body
rightly erected vpon the vpper face of the Horizon , as from some tower
or post standing right vp vpon a leauel ground :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.36

And that shadowe is called <font> Vmbra versa <$$font> which proceedeth
from some right style or pearch being thrust into a wall or post
standing right vp and not leaning , in such sort as the sayde style or
pearch may bee a iust paralell to the vpper face of the Horizon .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.37

Now to find out the length of either the foresaide shadowes , you must
doe thus . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.38

Multiply the right Sine of the complement of the giuen Solar altitude ,
by 12. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.39

and diuide the product by the right Sine of the said Solar altitude ,
and you shall haue the Longitude of the right shadow of the said body .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.40

Againe if you multiply the right Sine of the foresaid altitude by 12.
and diuide the product by the Sine of the complement of the said
altitude , you shall haue the Longitude of <font> Vmbra versa , <$$font>
of the saide body . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.41

As for example , suppose the giuen Solar altitude to be 25. degrees ,
the complement whereof is 65. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.42

and the right Sine of that complement is 54$$378 if you make the total
Sine to be 60$$000. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.43

Then in multiplying the foresaid right Sine by 12. the product will be
652$$536. which if you diuide by the Sine of the altitude which is
25$$357. you shall find the longitude of <font> Vmbra recta <$$font> to
be 25. parts 4 ' 4 4 " 2. {COM:unclear_symbol} 6 ' .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.44

Now if you multiply the Sine of the altitude which is 25$$357. by 12.
and diuide the product by the Sine of the complement which is 54$$378.
you shall finde the Longitude of <font> Vmbra versa <$$font> to bee 5.
parts , 3 ' 5. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,52V.45

and in saying here parts , I meane alwaies such parts <P_53R> as are the
12. parts , whereinto the body yeelding shawdow is diuided :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53R.46

but if you worke this example by the first tables of Sines making the
totall Sine of 6$$000$$000. though you finde it true in the parts and
minutes , yet shall you not finde it so in the seconds and thirds ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53R.47

and if you worke the same by the second tables making the total Sine
10$$000$$000. you shal find it to agree only in the parts , but neither
in minutes nor secondes , which maketh me to suspect that the Printer
hath committed some error therein , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53R.48

for both the tables were made by one selfe rule .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53R.49

<heading>

A briefe description of the tables of Sines Printed in quarto like vnto
those which Clauius setteth downe in his commentaries vpon Theodosius
his Spheriques . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53R.51

<$$heading>

Hauing heere before plainely described vnto you the tables of Sines made
by <font> Monte Regio <$$font> , which are Printed in folio , & how to
vse the same , I wil now briefly describe the said tables lately
corrected by <font> Clauius <$$font> , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53R.53

and were Printed in quarto at Rome <font> Anno 1586 <$$font> , the
totall Sine of which tables according to the last table of <font> Monte
Regio <$$font> , is 10$$000$$000 , by which Tables are to be wrought all
the conclusions hereafter following . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53R.54

First then you haue to vnderstand that these table {COM:sic} are
contained in 36. Pages , in the front whereof are set downe the degrees
of the Quadrant proceeding from 1 to 89. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53R.55

but because the whole number of minutes belonging to the saide degree ,
which is 6 ' 0. can not be all placed in one selfe Page , but only 3 '
0. in the left outermost collum of the left_hand Page : and other 3 '
0. in the left outermost collum of the right_hand Page : therefore the
degrees or arches of the Quadrant are faine to be twice repeated in the
front of euery two Pages , as you may plainely see by viewing the said
tables , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53R.56

and euery Page containeth seauen collums , whereof the first on the left
hand containeth the minutes belonging to the degrees or arches of the
Quadrant , which minutes do proceed downward from 1. to 3 ' 0.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53R.57

and the seauenth collum on the right hand in euery Page containeth the
minutes belonging to the complement of euery arch , which minutes doe
proceede backward , that is to say from 1. see downe at the lowest end
of the last collum of the second Page , and so proceeding vpwarde to 3 '
0. which 3 ' 0. is also set <P_53V> downe at the lowest end of the
last collum of the left_hand Page , and so proceedeth vpward to 6$$0.
which 60. minutes doe helpe to make vp the complement that is
answerable to euery arch wherevnto no minutes be annexed ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.58

for if the arch hath no minutes , then you must adde to the complement
thereof 60. minutes , which is one whole degree , to make vp the
complement . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.59

As for example , suppose the Arke to be 46. degrees , without any
minutes ioyned thereunto , the complement whereof set downe at the foote
of the said arch , is but 43. degrees , wherefore you must adde
thereunto 6 ' 0. which is one degree , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.60

so shall the complement be 44. degrees , which is the true complement
indeede , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.61

but if you suppose the foresaid Arke to haue 1 ' 3 ioyned thereunto you
shall find the complement to be 43. degrees , 4 ' 7. which is
answerable to the foresaide Arke 46. degrees , and 1 ' 3.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.62

for if you take 46. degrees , 1 ' 3. out of 90. degrees , the
remainder will be 43. degrees , 4 ' 7. which is the complement , so as
you neede not to make any Subtraction out of 90. to find the complement
of any arch , that hath any minutes annexed thereunto :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.63

but when so euer you haue to finde out the right Sine of any complement
in these tables , you must then make the complement an arch , seeking
for the same in the front and not at the foote of the tables ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.64

& if the said complement haue any minutes annexed thereunto , you must
seeke those minutes in the left outermost collum of euery Page , and not
in the outermost right collum belonging to complements ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.65

for in this case the complement is an arch and not a complement .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.66

The order of working by these tables in all other things differeth not
one iotte from that which we haue obserued in working the two former
conclusions by the tables of <font> Monte Regio <$$font> Printed in
folio , as you shall easily perceiue by the examples here following .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.67

<heading>

1 How to find out the declination of the Sunne at any time his place in
the Zodiaque being giuen , <font> Per tabulas Sinuum <$$font> .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.69

<$$heading>

Knowing the place of the Sun for the day , consider how much the said
place is distant from the first point of Aries if y=e= place of the
Sunne be nigher to <font> Aries <$$font> then to <font> Libra <$$font> .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.71

But if it be nigher to <font> Libra <$$font> , then take his distance
from the first point of <font> Libra <$$font> , which distance must not
exceede 90. degrees , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,53V.72

and seeke that distaunce amongst <P_54R> the Arkes in the front of the
Tables if they be degrees , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.73

if minutes , you shall finde them in the first collum on the left hand ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.74

then multiply the Sine of that distance by the Sine of the greatest
declination which is 23. degrees , 2 ' 8. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.75

and diuide the product therof by the total Sine , and the quotient wil
shew you the Sine of the declination for that day , the arch wherof , is
the very number of the declination it selfe . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.76

As for example , you would know the declination of the Sunne the
eleauenth of Aprill 1591. when as the Sunne was entred 3 ' 3 into
<font> Taurus <$$font> vnto which you must adde according to the rule
before giuen 30. degrees , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.77

for that is his distance from the first point of <font> Aries <$$font> ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.78

then seeke out the said 30. degrees , in the front of the last Tables
among the Arkes and the 3 ' 3. in the first collum on the left hand
right against which you shall find the sine of the saide distance to bee
5082$$901. which being multiplyed by 3$$982$$155 <paren> which is the
Sine of the greatest declination <$$paren> the product thereof will be
20$$240$$890$$631$$655. which if you diuide by the totall Sine which is
10$$000$$000. you shall find the quotient to be 2$$024$$089. which
quotient must be sought out in the said Tables ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.79

and if you find no such number , then take the nearest number thereunto
, which is 2025025. and the Arke thereof together with the minutes that
stand right against the said quotient in the first collum on the left
hand , is the declination of the Sunne for that day wich is 11. degrees
, 4 ' 1. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.80

<heading>

2 How to know the right ascention of the Sunne , <font> Per tabulas
Sinuum <$font> . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.82

<$$heading>

First knowing the Sunnes place , you shall learne the right ascention
therof thus . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.84

First consider how farre his place is from the Equinoctiall point , as
is saide before in the last proposition , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.85

and multiply the Sine of the complement of that distance by the totall
Sine , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.86

then knowing the declination of the Sunne for that day by the last rule
, diuide the former product by the Sine of the complement of the said
declination , and the quotient will shew the Sine of that Arke whereof
the complement is the right ascention . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54R.87

As for example , the Sunne being in the 3 ' 3. of <font> Taurus
<$$font> and his declination 11. degrees , 4 ' 1. as you found by the
last proposition & his distance fro~ the first point of <font> Aries
<$$font> to be in all 30. degrees 3 ' 3. <P_54V> the complement
whereof is 59. degrees , 2 ' 7. the Sine of which complement is
8$$611$$860. which being multiplyed by the totall Sine which is
10$$000$$000. the product will be 86$$116$$600$$000$$000. which being
diuided by the Sine of the complement of the Sunnes declination which is
78. degrees , 1 ' 9. whose Sine is 9792818. by which Sine if you
diuide the former product , the quotient will bee 8$$773$$600. the Arke
of which quotient is 61. degrees , and 1 ' 9.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.88

and the complement of that is 28. degrees , and 45 ' 1. which is the
right ascention of the place of the Sunne for the foresaid day .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.89

And here note that if the Arke from <font> Aries <$$font> to the giuen
pointe , doe containe iust 90. degrees , the right ascention thereof is
also 90. degrees , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.90

but if the said Arke bee more then 90. degrees , and lesser then 180.
degrees , then subtract the same out of 180. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.91

and seeke out the right ascention of the remainder as before , whose
right ascention if you take out of 180. the remainder shall bee the
ascention of the propounded Arke . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.92

But if the said Arch which is comprehended betwixt <font> Aries <$$font>
and the giuen pointe bee greater then 180. degrees , or 6. signes ,
and lesser then 270. degrees , or 9. signes , then hauing subtracted
180 degrees from the same arch , calculate the right ascention of the
arch from the beginning of <font> Libra <$$font> , as before , and the
right ascention thereof being added to 180. degrees , shall be the
ascention desired . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.93

Lastly if the arch comprehended betwixt <font> Aries <$$font> and the
pointe giuen , be greater then 270. degrees , or 9 signes , then
subtract that same out of 360. degrees , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.94

and seeke out the right ascention of that remainder as before , which if
you subtract out of 360. degrees , the remainder shall be the right
ascention desired . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.95

<heading>

3 how to finde out the ascentionall difference , <font> Per tabulas
Sinuum <$$font> . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.97

<$$heading>

Multiply the Sine of the Latitude giuen by the total Sine ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.99

and diuide the product by the complement of y=e= said Latitude
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.100

that done , multiply the quotient by the Sine of the sunnes declination
, BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.101

and diuide the product by the Sine of the complement of the declination
, and the quotient thereof will shew the signe of the ascentionall
difference : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,54V.102

and by working according to this rule you@ @shal find <P_55R> that when
the Sunne is entred 3 ' 3. into <font> Taurus <$$font> , at which time
his declination is 11. degrees , 4 ' 1. <paren> as haue {COM:sic} been
said before <$$paren> the ascentionall difference will be 15. degrees ,
2 ' 1. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55R.103

And heere note that the ascentionall differences for one quarter of the
Circle serueth also for all the rest , so that the Latitude bee not
altered , and that the declination of the points in the later quarters
be equall to the declination of the points in the first quarter .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55R.104

<heading>

4 How to finde out the oblique ascention of any pointe of the Ecliptique
in any Latitude assigned . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55R.106

<$$heading>

First finde the right ascention of the giuen pointe by the second
proposition , & also the ascentional difference therof by the third
proposition : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55R.108

the~ consider whether the declination of the said point be Northward or
Southward , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55R.109

for if it be northward , then subtract the ascentionall difference out
of the right ascention , and the remainder shall be the oblique
ascention desired : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55R.110

but if the declination be Southward , then adde the ascentionall
difference vnto the right ascention , and the summe shall be the oblique
ascention . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55R.111

In working thus for the Latitude 52. and suppose the Sunne to bee in
the 3 ' 3. of <font> Taurus <$$font> , and hauing found by the former
proposition his right ascention to be 23. degrees , 4 ' 1. and the
ascentional difference to be 15. degrees , 2 ' 1. you shall find his
oblique asention in the foresaid Latitude to be 13. degrees , 2 ' 0.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55R.112

<heading>

5 How to finde out the time OF the Sunnes rising and setting , and
thereby the length of the artificiall day . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55R.114

<$$heading>

First you must know the ascentional difference , and conuert the same
into howers & minutes , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55R.116

then if the Sunne be in any of the northern signes , adde those howers
to 6. howers which is the one halfe of an Equinoctiall day , and the
summe of such Addition shall be the one halfe of the artificial day ,
which being subtracted out of 12. howers , the remainder shal be the
hower of the Sunnes rising : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55R.117

As for example , the Sunne being in the 3 ' 3. of <font> Taurus
<$$font> you found the ascentionall difference to be 15. degrees , and
2 ' 1. which being turned into howers maketh one hower 1 '
{COM:unclear_symbol} . and somewhat more , which being added to 6.
maketh 7. howers 1@ @'. 2@ @". and a little more : <P_55V> which is
the one half of the artificiall day which being doubled , maketh in all
14. howers 2@ @'. and 4@ @". BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.118

but if the Sunne be in any of the Southerne signes , you must remember
to subtract y=e= howers of the ascentionall difference out of 6. howers
, BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.119

and the remainder shall be the one halfe of the artificiall day ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.120

and by subtracting the halfe length of the artificiall day out of
{SIC:of_of} 12. you shall know the hower of the Sunnes rising ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.121

and hauing the time of his rising , you must needs know the time of his
setting . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.122

<heading>

6 How to find out the Meridian altitude of the Sunne in any day though
he doth not shine at all , the eleuation of the Pole being giuen .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.124

<$$heading>

Subtract the eleuation of the pole from 90. and the remainder shall be
the eleuation of the Equinoctiall , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.126

then if the Sunne be in any of the Northern signes , adde the
declination of the Sunne , vnto the altitude of the Equinoctiall , or
else if he bee in any of the Southern signes , subtract the declination
, and the summe of the Addition , or remainder of the Subtraction ,
shall shew the Meridian altitude . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.127

As for example , the second of May 1591. the sunne being in the 20.
degrees , 4 ' 2. of <font> Taurus <$$font> , and his declination
northward 17. degrees , 5 ' 6. 2 " 1 heere by subtracting 52. degrees
, which is our Latitude from 90. you shall find the remainder to be 38.
which is the altitude of the Equinoctiall , whereunto if you adde the
Sunnes declination for that day which is 17. degrees , 5 ' 6 and 2 " 1
the summe will bee 55. degrees , 5 ' 6. and 2 " 1.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.128

and that is the Meridian altitude of the Sunne {TEXT:Suune} for that day
. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.129

Let these few conclusions serue to shew you the vse of the Tables of
Sines , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.130

for it would make a long booke to set downe so many conclusions as are
to bee wrought by these Tables , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.131

and therefore I leaue to trouble you any further therewith , minding now
briefly to declare vnto you the vse of the Tables of lines Tangent and
Secant by one example or two as followeth . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.132

But first I thinke it necessarie to shew you what those lines bee , and
where to they serue . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,55V.133

<P_144V>

<heading>

Cap. 11 . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.136

<$$heading>

<heading>

What is the Zodiaque ? BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.139

<$$heading>

It is a broad , oblique , or slope Circle , hauing a circular line in
the midst thereof , called the Ecliptique line ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.141

and deuideth the Spheare into two equall partes , by crossing the
Equinoctiall with oblique Angles in two points , that is in the
beginning of <font> Aries , <$$font> and in the beginning of <font>
Libra <$$font> , so as the one halfe of this broad Circle declineth
towardes the North , and the other halfe towardes the South : in which
Circle many thinges are to bee considered , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.142

first the name , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.143

then what breadth it hath , and why it hath such breadth , and into what
parts it is deuided as@ @well touching the breadth or Latitude , as
circuit or Longitude thereof , also into how many parts the firmament is
diuided by the spaces described in the Zodiaque , and appointed to the
12. signes . Also how much it declineth from the Equinoctiall towards
the South or North , and vpon what poles it turneth about , and why the
line in the midst is called the Ecliptique line ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.144

and many other necessarie points , which I minde here briefely to touch
. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.145

<heading>

<font> Why is this Circle named the Zodiaque ? <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.147

<$$heading>

It is named the Zodiaque either of this Greeke worde <font> zoe <$$font>
, which is as much to say as life , because the Sunne being mooued vnder
this Circle , giueth life to the inferiour bodies , or else of this
Greeke word <font> Zodion <$$font> , which is as much to say as a beast
, because that 12. Images of stars , otherwise called the 12. signes ,
named by the name of certaine beasts , are formed in this Circle :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.149

and therfore the Latines do call this Circle <font> Signifer <$$font>
because it beareth the 12. signes . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.150

<heading>

<font> How are these signes called , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.152

and with what Characters are they marked . <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.153

<$$heading>

Their names and Characters this table here following doth shew , and
also which be opposite one to another , as <font> Aries <$$font> to
<font> Libra Taurus <$$font> to <font> Scorpio <$$font> , and so foorth
. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,144V.155

<P_145R>

{COM:zodiac_signs_omitted}

<font> The sixe Northerne signes : Aries , Taurus , Gemini , Cancer ,
Leo , Virgo BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.158

The sixe Southerne signes : Libra , Scorpio , Sagittarius , Capricornus
, Aquarius , Pisces <$$font> Of which signes the first sixe on y=e= left
hand are called the Northerne signes , because they are contained in
that halfe of the Zodiaque , which declineth towards the North .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.159

And the other sixe on the right hand being right opposite to the first
6. are called the Southern signes , because they are contained in the
other halfe of the Zodiaque , declining towards the South :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.160

And against euerie sign is set his proper Character .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.161

<heading>

<font> What diuision doe Astronomers make of the 12. signes . <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.163

<$$heading>

Diuerse , as followeth : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.165

for some are said to be ascendent , and some descendent .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.166

Ascendent are those that rise from the South towards our Zenith ,
tending Northward , which be these , <font> Capricornus , Aquarius ,
Pisces , Aries , Taurus , <$$font> and <font> Gemini <$$font> .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.167

The descendent are these , <font> Cancer , Leo , Virgo , Libra , Scorpio
<$$font> and <font> Sagitarius <$$font> . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.168

Againe some are saide to bee vernall , as <font> Aries , Taurus <$$font>
and <font> Gemini <$$font> . Some Estiuall as <font> Cancer , Leo ,
Virgo . <$$font> Some Autumnall as <font> Libra , Scorpio , <$$font>
and <font> Sagitarius <$$font> . And some Hiemall or Brumall , as
<font> Capricornus , Aquarius , <$$font> and <font> Pisces <$$font> ,
signifying the foure seasons of the yeare , that is to say , the Spring
, Sommer , Autumne , and Winter . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.169

And some doe make diuerse other diuisions , which because they
appertaine to Astrologie rather then to the Treatise of a Spheare I
willingly omit them . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.170

<font> Now tell what breadth the Zodiaque hath , and why it is imagined
to haue such breadth ? <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.171

It hath <paren> according to the ancient writers <$$paren> 12. degrees
in the bredth , that is to say , 6 degrees on the one side of the
Ecliptique line , & 6. degrees on the other side of the Ecliptique line
, BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145R.172

but according to <P_145V> the moderne writers , it hath 16. degrees in
breadth , that is , eight degrees on ech side of the Ecliptique line ,
which breadth was necessarily imagined , first to the intent that by the
measure and degrees thereof it might bee knowne , how much the Planets
<paren> otherwise called the wandring starres , whose course is to pass
continually vnder this broade Circle <$$paren> doe wander at any time on
either side of the Ecliptique line , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145V.173

for they all wander , but some more , some lesse , the Sunne onely
excepted , which neuer swarued from that line , but alwayes goeth right
under the same , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145V.174

and therefore the saide line is called by some writers the way of the
Sunne : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145V.175

And secondly it hath such breadth to the intent it maye containe within
the same , the 12. signes aforesaid , by meanes of which signes the
whole circuit or longitude of the saide Circle is deuided into 12.
equall parts , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145V.176

and euery such part is deuided into 30. degrees , and euery degree into
60. minutes , and euery minute into 60. seconds , &c. so as the whole
Longitude thereof contayneth 360. degrees , according vnto which
diuision , all the rest of the Circles both greater and lesser described
in the Spheare , are made to containe the like number of degrees , and
euerye halfe Circle to containe 180. degrees , and euery quarter of a
Circle to containe 90. degrees , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145V.177

and by this diuision as well of the breadth as of the length of the
Zodiaque , it appeareth that euery one of the 12. Signes hath 30.
degrees in length , and 12. degrees , in bredth ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145V.178

and thereof the Planets , Starres , and all other Celestiall bodies are
said to haue both Longitude and Latitude , the Sunne onely excepted .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145V.179

<heading>

<font> How is such Longitude and Latitude to be vnderstood ? <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145V.181

<$$heading>

The Longitude of any Planet or Starre is to bee counted in the
Ecliptique line containing in circuit 360. degrees , reckoning from the
first point of <font> Aries <$$font> , and so to <font> Taurus , Gemini
<$$font> , and <font> Cancer <$$font> , & so foorth according to the
succession of the signe , vntill you come againe vnto the first point of
<font> Aries , <$$font> at which point such Longitude both endeth and
beginneth . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145V.183

The Latitude is counted from the said Ecliptique line towards any of
y=e= poles of the Zodiaque . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145V.184

And hereof looke how many degrees any fixed starre or Planet is distant
from the Ecliptique line towards any of the said poles , so much
Latitude it is said to haue either Northerne or Southerne :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,145V.185

moreouer , by this diuision of the signes the whole firmament is
<P_146R> deuided into 12. parts by reason of 6. Circles called the
circles of position , imagined to passe through the poles of the
Zodiaque , and also through y=e= beginning of euery signe , wherby we
know vnder what signe euery star is situated though it be cleane out of
the Zodiaque as this figure here plainely sheweth , marked with these
letters <font> A. B. C. D. <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146R.186

{COM:figure_omitted} <font> A. <$$font> signifieth the North pole of
the worlde , <font> B. <$$font> the North pole of the Zodiaque , <font>
C. <$$font> the South pole of y=e= world , <font> D. <$$font> the
South pole of the Zodiaque . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146R.187

<heading>

How much the Zodiaque declineth from the Equinoctiall towards either of
the Poles , and the greatest declination of the Sunne , what it is at
this present , and what it hath beene in times past .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146R.189

Cap. 12 BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146R.190

<$$heading>

You have to vnderstande that the Zodiaque or rather the Ecliptique line
, declineth from the Equinoctiall towards eyther of the poles , 23.
degrees 2 ' 8. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146R.192

and that is saide in these dayes to be the greatest declination of the
Sunne , which declination is twofold , that is Northerne and Southerne ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146R.193

for like as the Sunne entring into the First pointe of <font> Aries ,
<$$font> beginneth then to decline from the Equinoctiall Northward , to
the quantitie of 23. degrees , and 2 ' 8. so entring into the first
point of <font> Libra <$$font> , he declineth againe from the
Equinoctiall as much Southward . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146R.194

And note by the way that by reason of this slowe motion , when he is in
the Northerne signes , he spendeth 7. dayes , and 3$$5 of a daye more
in making his North declination then in making his South <P_146V>
declination , because hee is then in his swift motion ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.195

and the time hath beene that he hath spent aboue ten dayes more in
making his North declination , then in making his South declination :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.196

neither is the greatest declination of the Sunne in all ages of like
quantitie . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.197

For in <font> Ptolemies <$$font> time it was 23. degrees , 5 ' 1. and
2 " euer since whose time it hath alwaies continually decreased vntill
this present , so as now the greatest declination is no more but 23
degrees and 2 ' 8. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.198

And <font> Copernicus <$$font> maketh the declination of the Sunne in
respect of quantitie to bee twofold , that is greatest and least ,
affirming the greatest to be 23. degrees and 5 ' 2. and the least to
be 23. degrees and 2 ' 8. as it is now counted , the difference wherof
is 2 ' 4 BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.199

and whilst the Ecliptique departeth from the Equinoctiall , and turneth
againe towards the Equinoctiall , there doe run <paren> as he saith
<$$paren> 3434. yeares . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.200

<heading>

How to know the quantitie of the Sunnes declination bee it Northward or
Southward , euery day throughout the yeare , as well by a Table as by
helpe of the Spheare . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.202

Cap. 13 BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.203

<$$heading>

This is chiefely to bee knowne by Tables calculated of purpose , which
Tables most commonly are eyther made to aunswere euerie day of the
moneth , or else to the degree of the signe wherein the sunne is euery
day , which kind of Table is contained in lesser roome then the other ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.205

but to worke by such a Table , you must first knowe in what signe and
degree the sunne is euery day . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.206

<heading>

<font> How is that to be done ? <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.208

<$$heading>

It is to bee knowne most truely by the Ephemerides or such like Table
calculated of purpose , shewing not onely the degree of the signe , but
also the verie minute wherein the Sunne is euerie day ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,146V.210

and for want of such a Table , you may without consideration of the
minutes , know it by such an instrument or figure as this following ,
which consisteth of diuerse Circles , whereof the outermost contayneth
the degrees of the 12. signes , together with <P_147R> the names of the
said signes , and the next the daies of ech moneth , together with the
names of the said moneths , much like the backside of an Astrolabe , in
the center or midst of which instrument or figure is a thred , which if
you lay vpon the day of the month which you seek , it will straight
direct you to the degree of the signe wherein the Sun is that day ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,147R.211

as for example , if you would know in what signe and degree the Sun is
the 4. of May , then by drawing the thred right vpon the said day ouer
and beyond the outermost cicle , you shall finde that it will fall right
vpon the 23. degree of <font> Taurus <$$font> .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,147R.212

<font> An instrument to know thereby in What signe and degree the Sunne
. <$$font> <font> is euery day throughout the yeare . <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,147R.213

{COM:figure_omitted}

<P_147V>

Then hauing found the degree of the Sun you must resort therewith to
this Table following , made for the declination of the sun .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,147V.216

<font> A table shewing the declination of the sun euery day throughout
the yeare <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,147V.217

<P_148R>

<heading>

The description and vse of the Table . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.220

<$$heading>

This Table consisteth of fiue collums , whereof the first on the left
hand , and the last on the right hand doe containe the degrees of the
12. signes of the Zodiaque , counting from one to 30.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.222

And the three middle collums doe containe the degrees minutes , and
seconds of declination , ouer the head of which three middle collums are
set downe the Characters of these 6. opposite signes , <font> Aries
<$$font> and <font> Libra , Taurus <$$font> and <font> Scorpio <$$font>
, <font> Gemini <$$font> and <font> Sagittarius <$$font> ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.223

and at the foote of the said middle colums are set downe the characters
of the other 6. opposite signes , that is , <font> Virgo <$$font> and
<font> Pisces , Leo <$$font> and <font> Aquarius , Cancer <$$font> and
<font> Capricornus <$$font> , for euery 2. opposit signes , as well
aboue as beneath , haue like declination the vse of which Table is thus
: BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.224

first hauing found out the degree of the Sun by the instrument before
described , or rather by some true Ephemerides , you must seeke out the
number of y=e= said degree , either in the first or last collum ,
according as the character of the signe is placed .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.225

For if the signe or character be aboue , then you must seek for the said
number in the first collum on the left hand , which numbers do discend
from 1. to 30. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.226

but if the signe bee beneath , then you must find it out in the
outermost collum on the right hand , the numbers whereof doe ascend from
1. to 30. BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.227

and the common Angle or square , standing right against the saide number
will shew you the degree , minutes and seconds of the declination ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.228

as for example , hauing found by the former instrument that the 4. day
of May the Sunne is in the 23. degree of <font> Taurus <$$font> , I
seeing the Character of <font> Taurus <$$font> to stand aboue , do seeke
my foresaid number of 23. degrees in the first collum on the left hand
, BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.229

and in the common angle or square right against that number , and vnder
the signe <font> Taurus <$$font> , I finde the declination of the Sun to
be 18. degrees 32.@ @' and 37@ @" . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.230

But this Table can@ @not serue alwaies : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.231

yea rather such tables are to bee renewed as our Astronomers say euery
30. yeres . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.232

Also you may know the dayly declination of the Sun , by helpe of the
materiall Spheare or globe : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.233

thus hauing set the Spheare at your Latitude , bring the degree of the
signe wherein the Sunne is that present day vnto the mooueable Meridian
, BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.234

and staying it there , marke whether it falleth on the South side or on
the North side of the Equinoctiall : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148R.235

<P_148V>

for if it be in any of the Northern signes , it will fall on the North
line of the Equinoctial , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.237

and if it be in any of the Southern signes , it will fall on the south
side of the Equinoctiall , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.238

and by counting the degrees vppon the Meridian , contained betwixt the
degree of the Sun and the Equinoctiall , you shall know what declination
the Sun hath that day , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.239

as for example in the latitude 52. in the yeare 1590 , the fift day of
May , I find the Sunne by the Ephemerides to be in the 23. degree and
48@ @'. of <font> Taurus <$$font> , which point I bring to the moouable
Meridian , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.240

and there staying it , I find that point to be distant from the
Equinoctial Northward 18. degrees , and certaine minutes ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.241

and so much of North declination I conclude the Sun to haue that day .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.242

<heading>

Vpon what Poles the Zodiaque turneth about , also of the Ecliptique line
and of the diuers vses thereof . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.244

Cap. 14 BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.245

<$$heading>

The Zodiaque turneth about vpon his owne proper Poles from West to East
, wherof the one being placed in the Colure of the Solstices towards the
North , is distant from the Pole Arctique 23. degrees , & 28@ @' .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.247

and the other is placed in the saide Colure towards the South , being of
like distance from the pole Antarctique , whereof the Astronomers haue a
generall rule , affirming that the distance of the two Poles of the
world from the Poles of the Zodiaque , is alwaies equall to the greatest
declination of the Sunne , which as hath been said before , is 23.
degrees and 28@ @'. as you may plainly see by the Spheare .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.248

And note that these 2. Poles are otherwise called the Poles of the
Ecliptique , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.249

for in considering the declination of the Sunne or of the Zodiaque from
the Equinoctiall , you must haue respect onely to the Ecliptique line ,
which is in the midst of the Zodiaque , and not to any other parte of
the Zodiaque . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.250

And as the Equinoctiall line sheweth the moouing of the first moouveable
, which is from East to West , so the Ecliptique line sheweth the
moouing of the second mooueable , which is from West to East , cleane
contrary to the first mooueable , the causes whereof haue beene before
declared . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.251

<heading>

<font> What other vses hath this line more than you haue already
declared . <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,148V.253

<$$heading>

<P_149R>

It hath diuers , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.256

for in this line or Circle are noted the degrees , wherewith any starre
riseth or goeth downe , either rightly or obliquely ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.257

for all the appearances of the heauens are chiefly referred to this
Circle . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.258

Againe by this circle the chiefest distinctions and parts of times , as
yeares and moneths are knowne , and also the foure seasons of the yeare
, as Spring , Summer , Autumne , and Winter .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.259

Moreouer , the obliquitie of this circle vnder which the Sunne
continually walketh , is cause that the dayes both naturall and
artificiall are vnequall . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.260

Finally , this circle doth shew the places and times of the Eclipses
both Solar and Lunar from whence this line taketh his name , of which
Eclipses we mind here briefely to treate . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.261

<heading>

Of the Eclipses both Solar and Lunar , and of the head and taile of the
Dragon , with certaine figures shewing the same .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.263

Cap. 15 BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.264

<$$heading>

<heading>

What signifieth this word Eclipse ? BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.267

<$$heading>

It is as much to say , as to want light , & to be darkened or hidden
from our sight , as when the Sun & Moone are both at one selfe time
right vnder the Ecliptique line , the one of these two lights most
commonly is Eclipsed and darkned : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.269

for there bee two Eclipses , the one of the Sunne , and the other of the
Moone , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.270

but sith that neither the Eclipse of the Sun or of the Moone doth chance
, but when they meete either in the head or taile of the Dragon , I
thinke it good to shew first what is ment by the head and tayle of the
Dragon . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.271

The Dragon then signifieth none other thing but the intersection of 2.
circles , that is to say , of the Ecliptique , & of the Circle that
carieth the Moone , called her Defferent , cutting one another in 2.
pointes , whereof that intersection which is westward when as the Moone
goeth towards the North , is called the head , and that which is
Eastwards when the Moone goeth towards the South is called the taile ,
marked with such Characters as you see in the figure following ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.272

and that parte towards the south is called of some the belly of the
Dragon . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.273

And note that the Defferent of the Moone is at no time distant from the
Ecliptique aboue 5. degrees at the most . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149R.274

<P_149V>

{COM:figure_omitted} This being presupposed , I will speake first of the
Eclipse of the Moone , and then of the Sunne , both which may be
Eclipsed either totally or in part . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149V.276

<heading>

<font> When is the Moone said to be totally eclipsed ? <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149V.278

<$$heading>

When the Sunne and Moone are opposite one to the other diametrally , and
the earth in the verie midst betweene them both ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149V.280

for the body of the earth being thicke and not transparent , casting his
shadow to that point which is opposite to the place of the Sunne , will
not suffer the Moone to receiue any light from the Sun , from whome she
alwaies boroweth her light . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149V.281

<heading>

<font> At what time is the Moone said to be diametrally opposite to the
Sunne ? <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149V.283

<$$heading>

When a right line drawne from the center of the Sunne to the center of
the Moone , passeth through the center of the earth :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149V.285

& note that euery time that she is at the ful , she is opposite to the
Sun , and yet the earth is not at euery such full diametrally betwixt
her and the sun , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149V.286

for then she should be eclipsed at euery full , which indeede can@ @not
be but when she is either in the head or taile of the Dragon .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149V.287

<heading>

<font> When is the Moone said to be eclipsed in part ? <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149V.289

<$$heading>

When the Sunne , the earth , and the Moone be met in one selfe
Diametrall line , but the Moone is declining either on the one side or
on the other , as you may plainely see by this figure following
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,149V.291

<P_150R>

{COM:figure_omitted}

But note that the Eclipses of the Moone may be vniuersal , because the
Earth is farre bigger then the Moone , and thereby able to shadow her
whole bodie . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150R.294

<heading>

<font> When is the Sunne saide to be eclipsed ? <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150R.296

<$$heading>

When the Moone is betwixt the Sunne and the Earth , which chanceth in a
Coniunction , and yet not in euery coniunction , but when it falleth
either in the head or taile of the Dragon , which may chance , as I
saide before , either totally or in part : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150R.298

totallie I say , in respect of those parts of the earth whereon the
shadow directly falleth . BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150R.299

For sith the Moone is farre lesser than the Earth , shee can@ @not
shadow all the Earth , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150R.300

and therefore the Eclipse of the Sunne can@ @not be vniuersall , but yet
to some parts of the Earth totally , and to some partly , and to other
some nothing at all , as you may plainly see by this figure following .
{COM:figure_omitted} BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150R.301

<font> Yet all the histories doe affirme that the Eclipse of the Sun was
vniuersall at the death of Christ . <$$font>
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150R.302

Yea , that was miraculous , BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150R.303

and also it was then at the full of the Moone which was also as
miraculous : BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150R.304

and therefore Dionisius {COM:"dioni"_in_a_different_font_than_"sius"} a
Senator of <font> Athens <$$font> , beholding that Eclips cryed out ,
saying <P_150V> these words , <font> Either God this day suffereth
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150V.305

or else the world must needes perish for euer <$$font> :
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150V.306

which <font> Dionisius <$$font> was the first that conuerted the <font>
Frenchmen <$$font> to the faith of Christ , doing there great miracles ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150V.307

in honour of whom was erected the rich Abbey of S. <font> Denise
<$$font> , not farre from <font> Paris <$$font> , where@ @as the Kings
and Princes of <font> France <$$font> were woont to be buried .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150V.308

<heading>

<font> How is it to be prooued that the Eclipse at Christ his death was
at the full of the Moone ? <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150V.310

<$$heading>

As well by ancient historye , as by S. <font> Augustine <$$font> , who
saith that the Iewes were woont to keepe their feast of Passouer <paren>
at which time Christ suffered <$$paren> alway at the full of the Moone .
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150V.312

<heading>

<font> If the Sun and Moone be eclipsed but in part , how are such
partes to be accounted ? <$$font> BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150V.314

<$$heading>

By the parts of the Diameter of the bodies of those two Planets ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150V.316

for the Astronomers doe diuide the Diameter as well of the Sunne , as of
the Moone into 12 , and some into 24 parts , which they call points ,
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150V.317

and therefore are woont to say , that the Sunne or Moone are darkned or
eclipsed 7. points , 8. points , 9. points , &c.
BLUNDEV-1597-E2-P1,150V.318

