<BEGIN_boethel-1593-e2-p1>

<P_8>

<heading>

IV . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.4

<$$heading>

Knowest thou al this , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.6

and yet hast forgotten the` ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.7

art thou the Ass to the Lute ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.8

heare and remembar If thou Looke . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.9

For thy Curars ayde , discover thy wound . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.10

Than I gathering my mynd to his ful strengh , haue I yet nide of warning
? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.11

hathe not the sowernis of Cruel fortune Ouertopt me by her self alone !
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.12

doth not the view of this place the moue ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.13

Is not this the shop , wiche surist seat in all my inward romes for the`
I chose ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.14

me which by me oft sytting , of science diuine & humain matters thou
disputedst ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.15

was this thy habite ? was this thy Looke ? when with the` I serched
natures secretes ? when to me with ruler thou discribedst the starres
wayes , & framedst our woorkes & wholle trade of lyfe after the trade of
celestiall order . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.16

Shall we receaue such rewardes for obeyeng the` ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.17

When thou thy self this sentence paste of Platos mouth : " that happy
were those common welthes , if eyther wisdom studiers ruld them , or
their Rulers wisdom imbraced . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.18

Thou by the self_same mans mouth didst teache that this was the
necessariest cause , for wyse men to rule the common wellth , leste that
the raynes therof , left to the wicked & harmfull citizens , might
breede the plague & harme to good . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.19

This autoritie I following , which in thy secret leysure thou taughtest
me , made me wish to tourne for Action of com~on Rule .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,8.20

God & thy self doe witnes beare , which he inspirde to wyse mens myndes
, that no care brought me to magistrate Rule , but common care for all
good men . Whence greate & vnappeased discorde with wicked folkes I
<P_9> had , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.21

And that freedom that conscience libertie {COM:sic} gaue me for to saue
right , I preserved , dispising the mightie@ @s offence .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.22

How oft have I crossed Conigastus , vsing violence to echo mans weke
fortune ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.23

How many tymes haue I overthrowne Triguyla , In court cheefe officer ,
from his begon & almost ended iniurye ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.24

How oft haue I protected poore men , whom the vnpunished auarice of
Barberous , with infinite slanders vexed , throwing my autoritie against
their perills ! BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.25

Never could any man drawe me from Law to Iniury .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.26

I sorowed for the provinces misfortunes , wrackt by private ravins and
publick taxes , no lesse than they that suffered them .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.27

Whan Campania province seemed afflicted through want in tyme of greatest
famyne , & such as could not be exprest , when buying & selling was
forbyd , I began a quarrell against the pretorian Ruler , for cause of
common good . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.28

I straue with him , the King knowing it , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.29

& wan it that no sale were made . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.30

Paulin the consul , whose goodes the palatine dog with hope & ambition
had deuourde , from the gapers Jawes I drew . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.31

I opposde myself to the hate of Ciprian the bakbyter , that the payne of
the preiudical accusation might not fall to the share of Albinus the
consul . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.32

Have not I , suppose you , sharpned quarrels against me ynough ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.33

and ought to have ben defended among the rest , euin them that for loue
of Justice among the Courtiers might haue saued me , by which I should
be safer ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.34

By what accusers am I now stricken ? of whom Basilius , fallen from
princes seruice , is driven to slaunder of our name , for dettes sake .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.35

When by Kinges Judgement a censure was giuen for banishment , for
Opilion & Gaudensius , for their Iniuries & many wronges , And when they
denyeng to obeye , saued them selves with defence of holy Sanctuary , &
that the King knowing , proclaymde that without they departed from
Ravenna towne at the prescribed daye , they should be driven out with
their forheades marked . What might be thought to crosse such seuiritie
? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,9.36

but yet in that <P_10> daye , themsellves deferring the slaunder ,
touched me . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.37

What tho ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.38

hath our science deseruid this ? or their forerun~ing condemnaco~n made
their accusers Just ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.39

So fortune was nothing ashamde , if not of th@ @accused innocency , yet
of th@ @accusers basenes ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.40

But what is our faulte ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.41

will ye seeke the principall ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.42

we are sayde to wish the Senates surety . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.43

The waye you desire , a sclaunderer , lest he might delay his Lessons by
which he might make me guilty of treason , we are accused to have letted
him . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.44

What then think you , o` pedagogue myne ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.45

shall we deny the facte , that shame the` we might not ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.46

but I wolde , & neuer to will , will leave . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.47

shall we confesse it ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.48

but shall the worke of hindering the sclaunderer , ceasse .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.49

Shall I call it a faulte , to wish the surety of that state ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.50

He himself , by his own decrees against me , hath made this vnlawfull ;
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.51

but folie , that lyes euer against her self , the worth of thinges can
neuer change . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.52

Nether Lawfull is it for me by Socrates Rule , to hyde trouth or graunte
a lye . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.53

But thus what it is , to yours & wyse folkes iudgement I leave the
censure , whose manner of matter & trouth , that posterite may knowe ,
to my silent memory haue com~itted . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.54

for as for false supposed lettres in which I am accusde to hope for
Romayne libertie , what bootes it speake ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.55

whose fraude had lyen all open if I might have vsde my accusers
confession , which in all matters beares greatest swaye :
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.56

for what left liberty may be hoped for ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.57

that weld god there were any ! BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.58

I had aunswered then as Canius did , who accused by Caius Cesar ,
Germanicus sonne , to be guilty of the coniuration against him : " Yf I
had knowen , thou hadste not knowen . " In which matter , sorow hath
not so duld my senses , to complayn of wicked men for dooiug mischefe
against vertue , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.59

but rather much wonder how they could hope performe it .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.60

For to will the worst , perchaunce might be our faulte ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.61

but to haue powre against Innocency , for ech wretch to doo what he
conceaues , god being Looker on , seemes monstrouse . Whence then is a
question not with_out cause , of thy familiar : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,10.62

" Yf there be a god , " quoth he , " whence <P_11> coms the euill ? The
good from whence , yf he be not ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.63

But it may be lawfull ynough for wicked men , that thursted the blud of
all the senate & all good men , to seeke our wrak , whom they haue seene
defend the good & saue the Senate . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.64

But did we deserue the lyke of the fathers or no ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.65

You remember , I suppose , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.66

for what I sayde or did present , you directed me ;
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.67

You call to mynde , quoth I , At Verona , when the King ; greedy of
common fall , did stryve to bring the treason layde to Albinus , to the
Senates order , how I defended then the innocency of all the Senat with
most assurance of my owne danger . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.68

You know all this that true it is I tell , & that no boste I make of any
my prayse . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.69

for th@ @assurance of a graunting conscience diminishith it self in a
sorte , as oft as bosting receauith rewarde of fame .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.70

But you see what end my Innocency hath . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.71

for true vertues rewarde we suffer false factes payne .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.72

for whose manifest confession of wicked facte , euer made all Judges so
agree in seueritie , that eyther the faulte of humaine witt , or th@
@incertayne state of fortune , may not leave out somewhat ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.73

Yf we had bene sayd to haue burned the sacred houses , to haue slayne
the preestes with wicked sworde , & bred destruction of all good men ,
the sentence had punished present confessing & convicted .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.74

Now allmost fyve_hundred_thousand paces of , though farre of & vnwearyed
, we are condemnde to death & exile , for our ready indeuors for the
Senates good : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.75

O woorthy men , for such a faulte none of them shall be convinced .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.76

the value of whose guiltynes , they themselves haue seene that brought
it : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.77

which to dym with mixture of som wickednes , they have false belyed me ,
to have stayned my conscience with sacrilege for Ambition sake .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.78

And thou thy self grafted in me , all desyre of mortall thinges , from
seate of my mynde hast pluckt , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.79

for vnder thy sight ther was no place for sacrilege faulte ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,11.80

for in to my eares thou didst instill , & to my thoughtes this
pythogorian <P_12> worde , Obey thy God . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.81

neyther did it becom me to seeke the help of vilest spirites , whom thou
hadst framed to such an excellency , that lyk to god thou madest them .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.82

Agayne , the Innocent closet of my house , resorte of honest frendes ,
my holy lawes fath=r= Symmacus , And for his deedes reuerenced ,
defendes vs from all suspicion of this cryme . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.83

But O mishap , They beleeuid all this cryme , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.84

& for this synne we were confyned , for that we were indewed with thy
lesson , & framed of thy condition : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.85

So bootes it not ynough , that thy reuerence should protecte me , but
that withall thou shouldest be vexed with my offence .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.86

But this is greatest heape to our mishap , that the valuing of most ,
regardes more fortunes event , than causes merit ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.87

And Judgith that best prouided , that felicitie recomendith . which
makes , that true waight first leaveth the vnhappy man .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.88

What now the rumors be , how variable , & increasing their Judgmentes ,
to remember , it greeves me . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.89

This only can I saye , that the last burden of fortune is , that whilest
faultes be layde to the wretchedest charge , they are beleeuid to
deserue that is layde to their charge . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.90

And my self bereued of all my goodes , spoyld of my dignities , spotted
in my fame , for benefitt , receaue punishment .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.91

Me thinkes I see the wicked shops of vilest men flowing with Joye &
mirth . And euery wickedst man overlayeng me with new fraudes of
accusation . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.92

I see the good lye down prostrate for feare of my fall , Ech wicked man
bolde vnpunishd to faulte , To doo the which thorow rewardes be styrred
, but Innocent folkes not only of surety , but of defence depriued .
Wherefore thus may I exclaime : {COM:verse_omitted}
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,12.93

<P_15>

<heading>

V . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.96

<$$heading>

This when with contynuall wo I had burst out , seeing her with mylde
countenance nothing mooued with my mones : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.98

" when the` , " quoth she , " sad & wayling I sawe , straight a wretch &
exule , I knew the` . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.99

but , how farre of thy banishment was , but that thou toldste , I knew
not . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.100

but thou , how farre from countrey art not expulst , but strayed ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.101

yet if thou hadst it rather be thought expulst , thou thy self haste
throwne it . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.102

for that for other was neuer lawfull than the` , to doo .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.103

for if thou remember from what countrey thou cammest , not guyded as
Athens was , by rule of multitude , but one King & Ruler , that Joyeth
more in subiectes nomber than their expulse : with whose raynes to be
guyded & Justice obeyde , is greatest libertie .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.104

Art thou ignorant of the auncientest law of thy Citie , which commaundz
that no man may be banisht from it , Whoso choosith there to build a
seate ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.105

for who so in her trench & suerty is conteynde , no feare shall haue ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.106

nor exul deserues to be . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.107

but who so leaves to will her habitation , wantes allso deseruith ;
wherfore thy Looke , not this place , so much moouith me ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.108

nor doo I desyre my shops walles adornid with yuory or glasse , rather
than the seate of the mynde , In which I placed not bookes , but that
that gives them price , sentences of myne owne woorkes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.109

Thou haste rehersed truth of thy desert for common good ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.110

but little hast thou told of nombers greate thou hast receaued .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.111

Thou hast remembred thinges knowen to all , obiected against the` ,
eyther for good or falshode . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.112

Of mischefz or fraudes of thy slaunderers rightly thou haste straightly
touched , that they might the better & farder be knowen with prayse of
vulgare folk . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.113

Vehemently hast thou invayde against the Senates Iniustice .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,15.114

Of our complaynt haste moned , & bewaylde the wrack of <P_16>
estymations Loste . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,16.115

The last thy wo agaynst fortune invayed , complayning that she equalled
not desertes rewarde . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,16.116

In end of thy raging muse , requirste a graunte that the same peace
which ruleth the heauen , might so rule th@ @earth .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,16.117

But for that a greate heape of affections ouerwhelme the` ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,16.118

& sorow , ire , wo , diuersly distractes the` , such as thy mynde is now
, BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,16.119

as yet thy remedies be no greater . Wherfore easyer lett vs vse a while
, that such as by growing paynes in swelling hath bene hardenid , that
they may beare more sharp receites , with a soft touch be doulced . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,16.120

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_17>

<heading>

VI . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.124

<$$heading>

First then suffre me with questions few thy mynde state to touche , & it
to prooue , that better may I know of thy cure the way ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.126

" Ask me , " quoth I , " according to thy will , what thou woldest my
aunsweres be . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.127

" Then she : " thinkes thou that this world is wheeled by rash & happing
chaunce ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.128

or dost suppose that Reasons rule is in it ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.129

" I can no way think , " quoth I , " that with so rash chaunce , so
certain thinges are moued , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.130

but I know that God y=e= maker hit guides , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.131

nor euer shall com day that from truth of this opinion shall draw me .
" BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.132

" Is it so ? " quoth she , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.133

" A little afore this thou hast tolde BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.134

& hast bemonde that men were so furr from godes care deprived ;
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.135

for with the rest thou art nothing moued , but that with reason they
were led . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.136

Good Lord , I wonder much , why placed in so right a mynde thou canst be
sick ! BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.137

But let vs serch a little hyar : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.138

I wote not what , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.139

somewhat lackes I trowe . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.140

But tell me , for that thou doutst not the world by god be rulde , seest
thou by what raynes it is guided ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.141

" Scarce doo I know , " said I , " the meaning of the question ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.142

ne yet can I aunswer thy demandes , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.143

was I ignorant that somewhat lackt ? by which lik cliff of Ramper
shrinking , the woes disease into the mynde is crepte . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.144

" But tell me , dost thou remember , what is the end of all , And
whither tended the intent of all nature ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.145

" I have hard it aunswered , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.146

but my memory dampt sorow hath made . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,17.147

" But whom dost thou know , whence all <P_18> proceedes ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.148

" I know , " quoth I , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.149

" And God is he , " I aunswere . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.150

" How can it be then , that , begynning knowen , the end thereof thou
knowest not ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.151

But this is the fashon of troubles , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.152

& such is theyr wont , that mooue they may a man from his place ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.153

but ouerthrowe or wholly pluck vp , they can not .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.154

But this wold I haue the aunswer , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.155

Remembrest thou thy self a man ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.156

" What els , " quoth I , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.157

" should I not remember that ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.158

" Canst thou tell me , what man is then ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.159

" Dost thou ask me this , whither that I know that I am a reasonable
creature & mortall ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.160

I know it , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.161

& that to be I must confesse . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.162

" Then she : " knowest thou not thy self ought els ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.163

" Nothing . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.164

" But I know , " quoth she , " that the greatest cause of thy disease ,
is to have left to know what thou art . wherfore eyther fully have I
founde the reason of thy sicknes , or a wage to reconcile the` home
agayne . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.165

for being confounded through thy obliuion , thou hast bewaylde thy self
an exul & spoyled of thine owne goodes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.166

For being ignorant of thy end , thou hast supposde mighty & happy the
wicked folkes & lewde , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.167

& forgetting by what brydle the world is guided , The eventus of fortune
thou supposest with_out a guide to run : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.168

Great causes not only to disease , but to ruine to .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.169

But thanked be thy hoste , that nature hath not yet wholly destroyde
the` . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.170

We haue the greatful foode for thy helth , thy true opinion of the
worldes Rule , whom thou belieuest not subiect to chaunce , but ruled by
diuine Reason . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.171

Feare nought therfore . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.172

Allready from this little sparke thy vitall heate is sprong .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.173

but because the tyme is not yet for stronger remedyes , & that the
nature of the myndes is such , that when they haue cast away the true ,
are indued with false opinion , by which a springing darknes of woe
confoundes that true sight , I will assay a while therfore with
lenitiues , & meane fomentations to skant them , that darknes of
deceauing affection remoouid , the shyne of true light mayst obtayne .
" BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,18.174

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_20>

<heading>

THE SECOND BOOKE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.178

I . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.179

<$$heading>

After this , a while she pawsde , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.181

and when my heede by my modest silence she markt , thus she began :
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.182

" If alltogither thy cause of greefe & state I know , thou pynest with
the affection & want of former fortune . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.183

She so much changyth the state of thy mynde , as thou ymaginest
ouerthrowes hit . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.184

I vnderstand the many shaped deceites of her wonder ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.185

and so farre exercisith a flattering familiaritie with them she myndes
deceaue , till she confound with intollerable woe , whom without hope
she hath left . Whose nature , conditions , & desert , if thou remember
, thou shalt know that thou hast nether had nor lost by her any thing
ought worth ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.186

but , as I suppose , I shall not neede to labour much to call these
thinges to thy memory . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.187

For thou art wont when she was present & flattered the` , to invay
against her with manly woordes in chassing her from our doores ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.188

with thy sentence invaydst her . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.189

But euery souden change neuer haps without a greate streame of the mynde
. BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.190

So doth it bifal , that thou a while hast parted from thy ease .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.191

But tyme it is for thee to drawe & taste som sweeter thing and pleasant
, which passing to the inward partes may make a way for behoofuller
draughtes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.192

Let persuasion of sweete Rhetorik assist the` , which then goith in
rightest path only , when she leaves not our precepts ;
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.193

and with this musick the guest of our home sowndes now easyer , now
weightyer notes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.194

What is it , therfore , O man , that hath throwne the` down to wo &
wayle ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.195

Thou hast seene , I beleue , som new vnwonted thing .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.196

Thou , yf thou thinkest that toward the` fortune be changed , art
deceaud . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.197

This was euer her manner , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.198

this was her nature . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,20.199

She hath euer kept <P_21> toward the rather her own constancy in her
mutabilitie . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.200

Such one was she , whan she beguild the` , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.201

& did deceaue with allurementes of false felicitie .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.202

Thou hast vnderstode now , the doutfull face of the blynde Goddesse ,
which though she hyde her self to others , hath made her self to the`
manifest . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.203

Yf thou allow her vse her fashon , complayne not therof ;
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.204

yf thou hatest her treason , skorne her BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.205

& cast her of , that so falsely beguylde the` ;
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.206

for she that now is cause of thy woe , the self same ought be of thy
quyett . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.207

She hath left the` , whom no man can be sure that will not leave him .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.208

Canst thou beleeue flyeng felicitie precious , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.209

and can thy present luck be deere ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.210

never faythfull in abode , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.211

and when she partes bringes nought but woe : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.212

And yf nether she can be kepte with iudgement , and whan she flyes ,
makes them wretched , what ought els meanith her flight than a show of a
comming calamitie ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.213

For alone it suffisith not to beholde what afore our eyes is sett ,
wisdom the end of all measures . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.214

for her mutabilitie in bothe , nether makes her fortunes threates feard
, nor her beguylinges wisched . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.215

Lastly , thou must paciently beare what so befalles in fortunes Courte ,
whan once to her yoke thy neck thou bowest ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.216

but if thou wilt prescribe her lawe , to byde or parte , whom thou hast
freely chosen thy gouuernesse , shoulst {COM:sic} thou not be iniurious
, and sharp thy luck with thy impatience , which change thou canst not ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.217

Yf thou woldst throwe the sayles to wynde , not whither will wolde , but
whither the blast doth dryve , so furr thou goest :
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.218

Yf thou doo lend the forrowes seede , thou must beare with deere yeeres
and barren : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.219

yf to fortunes guide thou hast betaken the` , thou must obey thy Dames
conditions . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.220

Woldst thou stryve to staye the course of a turning wheele ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.221

But thou of all mortall men the foolisht , if hap byde , it leavith to
be chaunce . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,21.222

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_22>

<heading>

II . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.226

<$$heading>

A few woordes wold I pleade with thee on fortunes syde .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.228

Mark thou then whither she call the not in plea .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.229

" Why me , o man ! guilty dost thou make of daily quarrells ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.230

What wrong doo I thee ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.231

What goodes from thee haue I drawne ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.232

Pleade thou against me afore any Judge for the possession of thy goodes
& dignities . And if thou showest that any mortall man haue propertie
of any of them that thou pretendst thyne owne , that thou ask ,
willingly I will yelde . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.233

When Nature brought the` out of thy motheres womb , naked of all & needy
, I vp tooke the` , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.234

and nourisht the` with my substance , & that that breedes now thy rage ;
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.235

with speedy fauour carefully I bred the` , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.236

and did indue with plenty & glory of all such thinges as were my owne .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.237

Now is it tyme , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.238

now may I , if I list , draw back my hand : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,22.239

yeld thankes for <P_23> vsing not thyne owne .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.240

Thou hast no lawe for quarrell , as if thyne owne lost thou hadst .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.241

Why sighest thou than ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.242

With no violence haue we vsed the` . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.243

goodes , honour , & all such lyke , of right myne own .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.244

My maydes knowes their Lady , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.245

with me they cum , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.246

& whan I parte , giue place . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.247

Boldly I affirme , if thyne they were that lost thou complaynst at all ,
thou hast not lost them . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.248

Am I alone forbyd my right to vse ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.249

To heauens is lawfull to bring thee pleasant dayes , & dark the same
with misty nightes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.250

To yeare is lawfull - adorne the earthe's face with floures and frute ,
Som tyme with cloudes and coldes confound . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.251

The Sea may with quyet calme be pleased , now terrible by waues &
tempest . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.252

the vnsaciable desyre of men , shall it bynd vs to constancy furr from
our condition ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.253

This is our powre , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.254

this contynuall plan we make . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.255

The wheele by turning Rolle we whirle , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.256

and Joye the lowest change with hyest , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.257

and hyest makes the same to matche . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.258

Com vp & yo=u= will , but on that condition , that ye counte it not
iniury to descend whan the fashon of my dalyauce requires it .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.259

Wert thou ignorant of my conditions ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.260

Knewest thou not Cresus , king of Lydia , a little before fearful to
Cyrus , straight way wretched man bequeathed to flamy heate , defended
from heauen by a mist sent downe ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.261

Dost thou not remember how Paul shed many an honest teare for the
calamitie of Perseus king , whom he tooke ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.262

What does Tragedies clamour more bewayle , than a man turning happy
Raigne by blynde fortune's stroke ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.263

Hast thou not learnt that there lay in Jupiters thressholl twoe barrells
fyld one with yll , the other of good ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.264

What yf thou suckest vp more largely of the better part ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.265

What yf I left the` not all alone ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.266

What if this my right mutabilitie haue bred the` cause to hope for
better ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.267

But be not thou amasde , that sett in the common raigne of all other ,
to lyve by thine owne lawe desirest . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,23.268

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_24>

<heading>

III . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,24.272

<$$heading>

Yf fortune for her self had spoken thus to the` , thou hadst no cause to
grudge agaynst her , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,24.274

but if ought ther be wherby thy quarrell by law thou canst defend , tell
it thou must ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,24.275

place to speake we giue . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,24.276

Than fayre thes be in show , " quoth I , " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,24.277

florist {COM:sic} over Retorik and musik , with the honny of <P_25> ther
sweetnes ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.278

they only delite whan they be hard . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.279

but deeper sense of yll the wretched hath . Wherfore , when these haue
don , to sounde our eares , ingraffed wo our mynde oppressith .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.280

" And she : " So it is , " sayd she , " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.281

for these be not yet remedyes for thy disease ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.282

but serues for bellowes against the cure of thy resisting sorowe .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.283

for when I see thine , I shall apply such remedyes as shall pearce
deeper . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.284

But leste thou shouldst suppose thy self a wretch , Hast thou forgotten
the tyme & meane of thy felicitie ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.285

I leave vntolde how desolate of parentes , the care of greatest men
fosterd the` , & chosen to affinitie of the cities Rulers , And that
kynde that is of kyndred the neerest ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.286

first thou wert deere afore thou wert next . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.287

Who wold not haue famed the` most happy with so greate honour of
father_in_lawe , of wyfes modestie , and seasonable obtayning of a man
childe ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.288

I ouerpasse <paren> for so I will common thinges <$$paren> dignities
receauid in youth denyed to elder folkes : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.289

it pleasith me , That this is happed to the singuler heape of thy
felicitie . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.290

yf any frute of mortall thinges may beare a waight of blessednes , can
the memory of such a daye be scrapte out by any waight of growing harmes
? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.291

When thou hast seene twoo Consuls at once , thy children , accompanyed
to with nomber of the fathers , & peeples Joye , when they sitting in
the Court as Curules , thou the Orator of kinges prayse , deseruest thou
not glory of wit & eloquence , when amidst them both thou satisfidest
the expectation of consuls with all the rowte , with a liberall tryomph
? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.292

Thou flatteredst fortune , as I suppose , while she stroked the` ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.293

and cherisht as her darling . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.294

Thou tokest away the rewarde that to priuate man she neuer lent afore .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.295

Will yo=u= now spurne at her ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.296

hathe she with a heavy eye now strayned the` .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,25.297

Yf <P_26> thou doo wayen the nomber and trade of plesant & wofull , thou
canst not yet deny thy self happy : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,26.298

yf therfore thou thinkst not thy self fortunate for seeming Joyes by
past , no cause why thou thy self a wretch suppose :
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,26.299

for passe they doo that wofull now be thought .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,26.300

Camst thou now first into the stage of lyfe , of a souden , & stranger ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,26.301

Supposest thou any constancy to be in humayne matters , whan speedy
houre a man himself vndoes ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,26.302

for tho rare credit of abode owght happing chaunce to have , yet the
last daye of lyfe may serue for fortune that remaynes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,26.303

What meanest thou to speake ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,26.304

Wilt thou leave her dyeng , or she thee flyeng ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,26.305

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_27>

<heading>

IV . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.309

<$$heading>

Than I : " truth hast thou told me , o` of all vertue the nursse ;
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.311

nor can I blame the speedy course of my prosperitie .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.312

But this is it , that considering , most vexith me , that in all
fortunes aduersitie I finde this most miserable , to haue bene happy .
" BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.313

" That thou , " quoth she , " beares payne for false opinion , that
Rightly thou oughtest not on matters themsellves impose .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.314

for if the vayne name of chauncing felicitie mooue the` , Repete with me
with how many & greate thou aboundest . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.315

Yf the preciousest of all thou didst possesse in fortunes Censure , that
to thy self vnharmd or broken be kepte , canst thou when best thinges be
retaynde , complayne by right , of yll hap ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.316

Safe doth remayne Symmachus thy father in lawe , of all mankynde most
worth , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.317

And that with price of lyfe thou careles should not buye ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.318

that man made of wisdom and vertue , sure of his own , mones for thy
wronges . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.319

Thy wyfe of modest wit , excelling for her shamfastnes ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.320

& that all her guiftes in short I may include , her father lyuith , I
saye , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.321

& keepith thy spirit , though hatyng lyfe , from which deprived , my
self will graunte skanten thy felicitie , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.322

And for lack of the` , with teares & woe pynith .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.323

What shall I speake of thy children Consuls , whose fathers &
grandfathers witt appeerith as their yong yeeres permitt .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.324

Whan then the cheefest care for mortall men is lyfe to keepe , o` happy
thou , yf know thou couldst thy good , to whom such thinges do hap , as
no man doubtes the deerest thinges in lyfe . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.325

Drye vp therfore thy teares . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.326

Fortune hath not yet hated all men , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.327

nether hath to greeuous a tempest ouerwhelmed the` ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.328

for Ankers holde remaynes , which nether suffers present comfort nor
comming hope to leave the` . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.329

" And let them holde , " quoth I , " fast still , I pray .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.330

for they enduring , howsoever the world goes , out we shall wade .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,27.331

But you see , " quoth I , " how much <P_28> honour we have lost . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.332

Then she : " we will help the` , yf thou be not weary of all thy lott .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.333

But I can not abyde such your delytes as depriued of som of thy
felicitie , wayling & carefull thou complaynst .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.334

for what man is of stayde felicitie , that quarrels not with som degre
of his estate ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.335

Carefull is the condition of mans goodes , which eyther never all happs
, or euer bydes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.336

This man hath honour , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.337

but his blotted blud shames him . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.338

This man nobilitie makes famous , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.339

but inclosed with neede , rather vnknowen he choosith :
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.340

An other man having both , the sole lyfe bewayles :
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.341

An other for mariage happy , childles keeps his goodes for an others
heire . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.342

Som Joye with children , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.343

with teares bemoanes the faultes of sonne or daughter .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.344

no man therfore easely agrees with his fortunes state .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.345

generall to all , that the vntryed knowes not , th@ @expert abhorrith .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.346

Add to withall that ech man hath a most delicate sense of his own
felicitie , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.347

and without all hap to his beck , throwen down he is , with any vnwontid
aduersitie , though in leste matters . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.348

Such tryfles they be that drawes from happyest men the top of bliss .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.349

How many be there , supposest thou , that wold think them neerest heauen
, if skraps of thy fortune hap to ther share ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.350

This place which thou thy bannishmeut callst , is the inhabitantes
countrey . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.351

so nothing is wretched , but when it is thought so ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.352

& blessed is all luck that haps with sufferers ease .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.353

What man is so happy that hath giuen hand to impatience , that wisshith
not his fortune changed ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.354

The sweetnes of mans lyfe , with how many bytternesses is it mixt !
which if they seemid to the enioyer delitefull when he wolde , it is gon
, BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.355

therfore he may not keepe it . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.356

The blessednes of mortall goodes plainly is miserable , that nether
perpetually duryth with the contented , nor wholly delites the afflicted
. BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.357

Why do ye mortall men seeke outwardly your felicitie within yo=u= ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.358

Error and blyndnes confoundes yo=u= . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.359

I will shew the shortly the thressholl of thy felicitie .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,28.360

Is there to the` ought more <P_29> precious than thy selfe ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.361

" nothing , " quoth I . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.362

" Then if thou be wise , thou shalt possesse that nether thou canst lose
, nor fortune take away . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.363

And that thou mayste knowe felicitie not to stand in happing chaunces ,
considir it this . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.364

Yf happynes be the greatest good of nature lyuing by reason , nor hit
the greatest good that may be taken away , the cause hit
{COM:incoherent_structure} doth exceede that may not so ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.365

It is manifest , that fortunes change can not attayn to the getting of
bliss . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.366

Besydes , whom falling felicitie caryes , eyther knowith her ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.367

or seeth her mutabilitie . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.368

Yf he be ignorant , what happy luck can blynde felicitie haue ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.369

Yf he know it , he must needes feare to lose that he is sure can not be
kepte . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.370

His contynuall feare then , depriuith his happynes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.371

or if he haue lost , will he not care for it ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.372

for hit should be a slender good that a man wold easely lose .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.373

And because thou art the same that art persuaded , and holdes it sure by
many demonstrations , mens myndes not to be mortall , and when it is
playne , that chauncing felicitie with bodies death is finished , no man
can doubte , Can this bring felicitie , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.374

but rather all mortall folkes in misery by deathes end is brought .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.375

Yf many we knowe to haue sought the frute of blessednes , not only by
death , but by woes & tormentes , for that how can the present lyfe make
them happy , whom miserable tyme passed could not ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,29.376

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_30>

<heading>

V . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,30.380

<$$heading>

" But because the fomentations of my reason haue entred in the` , I
suppose I must vse som stronger remedies . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,30.382

Go to . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,30.383

Yf now the giftes of fortune be not fleeting & changeable , what is ther
that eyther thou canst make thyne , or if thou seest & perceuist , wilt
not dispise ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,30.384

Are riches eyther thyne , or by their nature pretious ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,30.385

what is the golde therof ? but heape of gathered pence ? and such as
shynes more with their spending than with their heapes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,30.386

Hatefull men doth Auarice mocke , but bountie noble .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,30.387

And if it can not byde by a man that is giuen to an other , Than monny
is most pretious , when turnd to others by liberall vse , hath lost the
<P_31> possession . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.388

The same , if but with one abyde , from how many it be pluckt , the rest
it leaves full needy . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.389

The fame therof fills many mens eares , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.390

but Riches not distributed may not passe to many : which when it is don
, they must make poore whom they leave . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.391

O skant & needy riches , which all to haue is not lawfull for many , &
com not to any one without they begger of the rest .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.392

Doo Jewels luster drawe thyne eyes ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.393

Yf any beauty they haue , it is the stones light , not mens ; which I
muse why men so admire . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.394

for what is there that wantes a spirit and lymmes partage , that Justly
may seeme fayre to the myndes and reasons nature ? which tho as
Creators goodes & his diuisions , may draw som later beauty , placed
vnder your worth , no way deserue your wonder .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.395

Doo sick mens palenes please you ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.396

What els ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.397

for it is a fayre portion of a goodly woork . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.398

So somtymes we delite in face of smothest sea :
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.399

So doo we vew {COM:sic} the heauen , the starres , sonne & moone .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.400

Doo any of these touch the` ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.401

Darest thou boste at any of their lusters ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.402

Shalt thou be paynted out for the florishing springes sake ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.403

or shall thy plenty increase to sommer frutes ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.404

Why art thou drawne with vayne Joyes ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.405

Why dost thou cherish others goodes for thyne ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.406

Fortune shall neuer make those thyne , that nature hath made other
folkes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.407

The earthes frutes doutles be due to best nourishment .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.408

Yf thou wilt fill the neede that Nature Requires , thou needest not
seeke fortunes plenty . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.409

for with few or little nature is contented . Whose ynough if thou wilt
make to much , that noyfull & vnpleasant to taste will make .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.410

But now , Thou thinkest it beautifull to shyne with diuers garmentes ,
whose show yf it please the eye , eyther they will wonder at nature of
the substance , or the witt of the Craftes_man .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,31.411

But shall the long trayne of many servantes happyn the` , who if they be
of vile condition , it is an yll <P_32> burden for the house , & most
foe to his Lord : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.412

but if good they be , how canst thou sett other mens vertue among thy
goodes ? by which all , It is playne seene , that those thou reckenst
for thy goodes , are none of thyne : In which , if ther be no beauty got
, what is it that thou waylest for losse , or Joyest to haue ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.413

If by nature they be fayre , what carest thou ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.414

for such thinges of themselves separated from thy substance should haue
pleased . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.415

for precious they be not to haue com among thy ryches ;
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.416

but because they were precious , thou chosedst rather place them among
them . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.417

Why , lack you fortunes exclamation ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.418

I beleeue you seeke to beate away beggery with plenty .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.419

But this happes awry , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.420

for ye had neede of many helps to preserve the variety of deere goodes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.421

And this is true , that they neede many , that possesse muche .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.422

And agayne they lack leste , that mesure their own abundance by natures
necessitie , not Ambitions greedynes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.423

But is it so ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.424

Is ther no proper good ingraft in yo=u= of your own , that yo=u= should
seeke it in outward & meane matters ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.425

Is the world so changed , that the diuine Creature for Reason sake
should no otherwise florish , but that it neede possession of dom ware ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.426

And all other thinges contented be with their owne ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.427

but we lyke god of mynde , shall we take the ornamentes of excellent
nature from basse thinges ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.428

nor shall not vnderstand how much therby we Iniure our Creatour .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.429

He wold have vs exceede all earthly things , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.430

but yo=u= throwe your worth among basest stuff .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.431

For if euery mans possession seemes more deere that it is his owne ,
when the meanest thinges your own you judge , to them yo=u= yeld you
with your prising , which not without desert happs .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.432

For this is the state of humayn nature , that then it exceedes all other
, whan it self it knowes , but is made baser than very beastes , if to
know it self it leave . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.433

For naturall it is for other beastes not know themsellves ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.434

In man it is a vice . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.435

How farre stretchith your errour , which doo supposte to be deckt with
other mens ornamentes ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,32.436

For yf of outward thinges <P_33> any lyke be had , those be praysde from
whence they cam : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,33.437

but if ought ther be hid or vnknowen , bydes in his own spot .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,33.438

But I deny that is good , that harmes the hauer .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,33.439

Doo I saye vntruth ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,33.440

No , wilt thou saye . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,33.441

And riches oft haue harmed their owners , whan ech wicked man <paren>
and therfore greedier of others goodes <$$paren> hath thought him only
woorthyest , that hath obtaynd {COM:preceding_word_"obtaynd"_emended}
golde or Jewells . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,33.442

Thou that the speare and sword carefully hast feared , if wandering
empty man , of lyfe the path hadst enterd , afore a theefe woldest sing
O beautifull hap of mortall goodes , which when thou hast taken , sure
hath left the` ! " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,33.443

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_34>

<heading>

VI . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,34.447

<$$heading>

" What shal I dispute of Dignities and rule , wiche you , ignorant of
true worthe and power , with the skies do mache ? wiche happening to
any wicked man , what Etnas fire with brusting flames , or what deluge
suche ruine makes ! BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,34.449

Surely , as I thinke you remember , how Consulz rule , beginar of
liberty , for ther pride our fathers soght to put downe , who for like
faulte out of the citie the name of kings abolisshed .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,34.450

but if sometime , as seldom haps , honors in Good men be bestowed , what
elz in them doth please than vsars goodnis ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,34.451

So haps , that honour is not giuen to vertue for her worth , but vertue
esteemd by dignitie . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,34.452

But what is this , your craved and beautifull force ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,34.453

Do yo=u= not see how earthly be <P_35> the bestes that yo=u= Rule ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.454

for euin among the myse , yf ye see any one chalinging rule or
gouuernment aboue the rest , what a laughter doo ye mooue !
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.455

But what if ye haue respect to the body ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.456

what can be weaker than man , whom somtyme the byt of a flye , somtyme
the passage into any secret parte may destroye ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.457

How farre ought any man stretch the Rule but on the body alone and his
circumstances , I meane fortune her self ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.458

will you euer guide ought with free mynde ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.459

& will ye remooue the same sticking to her self by good reason , from
the state of her own quiet ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.460

Whan a tyrant thought to afflicte a poore man with his tormentes to
confesse the knowers of a conspiracy against him , his tongue he byt
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.461

& threw away , throwing it to the face of the wicked tyrant :
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.462

So the torture that he supposde to make stuff for his cruelty , a wise
man made for his vertue . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.463

for what is it that any man can doo to an other , that to be don to
himself can he not beare ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.464

Bucidides , we heare , was wont his guestes to kyll , slayne himself by
Hercules his host . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.465

Regulus cast many prisoners into yrons in the Punik warr ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.466

but straight himself sett handes on victorerers chaynes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.467

Dost thou think his powre ought , what himself may , can not lett that
an other should doo him ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.468

Besides , if euin in Souueraynties & powres , there should be any
naturall & proper good , neuer should they hap to wicked .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.469

for contrarieties seld consorte . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.470

Nature denyes that disagreins be Joyned . Wherfore when playn it is
that many men beare greate office , this is sure , that of their nature
they be not good , wiche stick to wickedst folke .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.471

The greatest worth that fortunes guiftes woorthyest can giue , be such
as in abondant sorte to wicked folkes do hap .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,35.472

<P_36>

Who so quicknes hath , hit swift a man doth make .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.474

So musick the musicall , phisick the phisician , Retorik Rhetorician
makith , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.475

for the nature of ech thing doth his propertie ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.476

nor is myxt with effect of contrarietie , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.477

And freely expells that is against it : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.478

nether can riches vnsaciable auarice refrayne ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.479

nor makes not free his own , whom vitious lust with vnbroke chaynes ,
holdes bound : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.480

And dignitie on wicked bestowde , not only makes them not worthy ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.481

but betrayes & discouers their indignitie . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.482

Why doth it hap so ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.483

You Joye somtyme to falsifie with other name , whose effect shames
themselves . Wherfore nether those riches , nor same powre , nor lyke
dignitie , can by right be called . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.484

Lastly , the same we may conclude of all fortune , that hath nothing in
her as it is playne to be desyrde , not of naturall goodnes , who eyther
neuer accompanyes the good , nor makes them good whom she is neerest .
" BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,36.485

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_37>

<heading>

VII . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,37.489

<$$heading>

Then I : " Thou thy self knowest that no ambition of mortall thinges did
rule vs . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,37.491

We were not guided by the pride of any mortall glory ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,37.492

but wish a ground in our affayres , by which silent vertue should not
growe olde . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,37.493

Then she : " This is that that noble myndes by nature , but not yet
brought by perfection to the vttmost top of vertue , might intice ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,37.494

I meane Gloryes desyre & fame of best actes for common welth : which how
small it is and empty of all waight , consider this .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,37.495

As Astrologers demonstrations haue told yo=u= , all the Earthes circle
is playne , gettes som meane to know these partes of the heauens face ,
that if it be matched with the greatnes of the celestiall globe , It is
supposde to haue no space , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,37.496

and it is of this little region of the world almost but the fourth
portion , As thou hast learnd by Ptolome`s graunte , which is inhabited
by vs Creatures knowen . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,37.497

From this fourth , if in thy mynde thou draw away as much as Sea and
marish couers , and so much as wasted ground by drynes hath distended ,
the straytest roome is left for mans habitation .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,37.498

If in this so small a point of title we be hedged in & inclosed , what
think we so much of enlarging fame , & name promoting ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,37.499

For what large and magnifick thing hath glory bounde in so straight &
small lymites ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,37.500

Ad to this that , though but small it self , enuirond is with habitation
of many nations tongues and conditions , that in all trade of lyfe
differs , To which not only no report of ech <P_38> man , but not of
Cities can com through hardnes of way & difference of speech , and
diuers traffik . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.501

In Marcus Tullius tyme , as he himself in place hath sayde , the fame of
Romayn Empire neuer past Caucasus mounte , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.502

& yet it was florishing , fearfull to the Parthians & to all peeple
inhabiting such places . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.503

Dost thou not see then , how narrow & neere presst glory is , which to
stretch out spred thou labourst ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.504

shall the glory of a Romayn go so furr , as whence neuer Romayn name
hath past ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.505

What , for that the diuers natures of peeple & their orders disagree ?
so that , what among som is prayse , among the rest sett for cryme .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.506

So haps that if any mans prayse delyte , to him the same doth neuer
proffit to many peeple sent . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.507

Is any man content that among his own his glory byde , & Immortalities
fame be tyed in bounties of his own soyle ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.508

But how many noble men in their tymes fayling obliuion of writers have
dasht ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.509

But what proffites writinges ? which with the office a long & dark age
suppressith ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.510

But doo yo=u= think immortality with thought of comming tyme ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.511

Yf thou Joyne it with the infinit spaciousnes of eternitie , what hast
thou to Joye of thy lasting name ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.512

For if the abode of one moment , with ten_thousand yeeres be compared ,
for that both space is ending , It shall haue , tho a little , som
portion . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.513

But this nomber of yeeres , how oft so euer multiplyed , may not compare
with the vnending lasting . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.514

Somtyme som outward thinges ther be , compard among themselves , haue
ende ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.515

twixt infinite and ending no comparison may beare .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.516

So is it that the lasting of any longest tyme , if it be matcht with
vnbounde eternitie , not small but none shall seeme .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,38.517

For without you be ignorant , how rightly to please popular eares &
vayne rumors , & leaving care of conscience & vertue , ask reward , of
other mens frute , <P_39> see how in the myldnes of such an arrogancy ,
how pleasantly a man may be begylde . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,39.518

For when one once had skornde a man that clothed him not with Philosophy
for true vertues vse , but for proude gloryes sake , & saide he wold try
him whither he were a Philosopher that easely could beare in patience
iniuryes , he tooke upon him to be suffring , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,39.519

& taking the skorne as a raging man : ' Dost thou at length understand
me a Philosopher ? ' BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,39.520

Then nippingly he said : ' I should haue vnderstode it , if thou hadst
bene silent . ' BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,39.521

What meanes it , that cheefest men <paren> for of them I speake
<$$paren> that seeke thorowgh vertue glory , what hath death to doo with
them after the body is dissolued , at their end ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,39.522

For be it that our Reason it self denyes vs to beleeue that all men dye
, then ther is no glory , when he is not , of whom she speakes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,39.523

But if the mynde it self with conscience good dissolued from earthly
gial , all freed seekes heauen , wold she not all earthly thinges
despise , who heauen enioyeng . Joyes earthly thinges to want ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,39.524

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_40>

<heading>

VIII . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.528

<$$heading>

" But lest you shuld suppose against fortune I make an Endles war , Ther
is a time whan she , the begiling one , somewhat wel of men desarues :
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.530

Euen than whan discouerd , herself she shews , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.531

and maners hers detectz . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.532

Perchanche yet thou wotz not what I say . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.533

Wondar hit is that I mynd tel , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.534

and mening skars with wordes may Expres . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.535

For men I suppose more get by aduerse than lucky fortune ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.536

for she euer with shewe of blis , with seming al false , deceues :
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.537

and euer true she is in change , when vnstable she seemes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.538

The one beguyles , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.539

the other instructes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.540

This tyes the enioyers myndes with show of lyeng good ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,40.541

the other lovsith them <P_41> with knowledge of frayle felicitie .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,41.542

This know therfore , for wyndy , fleeting , & ignorant of her self .
The other sober , ready & wise by aduersities exercise .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,41.543

At last happy he that drawes the strayeng with deceite from greatest
good , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,41.544

but aduersitie of tymes retourning them to surest naps , as by a hooke
doth drawe . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,41.545

Thinkest thou this for lest good , that this Currish & fearfull fortune
hath discouerd the mynde of thy faythfull frendz ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,41.546

The other hath shewed the fellow sure lookes & doubtfull ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,41.547

in departing hath taken hers , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,41.548

& thyne hath left the` . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,41.549

With how much woldest thou , in prosperous state haue bought this , when
thou thoughtest it most ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,41.550

Leave to seeke lost goodes , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,41.551

The preciousest kynde of ryches , frendes thou hast founde . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P1,41.552

{COM:verse_omitted}

