<BEGIN_boethpr-1695-e3-p1>

<P_15>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> IV . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.4

<$$heading>

Dost thou perceive these things , said she , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.6

and do they sink into thy Mind ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.7

Art thou altogether unqualified and unfit to receive these Precepts ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.8

Why dost thou weep ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.9

Why do thy Tears overflow ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.10

Speak , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.11

conceal not thy Thoughts . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.12

And if thou dost expect Help from the Physician , truly discover thy
Distemper . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.13

Then I , in some measure recovering my self , spoke thus to her : Need
my Sorrows then be repeated ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.14

and do not the Severities acted by Fortune against me , appear enough of
themselves , without these Admonitions ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.15

Doth not the very Face and Horror of this Place move thee ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,15.16

Is this the Library which thou didst choose for thy particular Apartment
in my House ? In <P_16> which , so often sitting with me , thou didst
skilfully read upon all Divine and Human Learning ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,16.17

Was this my Habit ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,16.18

Was this my Look , when with thee I penetrated into the Secrets of
Nature ? when thou traced'st out to me the several Motions of the Stars
? when thou didst shew me how to form my Life and manners by Divine
Rule and Order ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,16.19

And are these at last the Rewards of my Obedience to thee ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,16.20

Certainly thou didst deliver this Sentence as an Eternal Sanction by the
Mouth of <font> Plato <$$font> , viz. <font> That those Commonwealths
are most happy , who are govuerned by Philosophers , or by those who
study to be so . <$$font> BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,16.21

By the same Person also thou didst advise wise and discreet Men to take
upon them the Government of their Country , lest they refusing it ,
impious and unworthy Subjects should exert themselves , and oppress the
good and honest Citizens . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,16.22

Therefore I following this great Authority , have desir'd to reduce to
practice , in the Management of publick Business , what I <P_17> learnt
from thee in our grateful Retirement . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,17.23

And thou and that God who infuseth thee into the Minds of wise Men , may
witness for me , that I had no other end in aspiring to the Magistracy ,
than that one , of doing good to all , and protecting the Vertuous and
Just . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,17.24

Hence was I look'd upon by evil Men as their common Enemy .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,17.25

Hence sprung Dissention and Discord with them ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,17.26

but still the Clearness of my Conscience made me despise the Anger of
the most powerful , when I acted in the Defence of Justice and Right .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,17.27

How oft have I oppos'd <font> Conigast <$$font> , who taking Advantage
of their Inabilities , would have oppress'd and ground the Faces of the
Poor ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,17.28

How oft have I withstood <font> Triguilla <$$font> , the Steward of the
King's Household , and hinder'd him from bringing to effect the many
Injuries and Wrongs which he had hopefully projected and begun ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,17.29

<P_18>

How oft have I protected , with the Peril of my Authority , those
unhappy People , whom the lawless Avarice of the Barbarians did vex with
many Calumnies ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,18.31

No Man ever drew me aside from the Paths of Right to those of Injustice
: BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,18.32

I griev'd no less than the poor Sufferers , when I saw the Fortunes of
Provincial Subjects torn by the Rapine of private Officers , and them
oppress'd with publick Taxes . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,18.33

When , in the Time of a severe Famine , the whole province of <font>
Campania <$$font> had like to have been ruin'd by an Imposition upon the
People , which pass'd under the Name of a <font> Coemption <$$font> , I
, the <P_19> King being present at the Debate , contested with his
Captain of the Guards , on the Behalf of the Publick :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,19.34

And at last I prevailed , so that the heavy Impost was not exacted .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,19.35

I forced <font> Paulinus <$$font> , a Consular Man , out of the very
Jaws of those greedy Officers of the Palace , whose Ambition and Hope
had already devour'd him and his Estate . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,19.36

When <font> Albinus <$$font> , who had been Consul also , was to have
been cut off by a false Accusation , I placed my self betwixt him and
<font> Cyprian <$$font> his Accuser , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,19.37

and oppos'd my self to the Violence of his utmost Hate and Malice .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,19.38

Do@ @n't you think that I have got my self Enemies more than enough ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,19.39

I ought certainly , amongst the rest of Mankind , to be more assur'd and
safe , who for the Love of Justice , have forfeited all my Hopes at the
Court , and gain'd nothing but the Envy and Hate of those who are
powerful there . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,19.40

But , behold upon the Accusation of <P_20> what Men I now suffer !
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,20.41

<font> Basilius <$$font> is one of them , who being lately , for his
Offences , dismiss'd from the King's Service , and oppress'd with Debt ,
is forc'd , by his Necessities , to become my Accuser .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,20.42

The Credit of the other two , <font> Opilio <$$font> and <font>
Gandentius <$$font> , is so infamous , <P_21> that lately , for their
many Crimes and Cheats , they were condemned to Banishment by the King :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,21.43

and being unwilling to obey the Sentence , presently took Sanctuary ; of
which when he had notice , he gave Command , that if they did not leave
the City of <font> Ravenna <$$font> by such a Day , they should , with
all Disgrace , be driven out of it , with Marks branded on their
Foreheads . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,21.44

Now judg if there can be any Addition to this my severe usage ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,21.45

for upon that very Day on which this Execution was order'd to be done
upon them , the Accusation was receiv'd against me , from the Mouths of
these villanous Informers . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,21.46

What is then to be done ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,21.47

Have my <P_22> many irksome Labours and Enquiries after Wisdom deliver'd
this ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.48

or because my Condemnation was before determined , shall it qualify
these Men to be my Accusers ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.49

Is not Fortune ashamed ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.50

if not of the Accusation of injur'd Innocence , at least of the Baseness
and Infamy of its Accusers ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.51

But perhaps you may ask , what Crime is objected to me ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.52

I am accused for designing to preserve the Senate .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.53

Would you know the Manner and Circumstances of my Treason ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.54

Why , 't@ @is urg'd , that I hinder'd an Informer from carrying Proofs
to the King , which should have declared the whole Senate to have been
guilty of Treason ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.55

And now , O my Mistress ! what think you ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.56

shall I deny the Crime that I may not be a Reproach to thee ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.57

No , it was always my Desire to preserve that August Body in its
Splendor , and in its just Rights , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.58

and it shall be so to the last Moment of my Life .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.59

Shall I confess it ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.60

Then the pretended Endeavour of putting a stop to the Accusers will
cease . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.61

Shall I own it a Crime to wish the Safety of that Assembly ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.62

Indeed its uniust Decrees against me would make it look not to be so .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.63

But Folly , which always flatters it self , can@ @not change the Merit
of things . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.64

Nor do I think it lawful , according to the Judgment of <font> Socrates
<$$font> , either to hide the Truth , or own a Falsity .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,22.65

But however that Matter may be , I leave it to be weighed by you , and
the Judgment <P_23> of the Wise , having both by my Tongue and Pen
declared the whole Truth and Series of my Misfortune , and transmitted
it to indifferent and unprejudiced Posterity . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,23.66

To what purpose should I speak of those forged Letters , in which I am
accused , to hope for the Restauration of the Roman Liberty ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,23.67

I could easily enough have detected the Falseness of that Contrivance ,
even by the Confessions of my Accusers , <paren> which is of greatest
Weight in all such Affairs <$$paren> if I might have been allowed to
have made use of them . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,23.68

But what Liberty now can we ever hope to have ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,23.69

Would to Heaven we might expect any ! BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,23.70

then I had answer'd them in the Words of <font> Canius <$$font> ; who ,
when he was accused by <font> C. Caesar <$$font> , Son to <font>
Germanicus <$$font> , of being privy to a Conspiracy against his Life ,
told him , <font> If I had known of such a Design , thou hadst never
known it . <$$font> In which thing , Sorrow and my Misfortunes have not
so dulled my Senses , that I should complain of the Contrivances of
wicked Men against the Vertuous . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,23.71

But I wonder that according to their Hopes they should have effected
them ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,23.72

for the Will to do Ill proceeds from the Defects of humane Nature :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,23.73

But it is prodigious , that every Contrivance of ill Men should prevail
against the Innocent , even when the Eye of Providence beholds it .
Whence it was that one of thy <P_24> Disciples properly enough asked ,
If there be a God , whence then proceeds Evil ? If there be none ,
whence Good ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,24.74

Be it so , that it is natural and fit enough that ill men , who thirst
after the Blood of the Good , and of the whole Senate , should also
promote my Destruction , who have always defended both against their
Attempts . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,24.75

But have I deserv'd this Return from the Hands of the Senate ? <font>
&c. <$$font> BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,24.76

Thou mayst remember , I imagine , because always when I did or said any
thing , thou wert present , and didst direct me .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,24.77

Thou mayst remember , I say , when at <font> Verona <$$font> , the King
, greedy and desirous of our common Ruine , endeavour'd to have thrown
that Treason , for which <font> Albinus <$$font> was accused , on the
whole Body of the Senate ; how I then , contemning any Hazard which I
might run , did vindicate and defend that Order .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,24.78

Thou knowest this to be Truth , and that I never was accustom'd to value
or praise my self or my Actions : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,24.79

for whosoever feels a Name , by boasting of what he hath done , will
lessen , in a great measure , the Pleasures of a self-approving
Conscience . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,24.80

But now see the Event and Success of my Innocence ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,24.81

for instead of receiving the Reward of true and steddy <P_25> Vertue , I
undergo the Punishment of Villany and Impiety !
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,25.82

What Judges were there ever , who even upon the manifest Proofs of a
Crime , did so unanimously agree in Cruelty , that neither the
Considerations of humane Nature , which necessarily errs , nor of the
change of Fortune , which is so uncertain to all , should encline some
of them to Pity and Compassion ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,25.83

If I had been accus'd of designing to burn the Temples , or massacre the
Priests , and so destroy all good Men , yet I should have been allowed
to have been present , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,25.84

and upon my Confession or Conviction by the Witnesses , should have
received my Sentence . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,25.85

But now , for my Affections and Services to the Senate , I am unheard ,
undefended , at the Distance of 500 Miles condemn'd to Death , and
Proscription . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,25.86

O my Judges ! may none of you be ever convicted of the like Crime ; the
Falseness of which even mine Accusers themselves know ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,25.87

and that they are forced to throw another pretended Offence into the
Scale ; which <P_26> is , that out of my Ambition and Desire of Dignity
I have polluted my Conscience with the horrid Sin of Sacrilege .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,26.88

But certainly thou , my Guide and Directress , who art planted and
rooted in my Soul , hast so far driven out of my Heart the Desire of
mortal and fading things , that thou dost know <paren> I being ever
under thy Inspection <$$paren> there could be no Place there for that
Impiety ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,26.89

for thou didst daily instil into my Ears and Mind that golden Saying of
<font> Pythagoras , Follow God . <$$font> BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,26.90

Nor was it convenient for me to seek Assistance from foul and unlawful
Arts , whom already thou hadst form'd into the Excellence and Likeness
of God . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,26.91

Those <P_27> of my Family , my Friends also with whom I conversed , and
<font> Symmachus <$$font> , that vertuous and reverend Personage , to
whom the Secrets of my Conversation could not be hidden , do all , with
one Voice , clear me , even from the Suspition of that Crime .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,27.92

But , O Misfortune ! even thou art the greatest Cause of that Credit
which is given to my Accusers ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,27.93

for 't@ @is believed that I have used unlawful Arts , because I have
been bred up under thy Discipline , and imbibed thy Precepts . So that
it is not enough that that Reverence which is due to thee , should not
reflect , with Advantage , upon me thy Disciple , if thy self also do
not suffer upon my account . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,27.94

But this also is an heavy Accession to my Misfortunes , that the
Opinions of most People are not as they ought to be , grounded upon a
due Consideration and the Merit of Things , but upon the Events of
Fortune ; and that that only should be judged to be undertaken with
prudent Fore-sight , which is crown'd with an unhappy Success .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,27.95

Hence is it that those who are unfortunate do lose , before any thing ,
the good Opinion of the World . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,27.96

It troubles me now to remember what are the various Rumours , the
different and inconsistent Opinions of the People concerning me ; some
condemning , and some defending me and my Cause :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,27.97

Yet this I will say , that nothing can add more <P_28> to the
Afflictions of the Unhappy , who are unjustly persecuted , than when men
think they justly deserve the miseries which they endure .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,28.98

And now I am , at last , robbed of my Estate , spoiled of mine Honours ,
injured in my Reputation ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,28.99

and instead of those Rewards which I might justly have expected from my
Country , I have been condemn'd to the greatest Punishment .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,28.100

But now behold a more afflicting Scene ! BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,28.101

Me@ @thinks I see the Treacherous , the Unfaithful , the Injurious , and
other most Infamous Persons , all without Cause mine Enemies ,
over-flowing with Joy and Delight at my Misfortunes , and contriving new
Accusations against me : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,28.102

the Good are affrighted with the Horror of what I suffer ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,28.103

and ill Men are encouraged , by the Impunity of others , to design the
greatest Wickednesses , and by Rewards to act them ; whilst the Innocent
are not only depriv'd of their Security , but also of the natural
Privilege of defending themselves ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,28.104

therefore I may reasonably thus cry out : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,28.105

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_32>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> V . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,32.109

<$$heading>

Whilst my continued Griefs forc'd me to breath out these Complaints ;
she , with a pleasant Look , and no way mov'd with my Expression of them
, bespake me thus : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,32.111

When I first saw thee , sad and weeping , I knew thee to be miserable
and in Banishment ; yet at what distance from thy home I did not know ,
till I gather'd it by thine own Discourse : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,32.112

But indeed thou art not driven out of thy Country ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,32.113

but hast wandered thus far from it ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,32.114

yet if thou hadst rather be thought to have been violently remov'd ,
thou hast done thy self this Injury , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,32.115

for it was never in the Power of any other Person to have done it :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,32.116

For if thou dost call to mind of what Country thou art , a Country not
govern'd by the Fury and Extasies of a giddy and passionate Multitude ,
as that of the Athenians was heretofore ; but {COM:greek_omitted} ;
where there is only one Lord , one King , the Almighty Governour of the
Universe , who wishes the Encrease and numerous Prosperity , and
procures the Welfare of all his Subjects and Citizens , and loves not to
lessen their number , by sending them into Banishment : to obey whose
Laws , and to be govern'd by them , is the noblest Liberty and greatest
Happiness . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,32.117

<P_33>

Know'st thou not that most antient Law of thy Commonwealth , which does
decree , that it shall not be lawful to banish any man from it , who had
rather fix his Abode there than in any other Place ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,33.119

For whoever hath once attained to the Happiness of being settled within
the Bounds of that Territory , can never be presum'd to deserve the
Punishment of Exile ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,33.120

but whoever once leaves off to desire to be an Inhabitant there , at the
same time leaves off to deserve to be so . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,33.121

Therefore the Countenance of this Place , however dismal , does not move
me so much as thine own Looks . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,33.122

I do not here so much look for thy Library , the Walls of which were so
well inlaid with Ivory , and adorn'd with Glasses , as that noble
Cabinet and curious Repository of thy Mind and Thoughts .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,33.123

<P_34>

But I did depose that there , which makes even thy Books valuable ,
these choice and observable Sentences , which are the Quintessence of my
voluminous Writings . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,34.125

Thou hast indeed spoken much Truth upon the Subject of thy great Merits
from the Publick : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,34.126

but considering what , and how many they have been , all that thou hast
said of them is but little . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,34.127

The Particulars which thou hast recounted of thy Integrity , and the
Falseness of thine Accusation , are well known to all Men :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,34.128

And thou hast done well in being short in the Account of the Frauds and
Villanies of thine Accusers , because it will sound better out of the
Mouth of the People , who know all this . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,34.129

Thou hast also severely inveighed against the uniust Decree of the
Senate . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,34.130

Thou hast been much concern'd for the Injury done to me ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,34.131

and thou hast bewail'd the Loss of the good Esteem which Men had of thee
. BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,34.132

Thy last Complaint was against Fortune , and that Rewards and
Punishments were not equally distributed , according to the Merits of
Men : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,34.133

And in the end , thy distemper'd Muse wishes that the same Peace which
makes the Felicity of the calm Regions above , might also govern and
reside upon Earth . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,34.134

But because thy Affections are yet tumultuous and disorder'd , and
because the mutinuous Passions of Grief , Anger and Sadness do variously
and successively draw and distract thee : Thy Mind , I say , being in
such a <P_35> State , strong and vigorous Medicines are not proper for
thee ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,35.135

therefore , for the present , we will use more mild ones : so that those
Humours , which by frequent Disturbances flowed in upon thee , being now
gather'd to a Head , and come to a Consistence , may , by gentle
Applications , be mollified , and be fitter to bear the more powerful
Workings of stronger Remedies , which in time may dissipate them .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,35.136

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_36>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> VI . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,36.140

<$$heading>

<font> Phil. <$$font> First then wilt thou suffer me to try the Estate
, and feel the Pulse of thy Mind , by a few Questions ; that so I may
better understand thy Malady , and prescribe the Methods of thy Cure ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,36.142

<font> Boet. <$$font> Ask me what thou pleasest , and I will answer
thee . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,36.143

<font> P. <$$font> Thinkest thou that this World is manag'd by blind
Chance and Fortune ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,36.144

or dost thou believe that Reason hath any share in the Government of it
? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,36.145

<font> B. <$$font> I do by no means believe or imagine , that things ,
so certain in their Methods , and so regular in their Motions , should
be mov'd and informed by so unsteady a Cause : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,36.146

but I know that God , the Master-workman , doth preside over his Work ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,36.147

nor shall any Time or Accident ever move me from the Truth of this
Opinion . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,36.148

<font> P. <$$font> So 't@ @is indeed ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,36.149

and of this , a little before , thy Muse did sing when thou didst also
deplore the Misfortune of <P_37> Man , whom alone thou didst believe ,
not to be under the Care of Providence ; though , that every other thing
was govern'd by Reason , thou didst not doubt .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.150

But it is miraculous to me , that thou , who hast so just Notions of all
things , shouldst be in so ill a State of Health ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.151

I will therefore search further , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.152

for I believe thou yet labourest under some notable Defect :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.153

But tell me , because thou dost not at all doubt but that the World is
govern'd by God , by what kind of Government are its Affairs managed ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.154

<font> B. <$$font> I can not well comprehend thy Question ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.155

therefore I can@ @not readily answer it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.156

<font> P. <$$font> I was not then deceiv'd when I thought there was
something wanting , some vacuity of Breach by which this whole Train of
Perturbations found a way into thy Mind . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.157

But tell me , dost thou remember what is the chief End of all things ,
and whither the whole Mass and Body of Nature doth tend ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.158

<font> B. <$$font> I have heard what it is , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.159

but my Griefs have dulled my Memory , and eras'd almost everything out
of it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.160

<font> P. <$$font> But how then dost thou know from whence all things
have their Being ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.161

<font> B. <$$font> That I remember well , and told thee ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.162

it was from God . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.163

<font> P. <$$font> And how then doth it come to pass , that thou
knowing the Cause and Beginning of all things , shouldst be ignorant of
their End ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,37.164

It hath ever been of the Nature of these Perturbations , to have a Power
, to unsettle Mens Minds , and to interrupt the <P_38> Regular Course of
thinking ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.165

but they never yet could wholly alienate them from the genuine
Sentiments of true Reason : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.166

But I pray thee answer me this , Dost thou remember that thou art a Man
? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.167

<font> B. <$$font> I am not so much distemper'd but I remember that .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.168

<font> P. <$$font> Canst thou then tell me what Man is ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.169

<font> B. <$$font> If thou askest me , if I know my self to be a
rational and a mortal Creature , I answer , I do know and confess my
self to be so . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.170

<font> P. <$$font> And dost thou not know that thou are somewhat more
than that ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.171

<font> B. <$$font> No . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.172

<font> P. <$$font> Now I know another , and the greatest Cause of thy
Distemper ; which is , that thou hast lost the Knowledg of thy self : So
that I have plainly found the Source of thy Distemper , or rather the
way of restoring thee to thy Health : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.173

For because thou art confounded with the Oblivion of thy self , thou
complainest of thy Banishment , and of the Loss of thy Estate .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.174

And because thou dost not know what is the End of things , thou dost
believe wicked and lawless Men to be powerful and happy .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.175

And because thou hast forgotten by what Methods the World is govern'd ,
thou dost imagine that the many Vicissitudes and Changes of worldly
Affairs , come to pass of themselves , and are not directed by any
Governour ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.176

and doest believe there are no Causes of so important Effects .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,38.177

These may certainly , not only be great Occasions of a Disease , but
even of Death it <P_39> self . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.178

But , Thanks be to the Author of Health , who hath not suffer'd thee to
be wholly deserted by Reason ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.179

the true Opinion which thou hast of the Government of the World , which
thou believest not subject to Humane , but to Divine Wisdom , makes me
not doubt of thy Recovery : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.180

For by this small Spark , there is to me a great Assurance of vital Heat
: BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.181

But because the Time is not yet come for stronger Remedies , and because
it is natural to us to imbrace false Opinions ; so soon as we have laid
aside the true , from whence a Mist of Disturbances ariseth , which
hinders us from a true perception of Objects , I will endeavour , by
Lenitives and Fomentations , to dissipate it ; so that that Darkness
being removed , thou mayst easily perceive the Brightness and Glories of
the true Light . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.182

{COM:verse_omitted}

<heading>

Book the Second . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.185

The Argument . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.186

<$$heading>

<font> Philosophy urges several Reasons to <$$font> Boetius , <font> why
he should not so much desire the Return of his former Fortunes .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.188

The Description of Fortune . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.189

Her Discourse to <$$font> Boetius , <font> that he is not unhappy , but
yet blessed with much Felicity . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.190

The Description of humane Felicity ; that it doth not consist in the
Gifts of Fortune , nor in Riches , nor in Dignity and Power , nor in
Glory and Fame ; and even that sometimes adverse Fortune is profitable .
<$$font> BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.191

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> I . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,39.193

<$$heading>

<P_41>

Having said this , she was for some time silent ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,41.196

and when she perceived that I disposed my self with a modest Silence and
Attention to hear her , she thus bespake me : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,41.197

<P_42>

If I can see at all into the Causes and Habits of thy Disease , thou art
affected with the Loss of thy former Fortune , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,42.199

and languishest with the Desire of its Return :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,42.200

The Change of that , as thou imaginest , towards thee , hath perverted
thy Faculties , and alter'd the whole State and Constitution of thy Mind
. BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,42.201

I understand the manifold Deceits of that Prodigy ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,42.202

and I know the bottom of that Familiarity she useth towards all them
whom she designs to deceive , till she hath left them plunged in Sorrow
, and overwhelmed with Misfortunes and Despair .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,42.203

And if impartially , and without Passion , thou wilt call her to
remembrance , and consider well her Nature , Habits and Deserts , thou
wilt soon be undeceived , and find , that even when she did most caress
thee , thou didst never enjoy , nor that she having now left thee , thou
dost lose any thing of Beauty or of Worth . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,42.204

But , I think , I need not labour much to recal these things into thy
Memory ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,42.205

for thou wert wont , when she was present , and flattered thee most , to
oppose thy manly Words to her Allurements , and to assault her with
Arrows <P_43> drawn from my Quiver ; I mean with choice Sentences
extracted from my Precepts and Labours . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,43.206

But every sudden Change works a great Alteration in the Minds of Men :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,43.207

Hence it is that thou also art departed from the wonted Tranquility and
Peace of thine . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,43.208

But it is now time to give thee some Emollients and pleasant Lenitives ,
which may make way for more powerful Medicines .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,43.209

Approach then , Rhetorick , with all thy perswasive Charms , who then
only dost keep the right Path , when thou dost not swerve from my
Institutions and Doctrines ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,43.210

and with Rhetorick let Musick also draw near another Servant of my
Retinue , and warble out Numbers sometimes more light and airy ,
sometimes more weighty and consistent . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,43.211

<P_44>

What is it then , O Man , which hath plunged thee into this Abyss of
Misery and Sorrow ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.213

Certainly thou hast seen something astonishing and new .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.214

Dost thou think that Fortune is changed against thee ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.215

Thou art deceived : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.216

This was always her Custom , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.217

and is her Nature : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.218

She hath rather , in this Misadventure of thine , preserved her
Constancy in changing : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.219

Such she was when she deluded thee with her Blandishments and false
Shews of Felicity . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.220

Thou hast had before a full View of the direct Face of this blind
Divinity , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.221

and thou hast also now beheld her Reverse : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.222

She , who nicely conceals her self to others , is wholly displayed and
open to thee . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.223

If thou approvest of her Manners and Customs , use them ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.224

and complain not : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.225

If thou dost abominate her Perfidy and Falsness , contemn and cast her
off , whose Sports are so dangerous and hurtful .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.226

For that which occasions thy Melancholy , ought to have been a Curse of
thy greatest Joy and Comfort : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.227

For she hath forsaken thee ; of whom no Man can be secure but she will
leave him also . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.228

Dost thou then esteem that to be Happiness which is ever passing , and
will not stay ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,44.229

Is that present Fortune so dear to thee which is not permanent and which
, when it is gone , leaves Griefs and Discontents to succeed in its
place ? So that if a Man at his pleasure can@ @not retain her , and if
when she goeth away she maketh him miserable , <P_45> what is she ,
being so ready to take her Flight , but a sure Presage of future
Calamity ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.230

But it is not enough to behold those Objects which are placed before our
Eyes : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.231

for Wisdom hath a Prospect to the End and Event of things ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.232

and Fortune often changing from Adverse to Prosperous , and from
Prosperous to Adverse , should make Men neither fear her Threats , nor
desire her Favours . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.233

To be short , thou must with Patience and Equality of Soul , bear
whatever is acted by her upon the Scene of this World , when thou hast
once submitted thy Neck to her ponderous Yoke .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.234

For , if thou dost pretend to prescribe a certain time of Abode and
Recess to her , whom thou hast freely , and of thine own Accord , chosen
to be thy Soveraign and Mistress , art thou not injurious to her ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.235

and dost thou not , by Impatience , imbitter thy Lot , too hard already
, which thou canst not alter by thy most vigorous Efforts ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.236

If thou once hast spread thy Sails to the Winds , thou then canst not
choose thy Port , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.237

but must go whither they will blow thee . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.238

When thou committest thy Seed to the Furrows , remember that sometimes
the Years are fruitful , often barren . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.239

Hast thou given up thy self to the Governance of Fortune ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.240

thou canst then do no other thing than obey her Commands .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,45.241

Dost thou endeavour to arrest the forward Force of <P_46> the rolling
Wheel ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,46.242

O thou most sottish of all Mortals ! when Fortune once becomes stable
and fixed , she , in the Hour she is so , leaves off to be Fortune .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,46.243

{COM:verse_omitted}

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> II . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,46.246

<$$heading>

<P_47>

But now I would discourse thee a little in the Stile and Person of
Fortune , and observe whether her Questions be reasonable or not .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,47.249

First ; Why , O Man ! dost thou by thy daily Complaints accuse me as
guilty ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,47.250

What Injury have I done to thee ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,47.251

What Goods or Advantages have I withdrawn from thee ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,47.252

Implead me before what Judg thou pleasest , concerning the Possession of
Wealth and Dignities , and if thou canst prove that ever any man had a
true and fix'd Propriety in them , I will then readily grant , that
those things were thine which thou dost so earnestly desire to be
restored to thee . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,47.253

When Nature first brought thee <P_48> out of the Womb into this World ,
I received thee naked , necessitous , and stripp'd of all things ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.254

and <paren> which now is the Cause of thy Impatience against me
<$$paren> I indulgently educated thee , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.255

I heaped my Blessings upon thee , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.256

and encompassed thee with Glory and Splendor , and with an Affluence of
all things which were in my Power : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.257

now when I have a mind to withdraw my Bounty , and to stop the Current
of my Favours , be thankful for the Use of that which was not properly
thine . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.258

Thou hast no just Cause of Complaint , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.259

for thou hast lost nothing which was thy own : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.260

Why then dost thou mourn ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.261

I have done thee no Wrong . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.262

Riches , Honours , and all other things of that kind , are subject to me
, and in my Power ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.263

they are my Servants , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.264

and acknowledg me their Mistress ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.265

they come with me , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.266

and when I depart they follow . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.267

I dare boldly affirm , that if those things <paren> the want of which
thou dost now deplore <$$paren> had been thine own , thou hadst not lost
them : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.268

Shall I alone be forbid to exercise my own Power , and to use my own
Right ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.269

Heaven takes the liberty to bless the World with fair and sunny Days ,
and again to vail them in dark and cloudy Nights .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.270

The Year graces the Face of the Earth with Fruits ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.271

and bindeth her Head with Chaplets of Flowers ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.272

and again she destroys these with Rains and Frosts .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,48.273

'T@ @is lawful also for the Sea now to <P_49> appear with a calm and
smooth Brow , and again to rage in Storms and Tempests :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,49.274

And shall the boundless Covetousness , and other depraved Affections of
Men , oblige me to Constancy , which is so contrary to my Nature and
Customs ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,49.275

This is my Power , and this my continual Sport and Exercise .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,49.276

I turn with a flying Motion the rolling Wheel , pleasing my self to
exalt what was below , and to depress and humble what was on high :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,49.277

Ascend then , if thou pleasest , to the height , but upon this condition
, that thou shalt not think I do thee an Injury if I make thee descend
when my Sport or Humour require it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,49.278

But art thou not acquainted with my Ways and Methods ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,49.279

Dost thou not know that <font> Croesus <$$font> King of the Lydians ,
who , not long before , having been formidable to <font> Cyrus <$$font>
, and being taken by him , was led to the Flames , to be a miserable
Sacrifice to his Fury ; was delivered by a Shower , which in that Moment
was poured down from Heaven ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,49.280

<P_50>

Hast thou forgot how <font> Paulus Aemilius <$$font> , Consul of <font>
Rome <$$font> , when he had taken <font> Perseus <$$font> King of the
Macedonians , was grieved , and even wept for his Sorrows and Capitivity
? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,50.282

What doth the Tragick Buskin more exclaim against than Fortune ,
overturning with an undistinguishing Stroke the Happiness and Peace of
Kings and Common-wealths ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,50.283

Dist {COM:sic} thou not learn , when thou wert young , that <font>
Jupiter <$$font> , at the Entry of his Palace of <font> Olympus <$$font>
, doth always reserve two great Tuns ; out of the one of which he
dispenses Good , out of the other Evil to the World ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,50.284

What if thou hast drunk too deep of the Vessel of Good ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,50.285

What if , for the present , I have only vailed my self , and am not
wholly departed from thee ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,50.286

What if even this very <P_51> Mutability , so much complained of , which
is of my Essence , should give thee just Cause to hope for , and expect
better things ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.287

Yet do not despair , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.288

be not dismayed ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.289

nor desire , whilst thou are plac'd within the common Circumstances of
Humanity , to live under a Law , to be calculated for thy Meridian , and
to be appropriated to thy Complexion and Inclinations .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.290

{COM:verse_omitted}

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> III . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.293

<$$heading>

<font> Phi. <$$font> If therefore Fortune should speak for her self to
thee on this manner , I believe thou hast not any thing to answer ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.295

or if thou hast any thing by which thou canst defend thy Complaint ,
offer it , and thou shalt have free Liberty to speak .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.296

<font> Boet. <$$font> These things which thou urgest are indeed
specious , being enriched with all the Charms of Rhetorick and Musick ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.297

yet their Sound then only affects and delights us , when they strike our
Ears : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.298

But the Miserable have a much deeper Sense of their Misfortunes , which
these Notes can@ @not remove ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.299

and when they leave off to entertain our Ears , their Sorrow , which is
settled within , with greater Force attacks the Mind .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.300

<font> Phi. <$$font> So it is indeed ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.301

for these are not Specificks for thy Disease which rebels against its
Cure , but rather Nourishers of it : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,51.302

when time serves I shall administer <P_53> those things which will
pierce to its bottom . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,53.303

But , nevertheless , that thou mayst not number thy self amongst the
Miserable , let me ask thee , hast thou forgot the measure of thy
Happiness and Prosperity ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,53.304

I speak not of the Care which the Chief Men of the City took of thee ,
when thou wert left an Orphan , when thou wert grac'd with the Affinity
of those great Personages , and wert taken into their Affections ,
before thou were received into their Alliance , which is the most happy
and estimable kind of Propinquity . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,53.305

Who did not account thee most happy in the Noble Alliance of thy
Fathers-in-law ; in the chaste and exemplary Vertues of thy Wife ; and
in the Noble Dispositions of thy Sons ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,53.306

I pass by <paren> for common things I will not mention <$$paren> those
Dignities conferr'd upon thee in thy Youth , which have often been
denied to antient Men ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,53.307

for I am impatient to come to that which was <P_54> the Crown of thy
Felicity : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,54.308

If the Fruits of humane Labours can have any Weight of Happiness , can
the Memory of that Day , for any Evil which may since have befallen thee
, ever pass out of thy Mind , in which thou sawest thy two Sons advanced
to the Degree of Consuls , carried from thy House , accompanied by so
great a Number of Senators , and with the Joys and Acclamations of the
People ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,54.309

when thou sawest them in the Court placed in their Curule Seats , and
thy self in the Praises of the absent King <font> Theodorick <$$font>
didst display the Treasures of thy Wit , and didst deserve the Crown of
Eloquence ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,54.310

when in the <font> Circus <$$font> thou sitting betwixt the Consuls ,
didst satisfy the Expectation of the Multitude , which stood about thee
, with a triumphal Largess ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,54.311

Thou then didst flatter Fortune by thy Expressions , when she <P_55>
seemed to hug and caress thee as her Friend and Delight .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.312

Thou then receivedst from her such a Gift as was never before made to
any private Man . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.313

Wilt thou then come to an account with her ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.314

This is the first time that she hath looked unkindly upon thee ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.315

and if thou wilt equally weigh the Number of thy Blessings and
Afflictions , thou canst not but in Justice acknowledg that thou art yet
happy : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.316

For if therefore thou dost esteem thy self unfortunate , because the
things which heretofore seem'd pleasing to thee are passed away , there
is no reason for it , because even those things which do now afflict
thee , do also pass . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.317

Art thou but just now entred a Stranger upon the Scene of this World ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.318

Dost thou but now appear in this Theatre ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.319

Believest thou that there can be any Constancy or Stability in humane
Affairs , when thou seest that an Hour , or a quicker Minute , dissolves
humane Nature , and separates the Soul from the Body ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.320

For although there is seldom Hope that the things of Fortune will
continue with us , yet the last Day of a Man's Life seemeth to be the
last also of that Prosperity which remains with us .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.321

Where then is the great Difference ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.322

What doth it import then , whether thou by Death leavest it , or it by
Flight doth leave thee ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,55.323

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_58>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> IV . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,58.327

<$$heading>

<font> Boet. <$$font> All this which thou recountest , O thou Source
and Nourisher of all Vertues , is most true ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,58.329

nor can I deny the quick and early Arrival of my Prosperity .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,58.330

But one thing , when I remember it , doth most sensibly afflict me ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,58.331

for nothing doth more add to a Man's Infelicity , than the remembrance
that he was once happy . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,58.332

<font> Phil. <$$font> That thou dost yet groan under the Torment of thy
ill-grounded Opinion , is not to be imputed to the evil Estate of thy
Affairs ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,58.333

for if this empty Name of uncertain Happiness moves thee , do but
recollect with me , what Plenty thou enjoyest , and what is yet reserved
safe to thee : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,58.334

And therefore if thou yet dost possess that which in the best times thou
didst account most precious , it being yet by the Hand of Heaven
preserved safe and inviolate , canst thou justly then complain of the
Injuries of Fortune ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,58.335

<font> Symmachus <$$font> thy Father-in-law <P_59> , the Delight and
Ornament of Mankind , whose Welfare thou wouldst readily purchase at the
rate of thy Life ; one , who by an admirable Temper and Mixture is
wholly made up of Wisdom and Vertue , is yet safe , and fearless of his
own Concerns ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.336

only laments thy Injuries , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.337

and grieves for thy Misfortunes . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.338

Thy Wife yet lives an Example of Modesty , and a Pattern of Chastity ;
and that I may in one Word include all her Endowments and Perfections ,
the true Resemblance of her Father : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.339

She lives , I say , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.340

and being weary of Life , breaths only for thy sake ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.341

and <paren> in which thing alone I will yield that thy Happiness
receives Diminution <$$paren> she pines away with Grief and Tears , and
with the Desire of once more enjoying thy sweet Conversation .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.342

Why should I mention thy Consular Sons , in whom , being yet so young ,
so much of the Wit and Spirit of the Grand-father and Father doth shine
? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.343

Since then it is the chief Care of Men to preserve Life , thou art most
happy , if thou wouldst but know it , to whom so many Advantages and
Blessings yet remain , which all Men value above Life . Wherefore dry
up thy Tears , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.344

Fortune hath not expressed her Rage and Malice against you all ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.345

nor hath the Tempest been too violent , whilst thy Anchors yet hold ,
and afford to thee Cause of present Comfort , and Hope of future
Felicity . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.346

<font> Bo. <$$font> And may they ever hold ! BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,59.347

<P_60>

for whilst they are firm , however things go , I shall shift so as to
keep my Vessel above the Water , and perhaps to escape ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.349

but notwithstanding you may see from what Advantages and Dignities I am
fallen . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.350

<font> Ph. <$$font> I should think that we had made a good Advance , if
thou didst not yet retain a Concern for the Diminution of thy former
Estate . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.351

But I can@ @not suffer that thou shouldest , with so much Delight ,
mention thy Fortunes , and in so much Anxiety bewail the Loss of so
small a part of them : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.352

For whose Felicity is so well grounded , who hath not in some things
cause to quarrel with his Lot ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.353

The Condition of humane Goods is anxious and inconstant ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.354

for either they do not all at once arrive , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.355

or if they do , they make no stay with us . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.356

One Man is blessed with a great Affluence of Wealth ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.357

but he is ashamed of the Baseness of his Blood .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.358

The Nobility of that Man's Descent makes him conspicuous ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.359

but being uneasy within the Bounds of a narrow Estate , and so unable to
bear up the Port of his Ancestors , he had rather live retired and
unknown . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.360

Another abounds with Wealth , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.361

and is nobly born too , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.362

but he is unmarried , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.363

and to compleat his Happiness he would have a Wife .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.364

Another is happy in Wedlock , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.365

but he wants Children , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.366

and is troubled that he must gather Riches for another Man's Heir .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.367

Another hath the Joy of many Children , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,60.368

but is soon again mortified by seeing <P_61> the evil Courses which they
take . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.369

Therefore we see , that no Man can easily agree with the State of his
Fortune ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.370

for in all Conditions there is something which , untry'd , a Man doth
not know , and which after trial he doth not approve .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.371

Add also to this , that the Senses of the Happy are refined and delicate
; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.372

and unless every thing happens to them as they desire , or when it
pleaseth them , they are impatient . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.373

He who is not used to Adversity , is overcome and thrown down by every
cross Adventure ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.374

and the least evil Accidents {TEXT:Acccidents} discompose him :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.375

upon so minute and slender things doth the Happiness of the most
Fortunate depend . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.376

How many men are there in the World , dost thou believe , who would
think themselves advanced almost to Heaven , if they could attain but to
the least part of the Remainder of thy Fortunes ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.377

This very Place , which thou callest a Place of Banishment , is their
Country who inhabit it : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.378

And thy Miseries arise only from the ill-grounded Opinion that thou art
miserable . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.379

And again , every lot may be happy to that Man who can with Equanimity
and Courage bear it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.380

Who is he so happy , who when once he grows impatient , doth not desire
to change his State of Life ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,61.381

How much is humane Felicity imbittered ! which though it may seem sweet
to the Enjoyer , yet is not to be retained , but when it pleaseth takes
its Flight ? So that hence it may appear , <P_62> how miserable even
the greatest Felicity of Men is , since it will not remain with those ,
who with Equality bear every kind of Lot , nor will bring Comfort to
those whose Minds are anxious and oppressed . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,62.382

Why therefore , O wretched Mortals , do ye so industriously seek abroad
for that Felicity which is placed at home within your selves ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,62.383

Error and Ignorance mislead and confound you .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,62.384

But I , in short , will shew you the very Hinge upon which the truest
Happiness doth turn . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,62.385

Is there any thing more pretious and estimable to thee than thy self ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,62.386

No , thou wilt say . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,62.387

Then if thou wilt weigh things well , and gain the Command over thy self
, thou wilt possess that which thou wouldst never lose , and which
Fortune can never take from thee . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,62.388

And that thou mayst see that Beatitude can@ @not consist in those things
which are in the Power of Fortune , only consider thus ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,62.389

If Happiness be the Sovereign Good of Nature , living and subsisting by
Reason , then that thing can@ @not be it , which can by any means be
withdrawn from us , because that which can@ @not be taken away is
worthily esteemed the most excellent . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,62.390

Hence it appears that Instability of Fortune is not susceptive of true
Happiness . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,62.391

Add to this , that he who is carried away by fading Felicity , doth
either know that it is mutable , or he doth not .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,62.392

If he knows it not , what Happiness can he take in the Blindness of
<P_63> his Ignorance ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,63.393

If he knows it , he must necessarily be afraid lest he should lose that
which he knows is easily to be lost ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,63.394

and in that case his continual Fear will not suffer him to be happy .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,63.395

Perhaps he cares not if he should lose it , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,63.396

and he would not be much troubled at its Loss .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,63.397

Even truly the Good is but very small and inconsiderable , the Loss of
which a Man can bear with such Equanimity and Unconcernedness .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,63.398

And because I know that thou art one who hast been fully perswaded , and
by many Demonstrations convinced of the Immortality of the Souls of Men
; it also being evident that the Goods of Fortune receive a Period with
our Bodies by Death ; it can@ @not then be doubted but if Death can put
an end to our Happiness , that all men , when they die , are plunged
into the Depths of Misery . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,63.399

And since we know well , that many Men have endeavoured to obtain
Felicity , not only by undergoing Death , but by suffering the most
cruel Pains and Torments , how then can it be imagined that this present
Life can make Men truly happy , since , when it is ended , Men do not
become miserable ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,63.400

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_65>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> V . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.404

<$$heading>

<font> Phi. <$$font> But forasmuch as the Applications of my Reasons
have sunk into thee , I think it is now time to use some more powerful
Medicines : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.406

Go to then , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.407

if the Gifts of Fortune were not fading and momentary , as they are ,
what is there to be found in them which may , at any time , be accounted
thine ? or which , if it be thorowly considered and looked into , will
not appear to be vile and unworthy ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.408

Are Riches in their own Nature , or by the Estimation of Men , pretious
? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.409

What sort of Riches is most excellent ? Gold , or a great Mass of
Silver gathered together ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.410

But this appears more glorious by spending it , than by treasuring it up
; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.411

for Avarice always makes Men odious , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.412

and Bounty makes them famous and renowned . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.413

And if that which is conferr'd upon another can@ @not continue with any
Man , then certainly is Money most pretious when it is translated to
others , and ceases to be possess'd by him who hath given it .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.414

If all the Money that is in all Parts of the World were gathered into
one Hand , the rest of Mankind would be needful and want it .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.415

The Sound of a Voice , if it be entire , and not obstructed by any
<font> Medium <$$font> , doth at the same time fill the Ears of many
People ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,65.416

<P_66>

but Riches , unless they be diminished and canton'd , can@ @not meet the
Necessities of many ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.418

and that being done , they whom they have left must unavoidably submit
to Poverty . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.419

O therefore <paren> may I justly say narrow , mean , and even poor
Riches ! which can@ @not all be enjoyed by many at the same time , and
which can@ @not be possess'd by one , without impoverishing and ruining
the rest of Mankind ! BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.420

Doth the Brightness of Jewels attract the Eye ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.421

But if there be any thing extraordinary in their Splendor , it is the
Brightness of the Stones , and not of the Eye which beholds them ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.422

therefore I very much wonder that Men should admire them :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.423

For what is it which wants the Faculties and Motions of a Soul , and the
Contexture of Joints , which can really seem beautiful to a rational
Nature ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.424

For although from the Hand of the great Workman , and for Distinction's
sake , they have derived something of an inferiour Grace and Beauty ,
yet they are placed below thy Excellence , and by no means worthy to
attract thy Admiration . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.425

Doth the Beauty of the Fields delight thee much ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.426

<font> Boe. <$$font> Why should it not ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.427

for it is a fair Part of the fairest Work , the Creation of the Universe
: BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.428

So sometimes we are delighted with the Clearness of the Sea's Face ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.429

sometimes we admire the Heavens , the Stars , the Sun , and Moon .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.430

<font> Phi. <$$font> What do these things concern thee ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,66.431

Darest thou glory <P_67> in the Splendor of these things ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.432

Art thou embelished , or any way distinguished by the Flowers of the
Spring ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.433

or doth thy Plenty swell in the fruitful Face of Summer ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.434

Why art thou carried away with empty Joys ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.435

Why dost thou embrace that Good which is out of thy Power ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.436

for Fortune can never make that thine , which the Nature of things
forbid to be so . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.437

The Fruits of the Earth are doubtless for the Nourishment of living
Creatures ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.438

and if thou wouldst confine thy self to the supplying only of the
Necessities of Nature , thou wouldst not so much seek after the
Affluence and Gifts of Fortune . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.439

For Nature is satisfied with few things , and those the least :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.440

And if thou dost , after such Satiety , overcharge her with
Superfluities , that which thou dost superadd , becomes either
unpleasant or hurtful to her . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.441

To proceed , dost thou think that it recommends thee to the World to
shine in Variety of costly Clothes ? the Sight of which , if it be
grateful to the Eye , the Matter or the Ingenuity of the Workman is to
be admired . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.442

Doth a great Retinue , and the Attendance of a numerous Train of
Servants , make thee happy ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.443

If those Servants be vitious , they are a great Burden to the House ,
and pernicious Enemies to the Master of it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.444

But if they be good , why should the Vertue and Goodness of others be
put to thy Account ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,67.445

From all which it plainly <P_68> appears , that none of these which thou
didst number among thy own Goods , were really to be esteemed so . In
which , if there be no things desirable , what Reason is there that thou
shouldst grieve for the loss of them , or rejoice at their possession ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,68.446

If they are fair or beautiful by Nature , what doth that concern thee ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,68.447

For so by themselves , wholly sequestred from thy Riches , they would
please : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,68.448

They therefore are not to be esteemed pretious because they are numbred
amongst thy Goods , but because they seemed so before thou wert desirous
to possess them . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,68.449

What is it then , that with so much Noise , and so much Address , we
desire of Fortune ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,68.450

It is , perhaps , to drive away the Fear of Poverty by a general
Affluence of Wealth ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,68.451

but this often happens otherwise : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,68.452

for there is great need of many Helps even to keep so great an Accession
of Furniture , and Variety of things after they are obtained :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,68.453

And it is most true , that they want most things who possess the most :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,68.454

And on the other side , they want the fewest who measure their Abundance
by the Necessities of Nature , and not by the Extravagance of Excentrick
and irregular Desires . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,68.455

Is it so then , that Men have no proper and genuine Good planted within
them , but that they must be forced to go abroad to seek it ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,68.456

Are things so changed , that man , that excellent Creature , whose
Reason almost entitles him to <P_69> Divinity , can be no other way
sensible of his own Glories , than by the possession of soul-less
{COM:sic} and unnecessary things ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.457

All other Beings are content with their own Endowments ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.458

and you only <paren> who are the Image of God <$$paren> vainly seek
accessional Ornaments for your excelling Nature , from things placed so
much below you , not understanding how great an Injury you do by it to
your Maker . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.459

He ordained the Race of Men to excel all other earthly Creatures ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.460

and you depress your Dignity and Prerogative below the lowest Beings .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.461

For if that Good which belongs to any thing be more pretious and worthy
than that thing to which it belongs , since you esteem'd the most
contemptible things to be your Good , you submit your self , by that
your Esteem , to them , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.462

and take the lower Place : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.463

And this is but what you deserve . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.464

For such is the Nature of Man , that he doth then only excel other
Beings , when he knows himself : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.465

But he may be ranked below the Beasts that perish , when he once slights
that necessary and important Knowledg : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.466

For such Ignorance is natural to other Creatures ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.467

but to Man it is unnatural and a Vice . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.468

How weak and open in Error is it in Men , who imagine that any thing
which is foreign to their Natures , can be an Ornament to them ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.469

That can@ @not in Reality be so ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,69.470

for if any thing look bright and glorious with that which is put upon it
, that which covers <P_70> it is said to shine ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,70.471

and is admired ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,70.472

but notwithstanding the thing covered still continues in its natural
Impurity and Disesteem . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,70.473

I therefore deny that thing to be good which is hurtful to him who
possesses it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,70.474

Am I deceived in this ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,70.475

Thou wilt say , no ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,70.476

for Riches have often hurt their Possessors , since every ill Man is the
more desirous of other Mens Riches , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,70.477

and he thinketh him alone who is in possession of such things , to be a
Man of Worth , and to be esteemed . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,70.478

Thou therefore who now so much fearest to be assaulted by the Spear or
the Sword , if thou hadst entred into the Path of this Life not
incumbred with Riches , thou mightst , like the way-faring Man , with an
empty Purse have sung before the Robbers . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,70.479

The Happiness then derived from fading Riches is glorious indeed and
great ; by the possession of which a Man loseth his Security and Quiet .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,70.480

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_73>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> VI . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,73.484

<$$heading>

But why should I discourse of Dignities and Powers , which Men <paren>
wholly Ignorant of the true Nature of Dignity and Power <$$paren>
advance and extol to the Skies ? which , if they are conferr'd upon a
wicked Man , not the raging Flames of <font> Aetna <$$font> , nor the
most impetuous Deluge ravage so much , nor do so much harm as those
Weapons in such an hand . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,73.486

I believe you remember , your Ancestors desired to abolish the <P_74>
Consular Government , which gave beginning to the Roman Liberty ,
because of the Pride of the Consuls ; as their Ancestors before , for
the same Consideration , had banished Kings out of their City .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,74.487

But if sometimes <paren> which seldom happens <$$paren> good Men arrive
at them , what other thing is there pleasing in them , besides the
Probity of those who use and enjoy them ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,74.488

So it comes to pass that Vertue receives not Honour from Dignities , but
Dignities derive Honour from Vertue . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,74.489

But what is this Power so much celebrated , and so much desired ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,74.490

O ye terrene Animals ! do you not consider who they are over whom you
seem to exercise Authority ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,74.491

If thou shouldst see an ambitious Mouse , claiming a Superiority with
her <P_75> self over the rest of her Species , wouldst thou not almost
burst with Laughter ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,75.492

So then , if thou considerest the Contexture and Temperament of his body
, what canst thou find in the World more feeble than Man , or more
subject to Casualties and Misfortunes , to whom even a Fly <paren> one
of the smallest Products of Nature <$$paren> by a Bite , or by creeping
into the secret Recesses of his Body , may be the Cause of Death ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,75.493

But why should any Man exercise Authority over another , unless it be
over his body , or what is yet inferiour to that , over his Possessions
, which are the Gifts of Fortune ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,75.494

Shalt thou ever gain an Ascendant over a free and clear Soul ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,75.495

Shalt thou ever move the high-born Mind , consistent with it self , and
knit together by the Bands of Reason , from the proper Centre of its
Quiet ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,75.496

When a certain Tyrant once thought by Torments to compel a Free Man to
discover some Persons who had conspired against his Life , the Man bit
off his own Tongue , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,75.497

and spit it in his Face swelling and bloated with Rage : so by his
Wisdom disappointing <P_76> the Tyrant , and making those Torments which
his Cruelty had designed , Matter of Triumph to his Heroick Courage .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,76.498

To go further , what is it that any man may do to another , which
another may not do again to him ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,76.499

We are told , that it was the Custom of <font> Busiris <$$font> to kill
his Guests , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,76.500

and himself at last was killed by <font> Hercules <$$font> his Guest .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,76.501

<font> Regulus <$$font> after a Victory put many of the Carthaginians
into Chains , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,76.502

but himself soon after was forced to yield to their Fetters .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,76.503

Dost thou therefore think that the Power of that Man ought to be
magnified , who can@ @not hinder another from committing that upon him
which he lately committed upon another ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,76.504

Consider too , that if there were any thing of proper or natural Good in
these Dignities and Powers , they would never be attained by wicked Men
, BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,76.505

for disagreeing <P_77> things do not use to unite ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.506

and Nature forbids that contrary things should join : So that seeing
wicked Men do often execute Offices of Dignity and Trust , it appears
that they are not good in themselves , because they can reside in such
Subjects . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.507

The same may also be most justly said of all the Gifts of Fortune which
are most commonly shewed in greatest Plenty upon the worst of Men .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.508

It ought also to be considered , that no Man doubteth him to be valiant
, in whom he hath seen the Vertue of Fortitude shine : nor him to be
swift of foot , in whom he hath seen Swiftness .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.509

So Musick maketh a Musician ; the Science of Physick a Physician ; and
Rhetorick a Rhetorician . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.510

The Nature of every thing acts properly according to its End ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.511

nor is mix'd with foreign effects of differing Beings ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.512

but of its own Accord repels what is contrariant to it , or may be
destructive of it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.513

Riches can@ @not extinguish the unquenchable Thirst of Avarice ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.514

nor can Power give him Command of himself , who is already the Slave of
his Vices , and bound in the insoluble Chains of his Lusts .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.515

So Dignities conferr'd upon ill Men do not only not make them worthy ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.516

but rather shew their Unworthiness by laying them open , and discovering
their Shame . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.517

But how comes this to pass ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,77.518

you are pleased to impose upon things false Names , and differing from
their Natures , which are often <P_78> laid open , and appear by the
Effects of those very things : so that even these Riches , and this
Power , and that Dignity , ought not of right to be called by those
Names . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,78.519

And lastly , the same thing may be said of all the Gifts of Fortune , in
which it is manifest , that nothing is desirable , nor is there any
thing of native Good in them , since they are not always the Lot of good
Men , nor make them good to whom they are allotted .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,78.520

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_80>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> VII . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,80.524

<$$heading>

<font> Boe. <$$font> Thou knowest well that I did the least of any Man
covet mortal and fading Possessions ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,80.526

I only desired an honourable Occasion of being employed in Business and
fit Matter to exercise my Vertue , lest it should silently grow useless
and old . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,80.527

<font> Phi. <$$font> This is one thing which may tempt , I had almost
said debauch , some Minds naturally well inclin'd and endowed , though
not yet arrived at the Perfection of Vertue , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,80.528

I mean the Desire of Glory , and the Fame of having deserved well of
ones Country and the Common-wealth : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,80.529

but how <P_81> small , and how truly void of Weight even that is , do
but from hence observe : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,81.530

Thou hast learnt from Astrological Demonstrations , that the whole
Circuit of the Earth bears the Proportion only of a Point to the
Greatness of the Heaven ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,81.531

that is , if it be compar'd to the Magnitude of the Celestial Globe , it
may be judged to have no Space or Compass . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,81.532

And of this small Region of the World , almost the fourth Part is
inhabited by living Creatures , known to us , as <font> Ptolomy <$$font>
hath seemed to prove . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,81.533

And if thou shalt abate also all which is overflown by the Sea , and
Marshes , and Lakes , and also all that Space of the Globe which is
desart and overspread with Sands , or burnt up by the too near Vicinity
of the Sun , thou wilt find that what is left for the Habitation of Men
, is but a very small Proportion . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,81.534

And do you who are placed in , and confined to the least Point of this
Point , think of nothing but of propagating your Fame , and exerting
your Names , and making your selves renowned ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,81.535

What is there august or magnificent in Glory , confined to so small and
narrow Bounds ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,81.536

Add to this , that this little Enclosure is inhabited by several Nations
differing in Tongue , in Manners , and in way of Life : to whom , as
well by reason of the Difficulties and Inconveniences of Journying , as
by the Diversity of Languages , and the Unfrequency of Commerce , not
only the Fame <P_82> of particular Men , but even the Names of great
Cities , can@ @not arrive . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,82.537

In the time of <font> Marcus Tullius <$$font> , as himself in his
Writings tells us , the Fame of the Roman Common-wealth , which was then
well grown and robust , and redoubled by the Parthians and several other
Nations in these Parts , was not yet known to those who inhabited beyond
the Mountain <font> Caucasus . <$$font> BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,82.538

Thou seest then how narrow and strait that Glory is which thou labourest
so much to propagate and dilate . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,82.539

Dost thou think that the Glories of a Roman Man shall reach those Places
where the Fame and Story of the illustrious Roman Common-wealth would
never reach ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,82.540

Do not the Customs and Institutions of several Countries disagree among
themselves ; so that that which with some is adjudged to be
Praise-worthy , with others is thought to deserve Disgrace and
Punishment . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,82.541

Hence it appears , that it is not the Interest of any Man who desires
Renown , to have his Name spread through many Countries , and divers
People , but that he should be content with that Glory and Fame which he
can arrive at amongst his Countrymen , and not care to have the
Immortality of it extended beyond the Bound of one Country .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,82.542

But how many men , great and famous in their Generations , hath the
Carelesness and Neglect of Writers passed by in Silence ? Although
indeed one may justly ask , what can <P_83> such Memorials profit a Man
, which with their Authors must at length yield to the Powers of Age ,
and be with them buried in Oblivion ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,83.543

But Men imagine that they have obtained Immortality if their Names shall
but live in future Ages . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,83.544

But if they would compare this to the infinite Progress of Eternity ,
what have they which should make them pleased at the Diuturnity of their
Fame ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,83.545

For if the Duration of one Moment be compared with that of ten_thousand
Years , the Spaces of both being definite , it hath some , though a very
little Portion of it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,83.546

But yet this very Number of Years , and as many more as can by Numbers
be multiplied , can@ @not at all be compared to endless Duration :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,83.547

For there may be some Comparison betwixt finite Beings amongst
themselves , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,83.548

but there can be none at all betwixt Infinite and Finite .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,83.549

Hence it is that Fame <paren> however durable and lasting <$$paren>
considered with infinite Eternity , will seem not only to be little ,
but indeed nothing . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,83.550

But you think you can@ @not do well , unless you have the empty Applause
of the People ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,83.551

and forgoing the Pleasures of a good Conscience , and the Consideration
of the innate Worth of Vertue , and the Pleasure of Actions resulting
from it , you look for a Reward from the partial Breath , and vain
Discourses of the <font> Many <$$font> . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,83.552

Observe now how one once ingeniously plaid upon the Lightness and Folly
of such Arrogance . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,83.553

<P_84>

A certain Person accosted another with contumelious Language , who had
assumed to himself the Name of a <font> Philosopher <$$font> , not out
of a Principle of Vertue , but for the itch of Vain-glory :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,84.555

and he added , that he should now know if he were a true Philosopher ,
by bearing patiently the Injuries offered to him ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,84.556

he putting on for a while a counterfeit Patience , said then to the
other , Dost thou now believe me to be a Philosopher ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,84.557

He answered smartly again , I had indeed believed it , if thou couldst
still have held thy Tongue . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,84.558

What then is it that great and worthy Men <paren> for of such I speak
<$$paren> who would by vertuous ways acquire Glory ; what is it <paren>
I say <$$paren> of Advantage which they receive by a great Name after
the Body is resolved into Dust ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,84.559

For if <paren> which our Reason and Religion forbids us to believe
<$$paren> the whole Fabrick of Man , Body and Soul , is dissolv'd , and
dies together , then is there no Glory ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,84.560

nor can there be when he <paren> to whom it belongs <$$paren> doth no
more exist . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,84.561

But if the Soul which hath deserved well , when it@ @'s enlarg'd from
its earthly Prison , doth take a swift and unimpeach'd Flight to Heaven
, will it not despise the Earth and its Businesses ; and being wrapt in
the Joys of Heaven , rejoice that it is wholly exempt from sublunary
Considerations and Concerns ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,84.562

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_87>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> VIII . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,87.566

<$$heading>

But lest thou shouldst believe that I am an inexorable Enemy to Fortune
, and wage an endless War against her , I shall confess , that there are
sometimes when that faithless One may deserve well of Men ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,87.568

then I mean when she opens and discovers her self , and freely confesses
her self to be what she really is . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,87.569

Thou dost not perhaps yet understand what I <P_88> am about to say .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.570

The thing is wonderful which I desire to tell thee ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.571

and therefore I almost want Words to express this Paradox , to wit ,
that adverse Fortune doth more profit and truly more advantage Men than
prosperous : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.572

For this , under the Cloak and Shew of Happiness , when she smileth and
caresses , lies and deceives ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.573

the other always fairly and openly declares her Enmity ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.574

and shews her Instability by her constant Changes :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.575

That deceives , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.576

this instructs ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.577

that by a precious Shew of Good binds the Minds of those she favours ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.578

this by the Knowledg of her Fickleness frees and absolves them :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.579

therefore thou mayst observe the one always faithless , airy , wavering
, and ignorant of its own Condition ; the other sober , stay'd , and
even prudent in managing and making the best use of Adversity .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.580

Lastly , prosperous Fortune , by her Allurements and Blandishments ,
draws Men from the right , aside , and out of the direct way , leading
to that which is the sovereign Good ; whilst , for the most part , the
other doth not only lead Men , but as it were draw them with a Hook to
true and genuine Happiness . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,88.581

Further , thinkest thou that it is to be esteemed the least Good which
we receive from this hard , and at the first sight , horrible Fortune ,
that she doth discover to thee the Hearts of thy faithful Friends ,
since she distinguisheth between the constant and doubtful Countenances
<P_89> of thy Companions and Acquaintance ; and when she departeth ,
that she taketh away her Friends and leaves thine .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,89.582

At what rate wouldst thou have bought the knowledg of this , when thou
wert <paren> as it seemed to thee <$$paren> in thy prosperous Estate ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,89.583

Forbear then to deplore the Loss of thy Riches and Honours , since thou
hast found the most valuable Jewel , the most pretious kind of Riches ,
I mean the Knowledg of thy unalterable and sincere Friends .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P1,89.584

