<BEGIN_boethco-1556-e1-p1>

<P_18>

<heading>

PHYLOS. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.4

<$$heading>

Perceyuest thou not those thynges that be spoken ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.6

& be they not prynted and well fyred in thy mynde ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.7

Art thou no more apt to vnderstand the~ then an asse to play on the
harpe ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.8

Why wepest ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.9

Why shedest thou teres ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.10

Tell me thy gryfe , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.11

hide it not . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.12

If thou wylte haue helpe of the phisicion , it behoueth the to shewe thy
greife . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.13

BOEC. Then I takynge vnto my selfe a good harte or mynde sayde . Doith
not the crueltye of fortune suffyciently appere agaynst me
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.14

nedeth it anye other instruction ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.15

Doth not this place , that is to say : this person shewe the ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.16

Is this the place of study y=t= I had in the countraye wherein thou
dydst chose the sureste seate for thy selfe in our scoles , in the whych
thou sitting with me often tymes , disputest of godly and worldelye
thynges ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.17

Had I than so vyle habyt , and suche sorowful countenaunce ? When I dyd
serch out with the , the secret causes of nature ? When thou dyddest
declare vnto me the course of the sterres with a Virge or rodde of
geometry ? When thou dyddest forme my maners and dysposicion of lyfe to
y=e= symylytude and lykenes of the heuenly order ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.18

be not these the rewardes due vnto them that folowe the ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.19

Certes thou hast confyrmyd thys sentence by y=e= mouthe of Plato .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.20

Blessed is the commenaltye that is ruled by wise me~ , or if it happen
that the rulers of commennaltyes do studye wysedome .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.21

Thou haste lykewyse confyrmed and sayde by the mouthe of the sayde Plato
, that it is necessarye that the commonaltye be gouernid by wise men ,
lest that the gouernment thereof committed to wycked and euyl cityzens ,
should hurte the good people . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.22

I therefore folowyng the same sayinge that I lernid of the , emongest my
secret and solitarye lesures , wysshed to practyse the same in the
administracion of the commenwelth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.23

God and thou <paren> which haue instructe and taughte them y=t= be wyse
<$$paren> be my wytnes , that nothinge mouyd me for to beare rule but
for the common welthes sake , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.24

and for y=t= cause I hadde verye greuous and contynuall enmyte and
hatred wyth wicked men : BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,18.25

for my conscyence hath such libertye y=t= I more louid the ministracion
of iustice then I <P_19> regarded the anger of gret men .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.26

How often haue I wythstande the ma~ named Canygast , that stroue to
hinder euery pore mannes welth ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.27

How often haue I tourned the man Tryguyll , prouost of the kynges house
from the wro~ges that he had begon to doo , and more that he purposed to
do to pore me~ ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.28

how often haue I defended poore men that were wrapped in infynyte
miseries , by the couitousnes of cruel straungers vnponyshed , whereby I
was in daunger to lose myne autoritye ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.29

There was neuer anye manne that coulde drawe me from iustyce to do
wronge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.30

When I sawe the goodes of the people of the prouynces spoyled or taken
awaye , eyther by pryuye robbery or by commo~ trybutes , I was as sory
for it as they that suffred the wronge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.31

When a greuous order was made there in the time of greate honger or
scarsitie , whyche would haue impoueryshed gretelye the prouynce of
Campanye , I stroue agaynste the prouost of the pretory <paren> that
appoynted that order <$$paren> for the loue of co~men welth ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.32

and I laboured agaynst it , the Kynge Theodoryke knowyng the same , so
that I ouercame and caused y=t= the order toke none effecte .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.33

Paulyn a noble counsayler of Rome <paren> whose ryches the houndes of
the Palace , that is to say , the kinges gredy offycers wold haue
deuouryd by desyre and ambicio~ <$$paren> I delyuered and drewe out of
theyr rauynynge gapynge mouthes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.34

I dydde put my selfe in daunger of the malyce of the false accusar
Ciprian the kyngs servaunte , that the payne of the accusation before
adiudged shuld not wrongfullye punyshe Albyne a counsayloure of Rome .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.35

Have I not brought my selfe into troubles ynoughe ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.36

But I oughte to be more sure emongest other whom I haue profited then
emongest y=e= kings seruauntes whome I haue ben against alwais for the
loue of iustice , by whose accusacion <paren> that is to say by the
kings seruauntes , my familyer felowes , that haue accusyd me <$$paren>
I am banished : of the whyche accusars Basilius was one , y=t= sometyme
was dryuen out of the kinges seruyce for hys malyce and wyckednes , and
nowe broughte in agayne for to accuse me for nede of other me~s monye
and reward . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.37

Opilion and Gaude~cius , <paren> certes <$$paren> were other two of my
accusars , whyche when the king Theodoryke for theyr manyfolde deceytes
& falsehed had banyshed , they would not obey hym , but refused and
defendid the~ by takynge sanctuarye , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,19.38

and when the kyng herd of it , he comaunded y=t= except they departed
and went awaye from y=e= Citye of Rauenna within a certayne tyme
appoynted , that they shoulde be marked on the <P_20> forehed with a
hote Iro~ & dryuen awaye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.39

What crueltie might seme more then this ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.40

For the same day was I falsely accused by the very same accusers .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.41

What may be sayd to thys ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.42

Hath my study and learnyng deserued this ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.43

or hath my dampnacion or iudgement made the accusars true ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.44

Oughte not fortune to be ashamed of thys ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.45

Although fortune were not ashamed that I was vniustlye accusyd , yet
ought she to be ashamyd of the vyle gayne of the accusers .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.46

But perchau~ce thou woldest know the cause wherof I am accused .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.47

It is sayde that I wuld haue saued the senators .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.48

And thou wouldeste knowe howe and after what maner I am accused .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.49

It is noised that I stopped y=e= messenger and woulde not suffer hym to
brynge hys letters of accusation vnto the kyng , whereby the senatours
shold haue bene founde gyltye of treson commytted agaynste the kynges
royal maiestye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.50

O mysters Phylosophy what thinke you herein , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.51

shall I denye it , lest that I should shame the ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.52

Truelye I do confesse that I haue desyred to saue the senate :
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.53

And I confesse that I shall neuer cesse to doo the same :
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.54

But as towchyng that I did stoppe the message of the messynger , it shal
cesse , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.55

for it is not treue . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.56

Shall I call it a wronge or treason to wyshe the preseruation of the
order of the senate ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.57

Certes the same senate that consented to my dampnation dyd thys by theyr
decrees iudiciall , as thoughe it were not lawefull to desire theyr
helth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.58

But foly that alwaye workyth her own destructio~ can@ @not chau~ge the
meryte of thynges . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.59

And I thynke by the iudgement of Socrates that it is not lawefull for me
to hyde the truthe , nor to consent to lesynges .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.60

But how so euer it be , I referre it to thy iudgement , and to them that
be wyse , to iudge , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.61

for the truthe and order of thys thing can@ @not be hyd from our
successoures , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.62

for I haue put it in wrytyng and in memory . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.63

For what auayleth me to speake of the letters falsely surmysed to be
made by me <paren> whereby I am accusyd <$$paren> to haue hoped for the
delyueraunce of the Romaynes from the handes of the kynge Theodoryke .
The craft of wyche letters shoulde haue bene knowen yf I myght haue ben
present before mine accusors which is a thynge most expedyent and
necessary in all causes of iudgement , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.64

and what other fredom may me~ loke for ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.65

Certes I woulde there were some other thinge , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,20.66

I would then haue answered wyth the wordes of one Canius , <paren> which
whe~ he was accused of one Gaius , Cesars cosyn germayne sonne , that he
was gylty of a <P_21> coniuration or conspiracy made agaynst hym
<$$paren> the said Canius aunswered Gaius thus . If I had knowen it ,
thou shuldeste not haue knowen it , I would haue wrought so warelye .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.67

In whyche thinge before specyfyed that I am vniustelye accusyd of euyll
men , sorowe hath not soo dulled my sensis or wytte , that I do only
complayne that the wycked folke do goo aboute and inuente wycked thynges
agaynste vertuous folke , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.68

but I do maruayle gretlye howe they can brynge to passe the thynges that
they haue take~ in hande . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.69

For to wyll to doo euyll and wycked thyngs perchaunce is through our
owne faulte : BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.70

but it is lyke a monster before god to do such euyll and wickyd thinges
, that euery wycked perso~ hath conceyued in hys mynde to doo agaynst an
innocent , wherof one of thy famylyers that is to say a Phylosopher
demaunded iustly this question . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.71

Truelye he sayth if there be a god fro~ whe~ce commeth euyll thynges ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.72

And yf there be no God , from whence cometh good thynges ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.73

But if it were lawefull , that wycked folke <paren> that desyrethe the
deathe of all good folke and of all the senate <$$paren> wolde go aboute
to distroye me , whom they haue sene to defende good folke , & the
senate , whether thynkest thou that I had deserued the same of the
senate ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.74

that is to saye : that the senate shoulde wyll my distruction .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.75

Thou doest reme~bre <paren> as I thynke <$$paren> when that I was aboute
to saye or do any thynge , thou beinge present didist alwayes rule me .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.76

Thou remembrest <paren> I saye <$$paren> at the Cytye of Veron when the
kynge Theodorike gredy and desyrous of commen destruction , and to
distroy al the senate , went aboute to impute vnto all the hole order of
senatoures , the treason and gylte of hys royall Maiestye , wherof
Albyne the senatoure was accusyd , with how greate peryll of my selfe
dyd I defende the innocentye of the sayd senate ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.77

thou knowest that I saye truth , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.78

and neuer bostyd nor reioysed for anye prayse to my selfe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.79

For a man demynysheth in maner the secretes of hys conscience as often
as he in praysynge hymselfe receiueth any renoume of hys dedes emongest
men . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.80

But thou seyste what chau~ce or ende I haue for my innocencye .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.81

I do suffer paynes of false gyltie or felony , wythoute deserte for a
rewarde of my vertues . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,21.82

What ope~ confession of felonye had iudges euer so accordynge in
crueltye ? but that eyther the erroure of manes wit , or the chaunce of
fortune <paren> that is vncertain vnto al mortal men <$$paren> hath
turnyd some of the same iudges to compassion and pytye , sauynge in my
<P_22> accusation . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.83

For althoughe I had bene accusyd that I sayde I woulde brenne churches ,
& strangle pristes with cruell swerde , and distroy all good folke , yet
shulde not the iudge condempne me , excepte I were present and conuict
of the offence vpon my confession therof : BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.84

but I being absent the space of fyue_hundred myles in great study , and
hauing no knowledge that I was accusyd of any gylte or felonye , was
adiudged by y=e= senate to death of prescription .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.85

O wel be they worthy prayse <paren> it is spoken ironice that is to
vnderstande they be euil worthy prayse <$$paren> that for my kyndenes
haue thus iudged me , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.86

none of the~ could be so iudged of lyke cryme after the maner as I was
whan I was present , as they were present at my iudgment , the
innocencye of the whyche my offence they that haue accusyd me , haue
seene and do knowe . Whych innocencye to hyde & couer with som faut ,
they haue surmysed that I haue hurte and pollutyd my conscience with
sacryledge , or Nygromancy , in doinge sacrifyse to deuyls for ambicion
or desyre of dignitie . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.87

But certainely thou Philozophy being in me , dyddest put awaye all
desyre of mortal thinges from my mynd , so that there was no place left
of sacryfyse to deuyles in thy syght . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.88

And thou diddest pour into mine eares and mynde daylye the sayinge of
Pytagoras which is , that god must be serued and not Goddes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.89

Nor it was not conuenyent for me , to requyre helpe of vnclene spyrytes
or deuyles , whome thou haddest made of such excellency by wisdome ,
that thou wouldeste haue made me lyke vnto god by vnderstandynge .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.90

Furthermore my innocent wyfe of my howse , and a multitude of my honeste
frendes , and my father in law namyd the holy & reuerend Symachus in
thys behalfe do defende me from all suspicion of such offence .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.91

But o thou malyce , those wycked that accusyd me doo take wytnes of the
<paren> O Phylosophye <$$paren> of my crime and accusation ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.92

for they thought that I haue had affinitie or occasyon to inchauntment ,
because I am brought vp and instructyd in thy doctryne and informyd in
thy maners . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.93

And it is not sufficyent that thy reuere~ce do nothing profit me , but
that thou rather willinglye are contented to be blamed of them for my
offence , and accusacion . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,22.94

But yet besydes all my harmes I haue thys more hurt , that the iudgement
of many of the common people do not consyder the meryt and desyre of
thyngs , but onelye the chaunce of fortune , and doo iudge that onely
such thynges be ordeyned of god , that <P_23> worldelye felycytye or
delyte commendeth , which is as much to say : that <paren> after the
iudgement of the common people <$$paren> yf a man haue welthe he is a
good man , and worthy to haue it . And if he hath aduersitie , that he
is an euyll man & worthy to haue it , and that God hath forsaken hym .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,23.95

And soo there vpon it folowethe that wretchys and vnhappye or pore folke
, be not regarded , or estemed . For whyche cause it greueth me to
remember what vnfittynge rumors and dyuerse sayinges be emongest the
people of me . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,23.96

And this I dare be bolde to say , that the last bourden of euyll fortune
is thys , that when my accusacion is imputed to wretched folke , it is
thought that they haue deserued the same that they doo suffer .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,23.97

And certes I that am expulsyd from al good folke , spoyled of my
dignities , and spotted in my estymacion by false accusacion , in stede
of rewarde haue receyued ponyshment , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,23.98

me thynketh that I do se the wyckyd companye of felonowes folke abounde
in ioye and gladnes , and euery vnthryft lye in a wayte to accuse good
folke with newe fraudes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,23.99

And I do se the good people lye oppressed for fere of my peryll and
ponysshement . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,23.100

And I do se euery vnthrifitie person bolde to co~myt synne , vnponysshed
beynge procured therto for money . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,23.101

Also I do se the Innoce~tes not onely with_oute succur , but also
without defence . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,23.102

Therfore I am forced to crye vnto god of heuyn in this maner .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,23.103

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_24>

After that I had barckyed oute or rashly spoken these things vnaduysedly
my sorowe remaynynge styll , Phylosophy with a quyete countenaunce
beynge nothynge moued or angrye at my complayntes , sayde vnto me thus .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,24.106

PHIL. When I sawe the sad and wepyng , I knewe by and by that thou were
a wretche , and a banyshed man , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,24.107

but howe farre of thou were exiled or banyshed I knewe not but by thy
owne sayinge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,24.108

But yet thou art not banyshed farre from thy countray , that is to saye
, farre from thy owne reason or iudgememte , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,24.109

but thou hast strayed out of the waye or erred a litel .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,24.110

But if thou woldest rather accompt thy selfe banyshed from thy countraye
, then I saye thou rather haste banished thy self .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,24.111

For certes to banishe the it was not lawful for any man at any tyme , if
thou reme~bryste what countrye <P_25> thou were borne in . Whyche
countreye is not rulyd by the gouernment of many , as the cytye of the
Attheniens sometyme was gouerned . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.112

For of thy countrye is but one lord , one kyng , and one prynce , whych
is almyghtye God , that more reioyseth at the quyete conuersation of
manye Cytezens together , then of theyr exyle and banyshement . By
whose precepts to be ruled , and to obeye hys iustyce , is very hygh
lybertye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.113

Hast thou forgotten the old lawe of thy Citie ? wherein it is
establissed for a law that who soeuer had determyned therin to dwell may
not be banysshed from thens . But who soeuer hath no desyre therein to
dwel hath not deserued to be therein . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.114

Yet the disposition and maner of this place of exyle doth not so muche
moue me , as thy face onelye whyche is the inwarde disposition of thy
mynd . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.115

I do not requyre the walles of thy librari deckyd with Iuorye and glasse
, rather the~ the quietnes of the inward thought of thy mynde , wherin I
do not set and lay bokes , but wise sentences that maketh the bookes to
be precyous or estemed . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.116

And Certes Boecius , thou haste sayd and declared the truth of thy dedes
done for the common vtilitie and profyt of the people .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.117

But thou hast declared lytell of the commoditie that thou hast had , by
the multytude of thy actes and dedes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.118

And thou haste recyted thinges manifest to all men , of the honesty ,
that is to saye : of the saluation of the senate , or of the falsehead ,
that is to sai : of the forgyng of letters to th@ @emperor , imputyd to
the and layd to thy charge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.119

The wyckednes and decyts of thy accusars thou hast touchyd playnely ,
and verye strayte , albeit the thyngs might haue bene better spoken of &
more fully by voyce of the come~ people that knew it .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.120

Thou hast much blamed the acte of the vniuste senate ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.121

and hathe lamented for my blame , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.122

and thou {SIC:hou} haste bewayled the losse of thy good name .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.123

Laste of all thou haste complayned vpon fortune , that rewardes be not
equally distrybuted to men accordyng to their desertes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.124

And in the ende of thy furyous meter , thou hast prayed that the same
peace of the dyuyne purueyans or prouydence , may rule men on earth as
it ruleth the heuen . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,25.125

But for bycause that manye passions , and trybulatyo~s haue greuyd the ,
and that dolor anger and heuynes turneth thy mynd dyuersly as it
appereth nowe : Therefore as yet thou shalt not tast the stronge
medicine in thy weakenes , but suche as be somewhat easy , whereby the
thynges that by longe increase of corruption & paine haue growen vnto
<P_26> an hard swellynge , by softe handelynge of lenytyue medycynes may
be dissolued and made more apte to suffer the vyolence of stronger
remedyes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.126

{COM:verse_omitted}

<heading>

PHIL. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.129

<$$heading>

O Boecius , before I geue the any medycine , tell me fyrst whether thou
wylte suffer me to demau~d of the certyane questyons for to knowe the
state of thy mynd , whereby I may the better vnderstand howe to cure the
of thy dyssease ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.131

BOECI. I saye aske me whatsoeuer please the that I may answere the .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.132

PHIL. Then the sayde phylosophye sayde : Thynkyst thou that the worlde
is gouernyd by folyshe and by casuall chaunces ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.133

or belueyst thou that it is rulyd by reason , that is to saye : by gods
puruiaunce ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.134

B. Truly I say y=t= I neuer thought by any maner of means that suche
certayne thynges should be rulyd by the folyshe happe of fortune .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.135

But I doo knowe that almyghty God the creatoure of things rulith his own
worke , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.136

and I neuer sawe the tyme that coulde turne me from the truth thereof .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.137

P. It is eue~ so , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.138

for thou saidest so a lytle before , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.139

and lamentedest that mankinde was not gouerned by the dyuyne puruyans of
God , not doubtynge but that other creatours were ruled by the saide
diuine ordinaunce . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,26.140

But O , I do gretly wondre why thou art sycke for <P_27> so moch as thou
art set in so good opinion . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.141

Neuertheles , let us serche deper : BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.142

I do thynke that some thynge is yet amysse with the ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.143

but I can@ @not tell what it is . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.144

Saye to me Boecius <paren> for as moch as thou doutiste not but that
almyghtye god ruleth the worlde <$$paren> doest thou knowe how he
gouerneth it ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.145

BOE. I do scarsely vnderstande what thou menist by thy question ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.146

and as yet I can@ @not answere the to the same question .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.147

PHIL. I was not deceyued in that I sayd som thyng was amysse wyth the ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.148

for the syckenes of perturbacion or trouble hathe crepte into thy mynde
as by an open way that hath no impediment , or stoppe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.149

But tel me , doist thou remember what is the ende of all thynges
naturall ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.150

BOE. I have harde it , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.151

but heuynes hath caused me to forget it . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.152

PHIL. Knowes thou of who~ al things haue taken theyr beginning ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.153

BOE. I saye I haue knowen and haue answered , that God is the
begynnynge of al thinges . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.154

PHIL. Then howe maye it be that <paren> synce thou knowest the
begynnynge of all thynges <$$paren> thou knowest not the ende of the
same ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.155

But suche be the maners of troubles , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.156

and such be theyr strengthe that they maye cause a man to forgette
partelye , but can@ @notte plucke awaye from hym all together .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.157

But I woulde that thou woldest aunswere me to thys question .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.158

Reme~brest thou that thou art a man ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.159

BOE. Why should I not remember it ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.160

PHI. Canste thou tell than what thynge a man is ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.161

BOECI. Askiste me thys ? Or whether that I do knowe that I am a
resonable and a mortall beste ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.162

I do knowe & confesse that I am so . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.163

PHIL. Knowest thou whether thou were any other thynge ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.164

BOE. None other thynge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.165

PHIL. Nowe knowe I another great cause of thy disease .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.166

Thou hast forgotten to knowe thy selfe , what thou arte . Wherefore I
haue found fully the cause of thy sicknes , or els the maner and wayes
how to recouer the same . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.167

For bycause thou haddest forgotten thy selfe what thou art , therefore
thou hast complayned that thou art both a banyshed ma~ , and spoyled and
robbed of thy own proper goodes , and ryches , temporall .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.168

And no meruayle it is , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.169

for thou wotyst not what is the ende of al thynges ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.170

and thou thynkest that euyll men and wicked be myghtye and happye .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.171

And why so ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.172

because thou hast forgotten by what meanes the worlde is gouernyd .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.173

And thou thynkest that these mutacio~s and chaunces of fortune , do
wander wythout anye gouernoure . Whyche be the greate causes not onelye
of syckenes , but also of vtter destruction and death .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,27.174

But thou art bounde to geue thankes to <P_28> the Author of helthe ,
that nature is not cleane extynct in the , but that some strength yet
remayneth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,28.175

And I haue a great restoritie towardes thy healthe , that is to say :
the trew vnderstanding of the worlds gouernau~ce in that thou beleuyst
that it is not gouerned by the folishe chaunces of fortune , but subiect
to goddes ordynaunce . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,28.176

Therfore feare not , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,28.177

for of this lytle sparke of truth , the lyuely heate shall reuyue &
recouer his olde strength agayne . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,28.178

But forasmoche as now , it is no time to vse stronger medicines , & that
the nature of mens mindes is suche , that when they haue forsaken trewe
opynyons , they receyue false opinions and errours , whereof spryngeth
the darkenes of perturbacion , or trouble of the minde that taketh away
the treue lyght of vnderstanding of the same .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,28.179

But I wyll proue to remoue a lytell the same darkenes with easy and
moderate medicynes . That after that the darke cloudes of false
affectes be taken or remoued awaye , thou mayst beholde and know the
cleare lyght of the verye truethe . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,28.180

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_29>

<heading>

THE SECOND BOKE . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.184

<$$heading>

<heading>

BOECIUS . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.187

<$$heading>

After this phylosophy held her peace a lytel whyle ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.189

and then she by a modeste styllnes perecyuing me , dylygent and
intentyfe to heare her speake : said as folowethe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.190

PHIL. Forasmuche as I haue knowen and founde out the originall causes ,
and the disposition of thy syckenes , O Boecius , that is to saye : that
thou arte sycke for the losse of thy former fortune that was prosperous
, & nowe beyng chaungyd as thou surmysest , hath chaunged and turnyd the
disposition of thy mynde . I do wel know the manyfolde deceytes of the
sayde fortune , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.191

for so long she vsyth hyr famylier flatterye , with them whom she
intendethe to deceyue , vntyl she hathe ouerthrowen them sodenly with
intollerable greife and sorowe , whome she hath forsaken and left in
dyspayre of any co~forte agayne . Whose nature maners & dygnytie , yf
thou do consyder , thou shalt perceyue that nether thou haddest in her ,
nor hast lost by her , anye good thinge at all .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.192

But I thynke I shall not laboure much to brynge these thinges of
fortunes goodnes into thy remembraunce . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.193

For thou were wonte to re-rebuke wyth sharp wordes the same fortune both
beyng present and flatterynge , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.194

and thou didest argue or dispute agaynste her wyth sentences , drawen
out of my doctryne or informacio~ . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.195

But truly euery sodein mutacion or chau~ge of thynges cometh not
wythoute some trouble of the mynde . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.196

So it is done and commeth to passe , that thou art fallen a lytel from
the quietnes of thy mynde that thou were in before .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.197

But it is tyme that thou do receiue and taste som easye and pleasaunt
thynge , which after that it is entred into the inwarde partes of thy
mynde , it may prepare a waye for stronger medycynes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,29.198

Therefore behold the perswasion <P_30> of the swetnes of Rethoryke is
presente , that goeth forwarde , then onely in the ryghte way , when she
foloweth my precepts . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.199

And with Rethoryke is a mayd of my howse , named Musyke , that syngeth
nowe lyghter mesures , & now greater mesures .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.200

What thynge is it therfore , <paren> O thou man , <$$paren> that hath
caste the into heuynes , and wepynges ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.201

I beleue that thou hast seene some straunge thinge .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.202

If thou dost thynke that fortune is turned agaynst the : thou art therin
deceyued , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.203

for she is not chaunged , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.204

these were her maners alwayes , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.205

this is her proper nature , to be nowe prosperous and nowe contrarye .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.206

And she hathe rather kept her owne nature and constancy aboute the in
this her mutabylite . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.207

Truelye she was alwaies such when she flattred the , & deceyued the ,
with the delite of false profyte . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.208

Thou hast knowen the doubtfull countenaunce of that blynde goddes
fortune , which although she do hyde her self vnto some men , in
promysyng them prosperyte : hath shewed her self many_festlye and holye
as she is to the , that is to saye : inconstau~t .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.209

If thou allow her : vse her maners , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.210

and co~plain not . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.211

If thou feare her falsehed : refuse her BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.212

& forsake her , as one whose pastime is perillous and hurtfull .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.213

For fortune , whiche nowe is the cause of thy great heuines and greif :
ought to be the cause of thy quyetnes and reste .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.214

But certes she hath forsaken the , as she hath done other .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.215

For neuer man yet was sure of her . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.216

Accomptest thou that thynge happy and prosperous that wyll not tarye and
remayne ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.217

And is fortunes presence so precious to the , that is so slipperye and
wil not tary ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.218

And also when she departeth from the , she bringeth in heuynes and
mornyng ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.219

Therfore syns that fortune can not be retayned as a man wolde haue her ,
and when she departeth she maketh men carefull , what other thynge is
slypperye fortune but a certain token of wretchednes to come ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.220

And it is not sufficiente to beholde the thinge presente ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.221

but it is wysedome to consyder the ende of all thynges ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.222

& the chaungynge from one thynge to another , maketh that the
threatnynges of fortune are not to be fearid , nor her flatterynges to
be desyryd . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.223

Moreouer thou oughtest to suffer paciently all thinges y=t= be done
within the compasse , & boundes of fortune , that is to say : al
worldlye thynges , syns thou hast submytted thy selfe to her yoke by
desyre of temporall thyngs . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,30.224

But if thou wilt prescribe a lawe to Fortune to tarye or departe hence ,
whome thou of thyne owne free wyll , hast chosen <P_31> for thy lady :
thynkest thou not that thou doeste her wronge therein ? And that by thy
impacyence thou makest her wrouth and angrye ? Whom thou canste not
chaunge other wyse then she list her selfe . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.225

If thou commytte the sayles of thy shyppes , to the wyndes , thou goyst
not whyther thou wouldeste thy selfe , but whyther the wynde dryuethe
the . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.226

If thou sowe thy sedes in the feldes , thou muste consyder that the
yeres be somtyme plentious , & other whyles scarse or baren , so that it
is not in thy powre , to order & rule the yeare as thou lystethe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.227

Lyke wyse thou haste submytted thy selfe to fortunes gouernaunce ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.228

therfore it behoueth the to obeye the maners of her beynge thy lady and
mystres . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.229

Certes thou laborest to staye her tournynge whele .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.230

O , thou fole of al foles mortall , if fortune bega~ to be stedefaste
and not mutable , she myght not be called fortune .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.231

{COM:verse_omitted}

<heading>

<font> Philosophy talketh with Boecius in the stede of fortune sayenge .
<$$font> BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.234

PHI. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.235

<$$heading>

I wolde fayne talke with the <paren> Boecius <$$paren> a few wordes
<paren> with the sayenges of fortune , or in the stede of fortune
<$$paren> BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.237

therfore take thou good hede whether that she asketh the thynge , that
is right and lawfull . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.238

O thou man , wherfore makest thou me a wronge doer and gilty , with thy
contynuall complayntes ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,31.239

What wronge <P_32> haue I done the ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.240

What goodes haue I taken from the ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.241

Reason with me before what Iudge thou wilt , of possessions , riches or
other dignities , whether that any man lyuynge , can clayme any of theym
to be his owne . I wyll gyue the gladlye suche that thou prouist to be
thi owne proper . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.242

For whe~ nature brought the out of thy mothers wombe , I receyued the
all naked , without any thyng , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.243

and cherisshed the with myne own goodes , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.244

and was redye to norishe the more mekely of mine owne gentlenes ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.245

& I endued the with aboundau~ce , & with the beaute of all thinge y=t= I
had , which thinges maketh the now so angry and cruel agaynst me .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.246

Now it pleseth me to withdraw my hand , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.247

thou oughtest to tha~ke me for vsing of goods that were none of thyne .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.248

Thou hast no iust cause to complaine as though thou haddest loste thy
goodes vtterly . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.249

Therfore why mournyst thou ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.250

I haue done the no wronge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.251

Ryches , Honour , and suche lyke , be myne owne ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.252

and they beyng my seruauntes , do knowe me for their ladye and mystres ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.253

they do come wyth me , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.254

and do go awaye wyth me . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.255

I dare boldely say , that yf those things that thou complaynyst to be
lost , were thyne : thou could not haue lost them by anye meanes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.256

Should I alone be defended to vse my owne ryght ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.257

It is lawfull for the firmamente to make cleare bryght daye , and after
that to shadowe the same againe with the darke night .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.258

It is also lawefull for the yere to decke the grounde sometyme <paren>
as in the Ver <$$paren> with flowers , other whyles <paren> as in sommer
<$$paren> with corne , and to destroye the same agayne <paren> as in
Autumpne & wynter <$$paren> with rayne and colde .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.259

It is lawfull for the sea , <paren> in a caulme <$$paren> to be playne
and smothe , and in tyme of tempeste , to be roughe and raginge , with
floudes and stormes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.260

Shoulde the insaciate couetuousness of man , bynde me to be stedfast
agaynst my nature ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.261

This is my power BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.262

and this is always my play . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.263

I do turne the wauerynge whele rounde aboute , that neuer cessith .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.264

I do reioise to chan~g low thynges , that is to say : Aduersitie , with
high things , y=t= is to sai , prosperytie . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.265

Clyme upon my whele if thou wilt but upon this conditio~ , that thou
shalte not iudge that I do the anye wrong , yf thou fall or come downe ,
when I lyste to play . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.266

Knewest not thou my maners ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.267

Knewest not thou Cresus kynge of the Lydeens , of whome Cyrus the Kynge
of Persiens , was sore afferd , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.268

a lytel before that Cyrus toke Cresus , in batel ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,32.269

and led hym to the fyer to be brennyd , but that a raygne fell from
heuen , and <P_33> sauyd hym , whereby he escaped .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,33.270

And hast thou forgotten howe that Paulus a consull of Rome , wepte for
the myserye of the kynge of Persyens , whom he had taken prysoner and
captyue . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,33.271

What other thynge causyth the exclamation , and lamentation of tragidies
? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,33.272

But onelye that I fortune , sodenly by my rashe stroke , haue subuertyd
noble kyngedomes that were sometyme prosperous .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,33.273

Hast thou not learnyd <paren> when thou were a younge man <$$paren> that
there laye in the entrye at Jupyters house two tunnes of wyne , the one
full of good wine , th@ @other ful of euil wine , of the whyche euery
man <paren> that entred <$$paren> must nedes tast ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,33.274

What cause hast thou to complayne , if thou hast taken more parte of the
good <paren> that is to say <$$paren> of prosperitie then of aduersitye
? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,33.275

And what and I am@ @not clene gone fro~ the ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,33.276

What and my vnstedefastnes be a iuste cause for the , to hope for better
thynges ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,33.277

dyspayre the not therefore , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,33.278

and desyre not to lyue after thy owne mynde , & wyll , although thou be
placyd in the worlde whyche is commen and indifferent for all lyuyng
thynges . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,33.279

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_34>

<heading>

PHYLOSOPHY SPEKETH . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.283

<$$heading>

Therefore , yf that fortune spake wyth the for hyrselfe after thys maner
before sayde , Certes thou haddest nothinge to answere her wythall .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.285

And yf thou haddest any ethyng {COM:sic} to defende rightfully thy
complaynt withall , it behouyth the to shewe it .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.286

BOE. Then I saye , that the thynges that fortune hath sayde be goodly ,
and made swete with the pleasure of Rhetorike and musike ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.287

and then onely they delyghte men , when they be harde .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.288

But yet the felinge of sorowe & greifes is more depe , & paynfull vnto
the diseased , and wretched people , then the sayd pleasaunte wordes can
help and ease . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.289

For when the words of fortune do leue of to sound in myne eares , the
former greife commeth againe , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.290

and ouermuch greuyth my mynde . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.291

PHIL. And thou saiest ryght soth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.292

For the sayd wordes of fortune be no medicyns for thy disease , but
rather nouryshynges agaynste the cure of thy greife .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.293

For the medycynes , that shulde serche vnto the very botom of thy sores
, and take awaye the primatyue cause thereof , I wyl declare vnto the ,
when tyme shall requyre . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.294

Neuerthelesse , esteme not thy self a wretche , or clene forsaken .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.295

Hast thou forgotten the number and maner of thy prosperitye ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.296

I do passe ouer , and nede not shew howe that the noble men of the Cytye
of Rome , whyche were Counsulles , toke charge of the , beynge an
orphant withoute father and mother , and that thou were chosen and elect
into the affinite of Princes of y=e= Cytye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.297

And thou begannyst rather to be dere and welbeloued , then a neyghboure
, the whiche is the most precyous kynd of Aliaunce .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.298

What man would not iudge the most happye , that haddyst suche a father
in lawe , such a chast wyfe , and such good chaunces of thy men chyldren
as thou haste ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.299

And besydes this <paren> I am disposed to passe ouer commen thynges
<$$paren> I doo not speake of the dygnytyes that thou haddest in thy
youth , whych are denyed to old folke that is to say , scarse any olde
folke coulde attayne vnto anye suche . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,34.300

For nowe it delyghtethe me to come vnto , and remember the singuler
aboundau~ce or hepe of thy <P_35> prosperities . So that if any fruit
of worldly and tra~sitorye thinges , myght be accountyd felycytye , or
prosperitie , myghteste thou forgette <paren> for any hurte that myght
happen <$$paren> the day that thou sawiste thy two sonnes made Consuls ,
and ladde together from thy house with so greate asse~ble of Senators ,
& wyth so greate Ioy of the people ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.301

And whan thou sawest them set in the courte , in the Chayres of hygh
dignitie and iudgement , thou thy selfe beinge an orator , or speaker of
kynges laude and praysynges , dyddyst deserue glory of wytte and
eloquence , when that thou <paren> syttyng in the middes of thy two
sonnes beyng consules <$$paren> diddyst satysfye and please the
expectatyon {COM:sic} of the multytude of the people that was aboute the
, wyth trymphante laude and prayse of vyctorye ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.302

Thou then <paren> as I thynke <$$paren> didest deceyue Fortune with thy
gloryous wordes , when that she thus fauored the , and cheryshed the as
her owne derlynges . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.303

Thou dydest beare awaye from fortune , such a gyft and reward , that she
neuer gaue to any pryuate man . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.304

Wylt thou call Fortune to accompte nowe for anye thynge :
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.305

She hath nowe firste wynkyd vpon the , wyth her frownynge or cruell
countenaunces or lokynge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.306

And yf thou couldest consider the number and maner of myrthe and sorowe
, that is to saye : of thy prosperitie and aduersitie , thou cannyste
not denye but that thou art yet happye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.307

For if thou countist thyselfe therfore vnhappye , by cause those thinges
be gone that semyd happye & good : yet thou oughteste not to esteme thy
selfe a wretche or an abiecte . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.308

For the thinges that nowe seme vnhappye and sorowefull , do passe awaye
. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.309

Arte thou the fyrst that art be_come a sodeine geste into the shadowe of
thys lyfe , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.310

or thynkest y=u= that ther is any certayntie or stedfastnes in worldelye
thynges ? When y=t= the swyft hour of deth taketh awaye the same man ,
that is to saye Mans lyfe ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.311

For althoughe there is seldome any hope that the goddys of fortune
woulde contynue , yet is the latter daye of mans lyfe in maner a death
to fortune . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.312

What matter is it therfore as thou thynkeste , whether that thou dyinge
, forsake fortune , or she fleinge awaye , forsake the ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.313

That is to saye : Whether thou by death of thy bodye , forsake fortune ,
or Fortune by flyinge from the , forsake the ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.314

Surely no matter or difference it is . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,35.315

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_36>

<heading>

BOE. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,36.319

<$$heading>

O thou noryce of al vertues , thou sayest treuthe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,36.321

I can@ @not deny the swyfte course of my prosperytye .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,36.322

But thys is the thynge that moste greuyth me , when that I doo remember
y=t= I was happye or in prosperitye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,36.323

For in all aduersitie of Fortune , the mooste greife of aduersitie , is
to remember , that I haue bene in prosperitie .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,36.324

PHIL. But what thoughe y=t= thou sufferest ponishme~t of false opinion
, thou mayste not impute the same to the lacke of thynges , as though
thou haddest nothynge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,36.325

For thou hast many thynges lefte yet . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,36.326

For yf the vaine name of causuall prosperyte , do moue the : it is mete
that thou accompt and reken with me , howe moche & howe great ryches
thou hast yet in store . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,36.327

If therfore the thynge that thou hadst , & dyd possesse , most precious
and best in all the treasure of thy fortune , be reserued yet vnto y=e=
by gods grace vnspotted and inuyolate , mayst thou <P_37> ryghtfullye
complayne vpon the myschaunce of fortune , hauynge styll thy best
thynges ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.328

Certes the same precious worshyp of mankind , Simachus thy father in
lawe , is in good helthe , a wyse man , & a vertuous man for whose sake
thou wouldyst be redye to ioepard thy lyfe if nede were ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.329

he beynge a man fautles , is sorye for thy iniuryes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.330

Thy wyfe also lyueth , both sober of wytte , and excellent in clenes of
chastite , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.331

and shortely to conclude all her vertues , she is lyke her father
Symachus . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.332

She lyueth , I saye , to the , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.333

and she beynge wery of her lyfe , kepyth her lyfe for thy sake , being
ouercome with wepynge , and sorowe , for lacke of the . In the whyche
one thyng I must nedes grau~t that thy felicitie is mynyshed .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.334

What shall I saye of thy two sonnes beynge Consulles , in whom there
shynyth the wysedome of theyr father , and of theyr graundefather , as
much as is possyble to be in chylders of theyr age ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.335

but yet the cheyfe cure of al men lyuyng is to conserue theyr owne lyfes
. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.336

O thou man yf thou remember thy selfe , the goodes that thou hast yet
remaynyng , do make the happye . Whyche goodes , no man douthtyth , but
that they be derer and more to be estemyd , then thy owne lyfe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.337

Therefore nowe wype thy eyes BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.338

and wepe no more , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.339

for fortune is not all agaynste the , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.340

nor the stronge tempest of aduersitie hath yet touchyd the ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.341

for thy ankers , that is to saye : thy frendes do styke fast to the ,
whych will not suffer the to wante comforte of the tyme presente , nor
hope of the tyme to come . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.342

BOE. And I do wyshe that they maye cleue fast , and abyde ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.343

for whyles that they doo remayne , howe soeuer thynges be , or howsoeuer
the world goeth , I shal escape and do wel . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.344

But thou seyst howe that th@ @apparell and outewarde goodes that I had
be nowe gone . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.345

PHIL. But I haue somwhat comfortyd the , yf thou forthinke the not of
all thy hole fortune , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.346

for thou hast y=e= best goods styll . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.347

But I maye not suffer thy delyces or tendernes , that thou wepynge and
sorowefull , complaynyst that thou lackyst somewhat of thy prosperytie .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.348

For what man is so full of prosperytie , that doth not complayne , or is
not pleasyd wyth some parte of hys estate or degre ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.349

For the estate & condition of worldlye goodes , is so carefull a thynge
, that eyther it {SIC:is} commeth neuer to a man together holye , or
ells it neuer contynueth styll wyth him . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,37.350

For <P_38> although one man hath aboundaunce and plentye of monye , yet
he lackyth another thyng that is to saye , he is ashamed of his
ignobilytie , that he is no gentylman borne . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.351

And another man is well knowen for a gentyll man ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.352

but yet he is so nedye & poore that he had leuer be vnknowen of his
gentyles bloude . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.353

Another hathe both aboundaunce of goodes , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.354

and is noble , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.355

and yet he bewaylethe hys chaste lyfe , that he may not marye a wyfe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.356

Another is happely maryed BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.357

and hathe no chyldren , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.358

and gathereth treasure for a straunge heyre . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.359

Another is happye wyth chyldren , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.360

but he beyng sorowful for the synes and offences of hys sonne or
doughter , wepyth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.361

Therfore no ma~ <paren> for the most parte <$$paren> is contentyd wyth
hys estate or degre of fortune . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.362

For euerye man hath some thinge , that <paren> being not prouyd
<$$paren> he knoweth not , or beynge prouyd , he ferythe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.363

And adde thereto that euerye welthye man hath such delycate felynge ,
that <paren> except he hath all thynges at his commaundement <$$paren>
he is so impacient in aduersitie , that he is ouerthrowen , and
dysplesyd wyth euery lytel thynge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.364

And very small thinges they be in aduersytye , that draweth awaye the
cheyfe perfection of prosperitie from them that be moste fortunate .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.365

How many men <paren> thinkest thou <$$paren> wolde thynke them selfe
nexte vnto heauen , y=t= is to saye : welthy , yf that they myghte haue
but the lest parte of the resydue of thy fortune that remayneth wyth the
. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.366

This place that thou callest an exyle : is a countrie to them that dwell
therin . So that no man is wretched or abiect , but he that iudgeth
hymself so . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.367

And co~trary wyse , all fortune is good to hym that is conte~ted .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.368

What man is he that is so welthy , but wold wishe to chau~ge his estate
, when he is not conte~ted therwithall ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.369

How moch bytternes is mixed with the sweetnes of mans prosperite , which
prosperite , although it seme plesaunt to hym that hath it , can not be
so kept as a man wolde haue it , but when it lysteth , it gothe awaye .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.370

Therfore , it appereth howe wretched is the prosperytie of mortall
thynges , which do not alwayes contynue with theym that be pacient , &
contented , nor deliteth hooly the wretched man , impacient .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.371

O you mortall men , wherfore seke you in outward thynges , the felicitie
that is establisshed within you ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.372

Errour and ignoraunce confoundeth you . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.373

I shall shewe the shortlye , the roote off hye felicitie in this lyfe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.374

Is there any thyng more precious to the , then thyne owne selfe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.375

Thou wylt answere & say naye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,38.376

Then yf that thie mynde <P_39> be quyet and hoole , thou shalt possesse
the thynge that thou woldest not lese at any tyme , nor fortune can take
it from the . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.377

And to th@ @entent that thou mayst knowe , that felycitie can not stand
in fortunes thinges , or worldly things , y=u= maist thus gather and
vnderstand therof . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.378

If that felicitie be the souereygne bountie or goodnes of nature ,
lyuyng by reason , truly that can not be souerayne good , that maye be
taken awaye by any meanes : BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.379

but that thynge is more excellent , that can not be taken awaye .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.380

Than it is playne that vnstedfastnes of fortune maye not attayne to
receyue beatytude , that is to say : perfyte felycitie .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.381

More_ouer , that man , that this tomblynge or rollynge vnperfyte
felycitie , or goodnes , caryeth aboute , eyther knoweth that it is
mutable , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.382

or els he knoweth it not . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.383

If he knoweth it not , what : {COM:sic} blissed or good fortune may be
to the blindnes of ignorau~ce ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.384

And if he knoweth that it is mutable , then he oughte to feare y=t= he
loose not that thynge that he dowteth not , but that he maye loose it ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.385

therfore contynuall feare wyll not suffre hym to be blyssed or happy .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.386

If he do loose it , that is to saye : yf he lose temporal felycitie , or
ryches of fortune , and do lytle or nothing esteme it , the~ is it of
smale valour that a man can take in good worthe , whe~ it is lost .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.387

And for bycause I know , that thou thy selfe art the man , to who~ it
hath ben perswaded and declared by many reasons & demonstracions , that
the soules of mankynde , be in no wyse mortal or do dye :
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.388

And syth also it is manyfest , that fortunes felycitie is ended by the
death of the body humayne , or of mankynde , it maye not be dowted
<paren> yf this fortunes felicite myght take away perfyte felycitie or
blyssednes <$$paren> but that all mankynde in the ende of death ,
falleth into myserie & wretchednes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.389

And for_so_muche as I do knowe , that many holy men haue fought for the
fruyte of perfyte felycitie , not onely by the death of theyr bodyes ,
but also by paynes and ponysshements , by what meaynes then may this
mortall lyfe present , garnysshed with fortunes felycitie : that is to
saye : with worldlye thynges , make men blessed , whiche when it is
paste & ended , can not make theym wretched . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,39.390

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_40>

<heading>

PHIL. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.394

<$$heading>

But forasmuche as the medicynes , of my resons aforesayd , do begyn to
enter into the , I do now thynke it tyme to vse more stronger medycins
that is to say : stronger reasons . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.396

Come of BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.397

and harken vnto me . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.398

If that y=e= gifts of fortune were not bryttell , frayle , and
transytorie , what thing is in them that may be thyne at any tyme , or
that waxeth not vile , fylthye and foule yf it be well perceyued and
consydered . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.399

Be ryches of their owne nature precyous ? or by the that vsyst them ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.400

whether is y=e= more precious of these , y=t= is to say riches golde ,
or a great hepe of monye gathered together ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.401

Certes , ryches shynethe more BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.402

and causeth more prayse to be geuen vnto men in dystrubutinge , then in
horedynge vp and keping of y=e= same . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.403

For the couitousnes of them that kepe it : causeth them to be hated ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.404

and the liberalitie of them that do dystribute it , maketh them renomyd
and to haue an honest reporte . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.405

If the thing that is conueyed and delyuered from one to another , maye
not remayne styll with any manne ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.406

Then is moneye a precyous thynge , when it is conueyed from one to
another by the vse of gyfte , and cessyth to be kepte styll with anye
man : BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.407

It is spoken in mockage , that muste be vnderstande ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,40.408

monye is <P_41> not precious for the causes alledged .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.409

And yf all the monye in the worlde were gathered together and in one
mans possessyon , other folke that lackyd monye shoulde haue nede ther
of . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.410

Also one hole voyce fylleth at one tyme the eares of muche people that
heryth it , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.411

But riches can not passe vnto many or fyll manye , excepte they be
deuyded into percelles and porcions . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.412

And when it is so done it maketh them pore that do forgoo it .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.413

Therefore I may saye O troublesome and nedy ryches , whych many men can@
@not haue al hole together to them selfe : And commethe to no man
without impoueryshyng other . Do the shynynge or glysteryng of pearles
and precious stons draw mens eyes that is to sai cause me~ to desire
the~ . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.414

But yf there be any goodnes in theyr shynyng , it is the clerenes and
beautie of the stones & not of mens eyes . Wherfore I doo maruayle
greatlye at men , that they shoulde so wonder at theym , and desyre to
haue them . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.415

What thyng is there that <paren> wantynge mouynge of the soul and
ioyngyge of membres of the bodye to_gyther as these stones doo want
<$$paren> semyth goodly to a lyuing & reasonable creature . Whiche
precious stones <paren> albeit that they gather vnto the~ selfe somwhat
of the latter beautie of theis worlde , by the dylygence of theyr maker
, <paren> & theyr dystyncte nature <$$paren> : haue not deserued by any
meanes of the~ self , that men shuld meruayle at them , they beynge
subiecte and put vnder mans dignitie or gouernau~ce .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.416

Do not y=e= freshe beautie of the feldes delyght you ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.417

BO: What els . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.418

For it is a fayre porcion of a goodly worke in this world ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.419

& so are we somtyme glad at the syght of the calme sea , and so likewise
and by lyke reason , we do meruayle at the heauen or fyrmame~t , Sterres
, Sonne , and Moone . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.420

PH: Do any of the same thinges , appertayne to the ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.421

Dareste thou reioyce , and glory in the shynynge of any of theym ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.422

Arte thou decked with the flowers of Veer which is the sprynge time ,
when somer fyrst begynneth ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.423

Do thy plentyousnes , increase by sommer fruytes ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.424

What , art thou rauysshed with vayne ioyes ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.425

what , dost thou enbrace strau~ge goodes for thyne owne ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.426

Fortune can neuer make the same goodes thyne , y=t= the nature of
thynges hath made none of thyne , or estraunge to the . As the fruites
of the earth , ought to be y=e= foode of beastes , and not thyne .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,41.427

But yf thou wylt gyue nature that she nedeth , and replenish her to y=e=
ful , then is it no nede for the to seke <P_42> for the abundau~ce of
fortune , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.428

for nature is contentyd with verye lytle thynges .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.429

And if thou wylte choke nature wyth to muche , eyther y=t= thou geuyst
wil@ @be vnplesaunt , or hurtfull unto the . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.430

Thynkyst thou thy selfe goodly or more to be estemed for thy gay
apparell ? Of the whych yf the beawtie thereof be fresh and pleasau~t
to behold : I woulde rather maruayle at the substaunce therof , or the
craft of the workman that made it , then at the .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.431

Do a longe rowe of seruauntes goyng in order waytyng vpon the , make the
happye and good ? whyche yf they be euyll_manerd , then be they a
perilous charge to thy {SIC:they} house , and a veheme~t greuous burden
to the , beynge their mayster . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.432

But yf they be honeste and good : shall theyr goodnes be accountid or
imputed to the ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.433

So that by all the things before sayde , it apperyth that none of them
is thy goodnes . In whyche thinges yf there be no goodnes to be desyred
that maye be ascrybed to the : wherefore art thou sorye for the losse of
them ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.434

or why shouldest thou be glade to kepe them ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.435

But if they be good of their owne kind what is that to the ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.436

For although thei were taken from the , yet they shoulde be good of
themselfe , without the . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.437

For they are not therfore precious , for that they cam emongest thy
ryches , but bycause they semyd precyous vnto the ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.438

therefore thou haddyst leuer accompte them for thy owne ryches .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.439

But what thynge desyrest thou with so greate exclamatyon of fortune .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.440

Truely I think thou sekyst to expell necessytye , wyth aboundau~ce of
ryches . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.441

But surely this happeth to the , far other wise & co~trary .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.442

For certes a man hath nede of muche to beare the great charge of good
house kepynge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.443

And trewe it is that many thinges they haue nede of , that haue muche .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.444

And contrarye wyse they haue lytell nede , that measuryth theyr
aboundaunce and desyre with necessitie of nature , and not with theyr
insaciate couitousnes , that is to saye , that couetythe no more but
that is co~uenient for their present necessitie .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.445

O you men , haue ye no goodnes proper and naturall sette within your
selfe , but that you do seke for your goodnes in outewarde things
seperate from you ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.446

Surelye the condycion of thynges be so chaungid that ma~ beyng a godly
beast , by meanes of reason , thynketh himselfe nothynge estemed , but
he be sene a man by possession of worldelye goodes , that haue no life .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,42.447

And where as other beastes be contented wyth suche <P_43> beawtye and
goodnes , as nature hath geuen the~ , you creaturs that be lyke vnto god
by your reason or soul : do seke y=e= beauty of your excellent nature ,
in the lowist or meanist things that is to saye : in worldelye goodes ,
as though that they were better the~ your reason , that is moste
bewtyfull , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.448

and ye do not consyder what iniurye you do vnto almyghtye God youre
maker and creatoure . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.449

He would that mankynde were more excellent , and shoulde passe all
erthlye thynge , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.450

but you doo thruste downe your dignytye emongest al low thynges ,
estemynge them more than your self . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.451

For yf euery good thyng , is more precyous then the thynge that is owner
therof , when that you do iudge the vylest thynges <paren> as worldly
goodes <$$paren> to be your goodes , the~ do you submytte your selues
vnder them . Which certes happethe not withoute a cause ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.452

for suche is thee naturall condycion of man , that then onely he
excelleth all other thynges , when he knoweth hymselfe ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.453

and when he knoweth not hymselfe , then he is taken amonge beastes , as
a beaste . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.454

For the nature of all other beastes <paren> man onelye excepte <$$paren>
is not to knowe them selfe . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.455

But yf a man know not hym selfe , it cometh by some vyce that is in hym
, & not of nature . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.456

O thou mankynde , howe great is this thy errour , that thynkest that any
thyng can be made gaye , with other mens apparell or goodes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.457

But it can@ @not be so . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.458

For if a man shyneth by the thinges that be put vpon hym , and not of
hymself : the~ be those things praised and not he .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.459

For the thynge that is hydde and coueryd with the same shynynge things ,
remainyth styll in hys fylthynes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.460

And I denye that the thinge is good , that hurtyth hym that hath it .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.461

Doo I make a lye or saye otherwyse than I thynke ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.462

Thou wylte say naye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.463

Certes , ryches hath often tymes hurt them that had it forasmuche as
euerye wycked man is more gredye and desyrous of other me~s goodes
wheresouer they be , whether it be gold or precious stons , and thinketh
hym most worthy , that hath it . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.464

But for all that , thou man that hast te~poral riches now , thou feryst
the sharp speare and sworde , where as if thou haddest entred and walkyd
in the way or path of thys lyfe , as a wayefarynge manne pore and
without monye : thou mayste synge before the thefe without feare of
robbyng and without hurte of spere & swerde . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,43.465

O precious felicitie of Ryches temporall , <P_44> which whan thou hast
gotten it , thou canst not be sure thereof & kepe it .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,44.466

{COM:verse_omitted}

<heading>

PHIL. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,44.469

<$$heading>

What shall I speake of dignities and power , whyche you that know not
the trewe dignitie & power , do liken or compare it vnto heuen .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,44.471

And if these dignities and power shoulde happen vnto any wycked man they
do as much hurte as the brenning <P_45> hyll Ethna with all his flames
of fyer , brastynge out of the same . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.472

And no deluge or flode that drownyth the countries doth so much
annoiau~ce . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.473

Truly I thynke y=u= haff not forgotten that youre forefathers the
Romaines dyd couet to put downe the rule and aucthoritie of Consuls for
theyr pryde , which rule of Consules was the begynnyng of their lybertye
, whyche foresayd Romaynes before that , dyd put awaye from the cytye
the name of kynges , for the lyke pryde . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.474

But certes yf power and dygnitye be geuen vnto good folkes <paren> as it
seldome happeth <$$paren> what goodnes is in dignitye and power , but
onelye the goodnes of them that vse them . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.475

Soo it commeth to passe that honor commeth not to vertu by dignityes
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.476

but it com~eth to dignitie by vertue of them that vse the dignitie .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.477

But what is that same your noble powr that ye so much desyre and loke
for ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.478

Doo you not consyder the erthly bestes ouer whome you seme to haue
premynence ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.479

If thou sawest a mouse emongest other myse chale~ging vnto hym selfe a
ryght and power ouer other myse ? How much wouldest thou laughe therat
? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.480

that is to say , temporal power is such that it extendeth but onlye vnto
the bodye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.481

For yf thou loke vpon the body of a man , what thing shalt thou fynde
more weke and feble then mankynde , whome either the bytynge of lytell
wormes or some serpente that crepeth into their secrete partes ,
oftentymes kylleth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.482

Certes howe may a ma~ execute Iustyce vpon another , but vpon hys bodye
, or vpon fortune , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.483

that is to saye : vpon hys goodes and possessyons .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.484

Mayst thou at anye tyme rule or commaunde a fre thought ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.485

Mayst thou remoue the mynde or thought that cleuyth to it selfe , by
good reason , from the state of her owne quyetnes ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.486

When a certayne Tyrant thought once to co~pell with ponyshment and
tormentes , a certayne fre man called a philosopher to accuse other men
of confederacye of treason had & moued agaynst the saide Tyraunt : the
sayd philosopher did bite of his owne tounge , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.487

and did cast it into the face of the cruell tyraunt . Soo that the
tormentes that the cruell Tyrante thought should haue bene the cause of
crueltye to be executyd vpon others : The wyse man that is to say the
phylosopher turnyd it to a matter of vertue . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.488

What thyng maye anye man do to another , that he maye not receyue the
lyke of hym . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,45.489

We haue harde saye that Busyrys a Gyaunt , dyd vse to kyll his gestes ,
and that <P_46> he was lykewyse kylled of Hercules , beinge then his
geste . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.490

Regulus , a noble consull <paren> whiche had cast into bandes , or
chaines many prysoners that he had take~ in the batteyle of the
Carthagynens <$$paren> was at the laste taken hym selfe , and his handes
bou~de in chaynes , by theym that he hadde taken before tyme , of the
Carthagyens . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.491

Thynkest thou , that he is myghtye , that can do nothynge to another ,
but such as he may do the like to him ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.492

Moreouer , yf there were any naturall or good thynge in dygnytie and
power , they wolde neuer come to wycked , and euyll folke .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.493

For thynges contraryous , be not wonte to agre , & associate theymselfe
togyther . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.494

And nature dysdaneth that contrary thynges , be ioyned or copled
togyther . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.495

Therfore , for bycause it is certayne , that wycked persons <paren> for
the moste parte <$$paren> do beare rule , it appereth truely , that the
same dignites and power , be not good of the~ selfe , by their owne
nature , syns they be contented , to contynew with wycked folke .
Whiche thyng , I may most worthely iudge by the same dygnytie , and
power of all the giftes of fortune , that doo chaunge moste abundauntlye
, to many wycked and shrewed folke . Of the which gooddes of fortune ,
one thynge I thynke oughte also to be consyderyd , that no man dowtyth
but that he is stronge in whom he seith strength , and that he is swyft
in whom swyftnes apperyth , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.496

so by lyke reason , musyke makyth musicions , physyke phisicions
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.497

and rethoryke makyth retricyons . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.498

For euery natural thing workyth his owne propertye ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.499

& is not minged with any effects contrary to the same ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.500

but of it selfe puttyth awaye and resysteth thynges contraryous to it
selfe . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.501

And Ryches can@ @not satysfye the Ragyng aueryse and couitousnes of men
, BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.502

nor power or dygnitie contentyth or ruleth a myghtye man , whome
inordynate ambicion or desire of much honor holdyth bou~d in stronge
chaynes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.503

And dygnyties geuen vnto wycked folke , do not make them worthy ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.504

but shewethe and declareth them rather vnworthy .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.505

And whye soo ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.506

For you men do reioyse in thynges that appere otherwyse then they be
indede , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.507

ye geue and attribute to them wronge names , that be easily repreuid by
their effect and dedes . So that Riches ought not be called ryghtfully
riches , nor power called iustly power , nor dygnitie well called
dignitye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.508

For nether of the~ maye cause any man to be contentyd , but euer
desyrous of more the like thinges . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,46.509

And fynally I maye lyke wyse say of all the gyftes of <P_47> fortune ,
in the whiche it is manifest , that there is no goodnes of it selfe , or
of hys owne nature , to be desyred or lokyd for .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,47.510

For they neuer ioyne themselfe to good folke alwayes or for the most
parte , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,47.511

nor make them alwayes good , that they be ioyned or copled vnto .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,47.512

{COM:verse_omitted}

<heading>

BOECIUS . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,47.515

<$$heading>

Then I saye O Phylosophy , thou knowest that the desyre of mortall and
transitorye thynges , neuer had rule ouer me , or dyd ouercome me .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,47.517

But I haue desyred to bere rule in causes of the common welth , that
vertue shoulde not wax olde or be forgotte~ in me , for lacke of
exercyses . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,47.518

PHIL. For sothe that is a thynge that may allure and drawe mens myndes
, that be excellent by nature <paren> but not yet brought to the full
perfection of vertue <$$paren> that is to saye : desyre of renowme
<P_48> or glorye , and the fame of good admynistration in the commen
wealth , and to doo good and profytable thynges for the same , whych
fame and renoume , how lytell and voyde of estimatyon it is ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.519

co~syder as foloweth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.520

Thou hast learnyd by the demonstrations of astronomy , that all the
circuite or compasse of the earthe is by reason , as a pricke or lytle
tytle in respect to the compasse of heue~ that is to say : of the
fyrmament . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.521

Or yf all the earth wer compared to the gretnes of the celestiall globe
or compasse , it should be iudged as nothynge in respecte thereof . Of
the whyche earthe or worlde being so lytell a thynge , scarse the fourth
parte thereof is inhabyted , or lyuyng creatures that we do know , as
thou haste learned of Ptolome that prouyth the same .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.522

And if thou haddyst abatyd in thy mynde from thys forthe part , howe
muche the seas and marshe groundes do contayne , and lykewyse y=e=
quantitie of the dry wast grounds , the woodes , desertes and sands :
then shuld there remayne scarsly a very litle place for men to inhabyte
in . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.523

Therefore you me~ being inuironed or compassed within the lest part of
the sayd prycke or tytle , of the erth , do you thinke that your fame or
renowne be spred abrode ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.524

And howe great and notable is your glorye and fame , that is dryuen into
so narow a place ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.525

And adde thereto that manye nacyons beyng of dyuers languages , of
dyuers maners and of sondry reason of lyuynge doo inhabyte and dwell in
thys lytell compasse of the erth inhabitable , vnto whome nether the
fame of all men , nor the fame of cityes ca~ come for the dyfficultye of
wayes , for the dyuersitie of speache , for the lacke of the vsage and
entercourse of marchau~dise . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.526

For in the time of Marcus Tullius <paren> as he hymselfe in a certayne
Booke dothe wryte <$$paren> the fame and renoune of the co~men welth of
Rome had not passed or come than vnto the hyll named Cacasus ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.527

and yet was Rome an olde Cytye and fearyd of the parthiens & of other
inhabytynge there aboute . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.528

Seyst thou not nowe in howe narrowe and lytell romyth is the glory and
fame brought that thou goyst aboute and laboryst to delate and sprede
abrode ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.529

Canne the fame and glorye , of one Romayne , extende and spred thyther
that the fame and glorye of the hole cytye of Rome , coulde not come ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,48.530

And what sayest thou to thys , that the maners and lawes of dyuers
people do not accorde emonge them selfe , so that the same thynge that
some do prayse , other do disprayse and iudg worthy of ponyshm~et
whereby it commeth to passe that yf any <P_49> man delyteth to haue
glory and renoune , It behoueth hym that it be not shewed in any wyse
emongest dyuers people . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.531

Let euerye manne therefore be contented to haue an honeste prayse and
reporte emongest hys neyghboures . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.532

And lette the sayde immortall fame and glorye shute vp close within the
bondes of people of one nation where thou dwellest .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.533

But how many men <paren> that in their time were noble and famous
<$$paren> be nowe clene forgotten and out of memory , for lacke of
wryters , or by neglygente wryters . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.534

And albeit that such wrytinges of me~s fame and glorye do sumwhat
profytte , yet in processe of tyme beyng olde and longe past , the sayd
wrytynges and also the actors and wryters , do consume .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.535

But yet you men do thynke to get vnto your selfe an immortall and
perdurable name when you do thynke vpon the fame to come , or that youre
fame shall endure alwayes emongest men , whose tyme of contynuaunce , yf
thou compare it with the time infinite , that is eterne , or
euerlastynge , what haste thou to reioyse in the continuaunces of thy
fame ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.536

For if one mome~t of an hour were compared vnto tenne_thowsande yeares ,
bothe the same tymes haue an ende , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.537

and the moment hath some portion of tyme , thoughe it be verye lytel .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.538

But yet the sayde noumber of yeares , and as manye more , howe manye
soeuer they be added together thereto , maye not be compared to the tyme
euerlastynge that hath noo ende . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.539

For comparyson maye be made of thinges that haue an ende emongest them
selfe . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.540

But noo comparyson coulde euer be made of thynges that haue no ende , to
thynges , that haue an ende . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.541

And soo it happeth , though that fame be neuer so longe of tyme as thou
canst thynke , yf thou compare it with the tyme euerlastyng , it semeth
not onely verye lytell , but also none at all .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.542

But you thincke that you know nothyng well done , or that you can do
nothyng wel , but yf it be to please the peoples eares , or for the
vayne prayse of the worlde . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.543

And you requyre and seke for the prayse of other mens smale sayinges ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.544

and leue clerely the excellencye of your owne consciens and vertue .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.545

Consyder how gloriously one man moketh another in such lightnes of
Arrogancye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,49.546

For when a certayne tyraunt began to speake angerly vnto another man ,
whych falsely vsurped and toke vpon hym the name of a Phylosopher , not
for vertues sake , but for a vayne glorye . And when the Tyraunte sayde
that he woulde knowe whether he were a philosopher , for he woulde then
suffer <P_50> pacientlye all wronges done vnto hym . The man that named
hymselfe a phylosopher , suffered BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,50.547

and tooke pacyence a lytell whyle , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,50.548

and after he had receyued rebukes of the tyraunte , he at the last
stryuyng and impacyent , sayde vnto the tyraunt : knowst thou not that I
am a phylosopher ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,50.549

Then the tyraunte answered BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,50.550

and sayde roughely : I had taken the for a philosopher , if thou hadest
holden thy peace . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,50.551

But what is thys to these notable vertuous me~ that seke for glorye by
vertue , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,50.552

for of such do I speke nowe , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,50.553

what is fame <paren> I saye <$$paren> to them after the body is once
dede ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,50.554

For yf me~ do dye all hole as well the soule as the bodye <paren> whyche
thyng oure reason denyeth to beleue <$$paren> then is there no glorye at
al , when there is no man to whome glorye is sayde to belonge .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,50.555

And if the soule <paren> hauynge knowledge of it selfe and delyuered
from the person of the earthely body and beyng also fre <$$paren> goeth
to heue~ . Do it not dyspyse all erthly thinges ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,50.556

and beynge in heuen , dothe shee not reioyse that she is seperate from
all worldelye busynes , that is to saye : caryth nether for glory ,
renoune , riches , power , dygnytie nor aucthorytie of thys worlde .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,50.557

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_51>

<heading>

PHYLOSOPHY . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.561

<$$heading>

But that thou shalte not thynke y=t= I wyll hold cruell battaile against
fortune . Thou shalte vnderstande that the same false and sotyll
fortune sometyme deseruyth some goodnes at mens handes , at such tyme as
she do openly shewe her selfe and vncouer her face , by shewyng her
falsehed or aduersitie , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.563

and declareth her vnstable maners . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.564

Perchaunce thou knoest not yet what I doo speake .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.565

For it is a meruaylous thynge that I entend to saye ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.566

ye and I can scarse expresse the sente~ce with my wordes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.567

For I do thynke that euyl fortune do more profytte men then good fortune
. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.568

For when she semethe good and gentyll with prosperitie and welth the~
she lyeth falsely . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.569

But euyll fortune is alwayes trewe , when she sheweth her selfe mutable
by her vnstedfastnes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.570

Good fortune deceyueth , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.571

and euill fortune teachyth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.572

Good fortune byndethe wyth the beawtye of her goodes the hartes or
thoughtes of them that hath them . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.573

Euyll fortune vnbyndeth mens hartes and thoughtes by knowlege of her
frayle felycitie . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.574

And thou seist good fortune proude prodigall and not knoinge herselfe ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.575

Euyll fortune is sober meke and wise , by exercise of her aduersitie .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.576

Furthermore good fortune wyth her flatterynge drawethe men that be
wauerynge , from felycitie or perfytte good whych is god .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.577

Euyll fortune for the most parte bryngethe men agayne to perfyt
felycitie , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.578

draweth them as yt were with a hoke . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.579

Doeste thou esteme this for a smale thynge ? that this sharp and euyll
fortune , hath shewed vnto y=e= very myndes and thoughts of thy
faithfull frendes ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.580

The sayde euyll fortune hath dyscouered vnto the both the open playne
and doutefull countenaunce of thy felowes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,51.581

Good fortune going <P_52> from the , toke awaye her owne frends ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,52.582

and left the thyne owne frendes , and none of hers .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,52.583

When thou were in prosperitye and ryche as thou thoughteste thy selfe to
be , what wouldyste thou haue geuen to haue knowen this thynge all hole
together , that is to saye : thy frend from thy foe ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,52.584

Cesse thou nowe therefore to complayne for the losse of thy worldely
ryches , synce thou hast found thy trewe frendes whych is the mooste
precyous kynde of all ryches . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P1,52.585

