<BEGIN_boyle-1676-e3-p1>

<P_1E>

<heading>

EXPERIMENTS AND NOTES ABOUT THE MECHANICAL ORIGINE OR PRODUCTION OF
ELECTRICITY BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,1E.4

<$$heading>

That 't@ @is not necessary to believe Electrical Attraction <paren>
which you know is generally lifted {COM:sic} among Occult Qualities
<$$paren> to be the effect of a naked and solitary Quality flowing
immediately from a Substantial Form ; but that it may rather be the
effect of a Material Effluvium , issuing from , and returning to , the
Electrical Body <paren> and <P_2E> perhaps in some cases assisted in its
Operation by the external air <$$paren> seems agreable to divers things
that may be observ'd in such Bodies and their manner of acting .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,2E.6

There are differing <font> Hypotheses <$$font> <paren> and all of them
Mechanical , propos'd by the Moderns <$$paren> to solve the Phaenomena
of Electrical Attraction . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,2E.7

Of these Opinions the First is that of the learned Jesuite <font>
Cabaeus <$$font> , who , though a Peripatetick and Commentator on <font>
Aristotle <$$font> , thinks the drawing of light Bodies by Jet , Amber ,
&c. may be accounted for , by supposing , that the steams that issue ,
or , if I may so speak , sally , out of Amber , when heated by rubbing ,
discuss and expell the neighbouring air ; which after it has been driven
off a little way , makes as it were a small whirl-wind , because of the
resistance it finds from the remoter air , which has not been wrought on
by the Electrical Steams ; and that these , shrinking back swiftly
enough to the Amber , do in their returns bring along <P_3E> with them
such light bodies as they meet with in their way . On occasion of which
<font> Hypothesis <$$font> I shall offer it to be consider'd , Whether
by the gravity of the Atmospherical Air , surmounting the Specifick
Gravity of the little and rarifi'd Atmosphere , made about the Amber by
its emissions , and comprising the light Body fasten'd on by them , the
Attraction may not in divers cases be either caused or promoted .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,3E.8

Another <font> Hypothesis <$$font> is that proposed by that Ingenious
Gentleman Sir <font> Kenelm Digby <$$font> , and embraced by the very
Learned Dr. <font> Browne <$$font> , <paren> who seems to make our
<font> Gilbert <$$font> himself to have been of it <$$paren> and divers
other sagacious men . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,3E.9

And according to this <font> Hypothesis <$$font> , the Amber , or other
Electrick , being chaf'd or heated , is made to emit certain Rayes or
Files of unctuous Steams , which , when they come to be a little cool'd
by the external air , are somewhat condens'd , and having lost of their
former agitation , shrink back to the <P_4E> body whence they sallied
out , and carry with them those light bodies , that their further ends
happen to adhere to , at the time of their Retraction : As when a drop
of Oyl or Syrup hangs from the end of a small stick , if that be
dextrously and cautiously struck , the viscous substance will , by that
impulse , be stretch'd out , and presently retreating , will bring along
with it the dust or other light bodies that chanced to stick to the
remoter parts of it . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,4E.10

And this way of explaining Electrical Attractions is employ'd also by
the Learned <font> Gassendus <$$font> , who addes to it , that these
Electrical Rays <paren> if they may be so call'd <$$paren> being emitted
several ways , and consequently crossing one another , get into the
pores of the Straw , or other light body to be attracted , and by means
of their Decussation take the faster hold of it , and have the greater
force to carry it along with them , when they shrink back to the Amber
<P_5E> whence they were emitted . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,5E.11

A third <font> Hypothesis <$$font> there is , which was devised by the
Acute <font> Cartesius <$$font> , who dislikes the Explications of
others , chiefly because he thinks them not applicable to Glass , which
he supposes unfit to send forth <font> Effluvia <$$font> , and which is
yet an Electrical body ; and therefore attempts to account for
Electrical Attractions by the intervention of certain particles , shap'd
almost like small pieces of Ribbond , which he supposes to be form'd of
this subtile matter harbour'd in the pores or crevises of Glass .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,5E.12

But this <font> Hypothesis <$$font> , though ingenious in it self , yet
depending upon the knowledge of divers of his peculiar Principles , I
can@ @not intelligibly propose it in few words , BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,5E.13

and therefore shall refer you to himself for an account of it : which I
the less scruple to do , because though it be not unworthy of the wonted
Acuteness of the Authour , yet he seems himself to doubt , whether
<P_6E> it will reach all Electrical Bodies ; BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,6E.14

and it seems to me , that the reason why he rejects the way of
explicating Attraction by the Emission of the finer parts of the
attrahent <paren> to which <font> Hypothesis <$$font> , if it be rightly
proposed I confess myself very inclinable <$$paren> is grounded upon a
mistake , which , though a Philosopher may , for want of Experience in
that Particular , without disparagement fall into , is nevertheless a
mistake . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,6E.15

For whereas our excellent Author says , that <font> Electrical Effluvia
<$$font> , such as are supposed to be emitted by Amber , Wax , &c. can@
@not be imagin'd to proceed from Glass , I grant the Supposition to be
plausible , BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,6E.16

but can@ @not allow it to be true . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,6E.17

For as solid a body as Glass is , yet if you but dextrously rub for two
or three minutes a couple of pieces of Glass against one another , you
will find that Glass is not onely capable of emitting <font> Effluvia
<$$font> , but such ones as to be odorous , and sometimes to be rankly
stinking . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,6E.18

<P_7E>

But it is not necessary , that in this Paper , where I pretend not to
write Discourses but Notes , I should consider all that has been , or I
think may be , said for and against each of the above-mentioned <font>
Hypotheses <$$font> ; since they all agree in what is sufficient for my
present purpose , namely , that Electrical Attractions are not the
Effects of a meer Quality , but of a Substantial Emanation from the
attracting Body : BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,7E.20

And 't@ @is plain , that they all endeavour to solve the <font>
Phaenomena <$$font> in a Mechanical way , without recurring to
Substantial Forms , and inexplicable Qualities , or so much as taking
notice of the Hypostatical Principles of the Chymists . Wherefore it
may suffice in this place , that I mention some <font> Phaenomena
<$$font> that in general make it probable , that Amber , &c. draws such
light Bodies as pieces of Straw , Hair , and the like , by vertue of
some Mechanical Affections either of the attracting or of the attracted
Bodies , or of both the one and the other . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,7E.21

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_here}

<P_1M>

<heading>

EXPERIMENTS AND NOTES ABOUT THE MECHANICAL PRODUCTION OF MAGNETICAL
QUALITIES . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,1M.25

<$$heading>

Though the vertues of the <font> Loadstone <$$font> be none of the least
famous of <font> Occult <$$font> Qualities , and are perhaps the most
justly admired ; yet I shall venture to offer something to make it
probable , that some , even of these , may be introduced into bodies by
the production of <font> Mechanical <$$font> changes in them .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,1M.27

To make way for what I am to deliver to this purpose , it will be
expedient <P_2M> to remove that general and settled prejudice , that has
kept men from so much as thinking of any Mechanical account of
Magnetisms , which is a belief , that these Qualities do immediately
flow from the <font> Substantial Form <$$font> of the Loadstone , whose
abstruse nature is disproportionate to our understandings .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,2M.28

<heading>

EXPER. I . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,2M.30

<$$heading>

But for my part , I confess , I see no necessity of admitting this
supposition ; BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,2M.32

for I see , that a piece of Steel fitly shaped and well excited , will ,
like a Loadstone , have its determinate Poles , and with them point at
the North and South ; BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,2M.33

it will draw other pieces of Iron and Steel to it , and which is more ,
communicate to them the same kind , though not degree , of attractive
and directive vertue it had it self , BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,2M.34

and will possess these faculties not as light and transient impressions
, but as such setled and durable Powers that it may retain them for many
years , if the Loadstone , to which it has been duly <P_3M> applied ,
were vigorous enough : Of which sort I remember I have seen one <paren>
and made some tryals with it <$$paren> that yielded an income to the
owner , who received money from Navigators and others for suffering them
to touch their needles , swords , knives &c. at his excellent Magnet .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,3M.35

Now , in a piece of steel or iron thus excited , 't@ @is plain , that
the Magnetic operations may be regularly performed for whole years by a
body , to which the form of a Loadstone does not belong , since , as it
had its own form before , so it retains the same still , continuing as
malleable , fusible &c. as an ordinary piece of the same metal
unexcited : so that , if there be introduced a fit disposition into the
internal parts of the metal by the action of the Loadstone , the metal ,
continuing of the same <font> Species <$$font> it was before , will need
nothing save the continuance of that acquired disposition to be capable
of performing Magnetical Operations ; BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,3M.36

<heading>

EXPER. II . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,3M.38

<$$heading>

and if this disposition or internal <P_4M> constitution of the excited
iron be destroyed , though the form of the metal be not at all injured ,
yet the former power of Attraction shall be abolished , as appears when
an excited iron is made red_hot in the fire , and suffered to cool again
. BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,4M.40

<heading>

EXPER. III . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,4M.42

<$$heading>

And here give me leave to take notice of what I have elsewhere related
to another purpose , namely that a Loadstone may <paren> as I have more
than once tryed <$$paren> be easily deprived by ignition of its Power of
sensibly attracting Martial bodies , and yet be scarce , if at all ,
visibly changed , but continue a true Loadstone in other capacities ,
which , according to the vulgar Philosophy ought to depend upon its
<font> Substantial Form <$$font> , BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,4M.44

and the Loadstone thus spoiled may , notwithstanding this Form , have
its Poles altered at pleasure like a piece of <P_5M> Iron ; as I have
elsewhere particularly declared . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,5M.45

And I will confirm what I have been saying with an experiment that you
do not perhaps expect ; namely , that though it be generally taken for
granted <paren> without being contradicted that I know of by any man
<$$paren> that , in a sound Loadstone , that has never been injured by
the fire , not only the attractive Power , but the particular Vertue
that it has to point constantly , when left to it self , with one of its
determinate extreams to one determinate pole , flowes immediately from
the substantial or at least essential Form ; yet this Form remaining
undestroyed by Fire , the Poles may be changed , and that with ease and
speed . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,5M.46

For among my notes about Magnetical Experiments whence I borrow some
passages of this paper , I find the following Account .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,5M.47

<heading>

EXPER. IV . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,5M.49

<$$heading>

<P_6M>

To shew that the virtue that a Loadstone hath by this determinate Pole
or Extream to attract , for example , the South-end of a poised needle ,
and with the opposite extream or Pole the North-end of the same needle ,
I made among other tryals the following Experiment .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,6M.52

Taking a very small fragment of a Loadstone , I found , agreeably to my
conjecture , that by applying sometimes one Pole , sometimes the other ,
to that pole of <paren> a small but <$$paren> a very vigorous Loadstone
that was fit for my purpose , I could at pleasure , in a few minutes ,
change the Poles of the little fragment , as I tryed by its operations
upon a needle freely poised ; though by applying a fragment a pretty
deal bigger , <paren> for in it self it appeared very small , <$$paren>
I was not able in far more hours than I employed minutes before , to
make any sensible change of the Poles . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,6M.53

<P_7M>

This short Memorial being added to the preceding part of this discourse
, will , I hope , satisfie you , that how unanimously so ever men have
deduced all magnetick operations from the form of the Loadstone ; yet
some internal change of pores or some other Mechanical alterations or
inward disposition , either of the excited Iron or of the Loadstone it
self , may suffice to make a body capable or uncapable of exercising
some determinate magnetical operations ; which may invite you to cast a
more unprejudiced eye upon those few particulars ,
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,7M.55

I shall now subjoin to make it probable , that even Magnetical Qualities
may be Mechanically produced or altered . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,7M.56

<heading>

EXPER. V . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,7M.58

<$$heading>

I have often observed in the shops of Artificers , as Smiths , Turners
of metals &c. that , when hardened and well tempered tools are well
heated by Attrition , if whilest <P_8M> they are thus warmed you apply
them to filings or chips , as they call them , or thin fragments of
Steel or Iron , they will take them up , as if the instruments were
touched with a Loadstone : BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,8M.60

but <font> as <$$font> they will not do so , unless they be thus excited
by rubbing till they be warmed , by which means a greater commotion is
made in the inner parts of the Steel <font> so <$$font> neither would
they retain so vigorous a Magnetism as to support the little fragments
of Steel that stuck to them after they were grown cold again .
<heading> EXPER. VI . <$$heading> Which may be confirmed by what , if
I much misremember not , I shewed some Acquaintances of yours ; which
was , that , by barely rubbing a conveniently shaped piece of Steel
against the floor till it had gained a sufficient heat , it would
whilest it continued so , discover a manifest , though but faint
attractive power , which vanished together with the adventitious Heat .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,8M.61

<heading>

EXPER. VII . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,8M.63

<$$heading>

<P_9M>

We elsewhere observe , which perhaps you also may have done , that the
Iron bars of windows , by having stood very long in an erected posture ,
may at length grow Magnetical , so that , if you apply the North point
of a poised and excited Needle to the bottom of the Bar , it will drive
it away , & attract the Southern ; BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,9M.66

and if you raise the magnetic needle to the upper part of the Bar , and
apply it as before this will draw the Northern extream , which the other
end of the bar expelled ; probably because , as 't@ @is elsewhere
declared , the bar is in tract of time , by the continual action of the
Magnetical <font> effluvia <$$font> of the Tarraqueous Globe , turned
into a kind of Magnet , whose lower end becomes the North-pole of it ,
and the other the Southern . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,9M.67

Therefore according to the Magnetical Laws , the former must expel the
Northern extream <P_10M> of the Needle , and the later {COM:sic} draw it
. BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,10M.68

<heading>

EXPER. VIII . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,10M.70

<$$heading>

I have found indeed , and I question not but other observers may have
done so too , that , if a bar of Iron , that has not stood long in an
erected posture , be but held perpendicular , the forementioned
experiment will succeed , <paren> probably upon such an account as that
I have lately intimated : <$$paren> BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,10M.72

But then this virtue , displayed by the extreams of the bar of Iron ,
will not be at all permanent , but so transient , that , if the bar be
but inverted and held again upright , that end which just before was the
uppermost , and drew the north-end of the needle , will now , being
lowermost , drive it away , which , as was lately observed , will not
happen to a bar which has been some years or other competent time kept
in the same Position . So that , since <P_11M> length of time is
requisite to make the verticity of a bar of iron so durable & constant ,
that the same extream will have the same virtues in reference to the
Magnetical needle , whether you make it the upper end or the lower end
of the bar , it seems not improbable to me , that by length of time the
whole Magnetick virtue of this Iron may be increased , and consequently
some degree of attraction acquired . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,11M.73

And by this Consideration I shall endeavour to explicate that strange
thing , that is reported by some Moderns to have happened in <font>
Italy <$$font> , where a bar of Iron is affirmed to have been converted
into a Loadstone , whereof a piece was kept among other rarities in the
curious <font> Aldrovandus <$$font> his <font> Museum Metallicum
<$$font> . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,11M.74

For considering the greatness of its Specific Gravity , the
malleableness and other properties , wherein Iron differs from Loadstone
, I can@ @not easily believe , that , by such a way as is mentioned , a
metal should be turned <P_12M> into a stone . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,12M.75

And therefore , having consulted the book it self , whence this Relation
was borrowed , I found the story imperfectly enough delivered : The
chiefest and clearest thing in it being , that at the top of the Church
of <font> Arimini <$$font> a great iron-bar , that was placed there to
support a Cross of an_hundred pound weight , was at length turned into a
Loadstone . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,12M.76

But whether the reality of this transmutation was examined , and how it
appeared that the fragment of the Loadstone presented to <font>
Aldrovandus <$$font> was taken from that bar of Iron , I am not fully
satisfied by that Narrative . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,12M.77

Therefore , when I remember the great resemblance I have sometimes seen
in colour , besides other manifest Qualities , betwixt some Loadstones
and some course or almost rusty Iron , I am tempted to Conjecture , that
those that observed this Iron-bar when broken to have acquired a strong
Magnetical virtue , which they dreamed not that tract of time might
<P_13M> communicate to it , might easily be perswaded , by this virtue
and the resemblance of colour , that the Iron was turned into Loadstone
: especially they being prepossess'd with that <font> Aristotelian
<$$font> Maxim , whence our Author would explain this strange <font>
Phaenomenon <$$font> , that <font> inter Symbolum habentia facilis est
transmutatio <$$font> . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,13M.78

<heading>

EXPER. IX . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,13M.80

<$$heading>

But , leaving this as a bare conjecture , we may take notice , that what
virtue an oblong piece of Iron may need a long tract of time to acquire
, by the help onely of its position , may be imparted to it in a very
short time , by the intervention of such a nimble agent , as the fire .
As may be often , though not always , observed in Tongs , and such like
Iron Utensils , that , having been ignited , have been set to cool ,
leaning against some wall or other prop , that kept them in an erected
posture , which makes it probable that the great commotion of the parts
, made by the vehement heat of the fire , disposed <P_14M> the Iron ,
whilst it was yet soft , and had its pores more lax , and parts more
pliable , disposed it , I say , to receive much quicker impressions from
the Magnetical <font> effluvia <$$font> of the Earth , than it would
have done , if it had still been cold . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,14M.82

<heading>

EXPER. X . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,14M.84

<$$heading>

And 't@ @is very observable to our present purpose , what differing
effects are produced by the operation of the fire , upon two Magnetick
bodies according to their respective constitutions .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,14M.86

For , by keeping a Loadstone red-hot , though you cool it afterwards in
a perpendicular posture , you may deprive it of its former power of
manifestly attracting : BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,14M.87

But a bar of Iron being ignited , and set to cool perpendicularly , does
thereby acquire a manifest verticity . Of which differing events I must
not now stay to inquire , whether or no the true reason be , That the
peculiar Texture or internal constitution that makes a Loadstone
somewhat more than an ordinary Ore of Iron , <paren> which metal ,
<P_15M> as far as I have tried , is the usual ingredient of Loadstones
<$$paren> being spoiled by the violence of the fire , this rude Agent
leaves it in the condition of common Iron , or perhaps of ignited
Iron-ore : whereas the fire does soften the Iron it self <paren> which
is a metal not an Ore <$$paren> agitating its parts , and making them
the more flexible , and by relaxing its pores , disposes it to be easily
and plentifully pervaded by the Magnetical steams of the Earth , from
which it may not improbably be thought to receive the verticity it
acquires ; <heading> EXPER. XI . <$$heading> and this the rather ,
because , as I have often tryed , and elsewhere mentioned , if an oblong
Loadstone , once spoil'd by the fire , be thorowly ignited and cooled
either perpendicularly , or lying horizontally North and South , it will
, as well as a piece of Iron handled after the same manner , be made to
acquire new poles , or change the old ones , as the skilful experimenter
pleases . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,15M.88

<P_16M>

But whatever be the true cause of the disparity of the fires operation
upon a sound Loadstone and a bar of Iron , the effect seems to
strengthen our conjecture , That Magnetical operations may much depend
upon Mechanical Principles . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,16M.90

And I hope you will find further probability added to it , by some
Phaenomena recited in another paper , to which I once committed some
promiscuous Experiments and Observations Magnetical .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,16M.91

<heading>

EXPER. XII . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,16M.93

<$$heading>

If I may be allowed to borrow an Experiment from a little Tract that yet
lyes by me , and has been seen but by two or three friends , it may be
added to the instances already given about the production of Magnetism .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,16M.95

For in that Experiment I have shewn , how having brought a good piece of
a certain kind of English <font> Oker <$$font> , which yet perhaps was
no <P_17M> fitter than other , to a convenient shape , though , till it
was altered by the fire , it discovered no Magnetical Quality ; yet
after it had been kept red-hot in the fire and was suffered to cool in a
convenient posture , it was enabled to exercise Magnetical operations
upon a pois'd Needle . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,17M.96

<heading>

EXPER. XIII . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,17M.98

<$$heading>

As for the Abolition of the Magnetical vertue in a body endow'd with it
, it may be made without destroying the Substantial or the Essential
Form of the body , and without sensibly adding , diminishing , or
altering any thing in reference to the Salt , Sulphur and Mercury ,
which Chymists presume Iron and Steel , as well as other mixt bodies ,
to be composed of . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,17M.100

For it has been sometimes observed , that the bare continuance of a
Loadstone it self in a contrary position to that , which , when freely
placed , it seems to effect , has either corrupted or sensibly lessened
the vertue of it . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,17M.101

What I formerly observed to this purpose , I elsewhere relate ,
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,17M.102

and since that having a Loadstone , whose vigor was look'd upon by
skilful persons as very extraordinary , and which , whilst it was in an
Artificers hand , was therefore held at a high rate , I was careful ,
being by <P_18M> some occasions call'd out of <font> London <$$font> ,
to lock it up , with some other rarities , in a Cabinet , whereof I took
the key along with me , and still kept it in my own Pocket .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,18M.103

But my stay abroad proving much longer than I expected , when , being
returned to <font> London <$$font> , I had occasion to make use of this
Loadstone for an Experiment , I found it indeed where I left it , but so
exceedingly decayed , as to its attractive power , which I had formerly
examin'd by weight , by having lain almost a year in an inconvenient
posture , that if it had not been for the circumstances newly related ,
I should have concluded that some body had purposely got it out in my
absence , and spoiled it by help of the fire , the vertue being so much
impaired , that I cared little to employ it any more about considerable
Experiments . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,18M.104

<heading>

EXPER. XIV . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,18M.106

<$$heading>

And this corruption of the Magnetical vertue , which may in tract of
time be made in a Loadstone it self , may in a trice be made by the help
of that Stone in an excited Needle . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,18M.108

For 't@ @is observ'd by Magnetical Writers , and my own Trials purposely
made have assured me of it , that a well pois'd Needle , being by the
touch of a good Loadstone , excited and brought to turn one of its ends
to the North and the other <P_19M> to the South , it may by a contrary
touch of the same Loadstone be deprived of the faculty it had of
directing its determinate extreams to determinate Poles .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,19M.109

Nay , by another touch <paren> or the same , and even without immediate
Contact , if the Magnet be vigorous enough <$$paren> the Needle may
presently have its direction so changed , that the end , which formerly
pointed to the North pole , shall now regard the South , and the other
end shall instead of the Southern , respect the Northern pole .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,19M.110

<heading>

EXPER. XV . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,19M.112

<$$heading>

And to make it the more probable , that the change of the Magnetism
communicated to Iron may be produc'd at least in good part by Mechanical
operations , procuring some change of texture in the Iron ; I shall
subjoyn a notable Experiment of the ingenious Doctor <font> Power
<$$font> , which when I heard of , I tryed as well as I could ;
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,19M.114

and though , perhaps for want of conveniency , I could not make it fully
answer what it promised , yet the success of the trial was considerable
enough to make it pertinent in this place , and to induce me to think ,
it might yet better succeed with him , whose Experiment , as far as it
concerns my present purpose , imports , that if <P_20M> a Puncheon , as
Smiths call it , or a Rod of Iron , be , by being ignited and suffered
to cool North and South , and hammered at the ends , very manifestly
endow'd with Magnetical vertue , this vertue will in a trice be
destroyed by two or three smart blows of a strong hammer upon the middle
of the oblong piece of Iron . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,20M.115

But <font> Magnetism <$$font> is so fertile a Subject , that if I had
now the leisure and conveniency to range among Magnetical Writers , I
should scarce doubt of finding , among their many Experiments and
Observations , divers that might be added to those above delivered , as
being easily applicable to my present Argument .
BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,20M.116

And I hope you will find farther probability added to what has been said
, to shew , <font> that Magnetical operations may much depend upon
Mechanical Principles <$$font> , by some <font> Phaenomena <$$font>
recited in another Paper , to which I once committed some promiscuous
Experiments and Observations Magnetical . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,20M.117

Finis . BOYLE-1676-E3-P1,20M.118

