<BEGIN_brinsley-1627-e2-p1>

<P_1>

<heading>

<font> LUDUS LITERARIUS <$$font> : OR , THE GRAMMAR SCHOOLE .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.4

CHAP. I. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.5

<font> A DISCOURSE BETWEENE TWO SCHOOLEMASTERS , CONCERNING THEIR
FUNCTION . IN THE END DETERMINING A CONFERENCE ABOUT THE BEST WAY OF
TEACHING , AND THE MANNER OF THEIR PROCEEDING IN THE SAME . <$$font>
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.6

SPOUDEUS . PHILOPONUS . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.7

<$$heading>

<font> Spoud. <$$font> God save you , good Sir :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.9

I am glad to see you in health . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.10

<font> Phil. <$$font> What , mine old acquaintance , M. <font>
Spoudeus ? <$$font> BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.11

<font> Spoud. <$$font> The very same , Sir . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.12

<font> Phil. <$$font> Now , I am as right glad to see you well ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.13

you are heartily welcome to this my poore house .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.14

<font> Spoud. <$$font> Sir , I give you many thankes .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.15

<font> Phil. <$$font> But how have yo {COM:sic} done these many yeeres
? BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.16

<font> Spoud. <$$font> I thanke God I have had good health , ever since
we lived in the Colledge together : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,1.17

but for my time , I have spent it in a fruitlesse , wearisom , and an
unthankfull office ; in teaching a poore countrey schoole , as I have
heard , that <P_2> your selfe have also beene imployed in the same kinde
of life , and am therefore perswaded , that you have had some experience
of my griefe . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.18

<font> Phil. <$$font> Experience , say you ? BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.19

yea indeed I have had so much experience of that whereof you now
complaine , that if all other things were according thereunto , I might
bee able to teach very many . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.20

But I pray you Sir , what good occasion hath brought you into these
parts ? BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.21

It is a wonder to see you in this countrey . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.22

I should hardly have knowne you <paren> it is so long since we lived
together , now above twentie yeeres , and also for that you seeme to mee
so aged <$$paren> but that I did better remember your voice , then your
favour . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.23

<font> Spoud. <$$font> Sir , you see the proverbe verified in me ;
Curafacit canos . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.24

Cares and troubles have made me aged long before my time .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.25

As for my journey , a very great and necessarie occasion hath driven me
into these quarters , to come even unto you , to seek your helpe and
direction , in a matter wherein <paren> I hope <$$paren> you may
exceedingly pleasure me , without hurt any way , or so much as the least
prejudice unto your selfe . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.26

<font> Phil. <$$font> You might thinke me very unkinde , and forgetfull
of our ancient love , if I should not be ready to shew you any kindnesse
; especially sith you have taken so long a journey unto me .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.27

But I pray you what is the matter ? BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.28

<font> Spoud. <$$font> The matter <paren> if you wil give me leave
<$$paren> is this . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.29

I have heard that you have long taken great paines in teaching ; and
that of late yeeres , you have set your selfe wholly to this happy kinde
of travell ; to finde out the most plaine , easie , and sure waies of
teaching , for the benefit both of your selfe , and others : whereby you
have attained much happy knowledge in this behalfe .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.30

Now my long journey hath been for this same very purpose , to desire
some conference with you , and to intreat your loving favour & helpe .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.31

I should thinke my selfe for ever bound unto you , if you would
vouchsafe to impart unto me some of those experiments , which I have
been certainly informed , that by your travels you have obtained .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,2.32

For , I myselfe have so long laboured in this moiling and drudging life
, without any fruit to <P_3> speake of , and with so many
discouragements and vexations in stead of any true comfort , that I waxe
utterly wearie of my place , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,3.33

and my life is a continuall burden unto me : Insomuch as that it causeth
me to feare , that God never called me to this function , because I see
his blessing so little upon my labours ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,3.34

neither can I finde any delight therein : whereas , notwithstanding , I
heare of some others , and even of our old acquaintance , whom God
blesseth greatly in this calling ; though such be verie rare , some one
or two spoken of almost in a whole countrey . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,3.35

<font> Phil. <$$font> Indeed I have travelled in this too unthankefull
a calling <paren> as you doe most justly complaine <$$paren>
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,3.36

and that in all this time , since we lived together . In the greatest
part wherof , I have been well acquainted with your griefes and
vexations ; which are no other then doe ordinarily waite upon this our
function : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,3.37

yet this I thankefully acknowledge <paren> according to your former
speech , and to give you likewise some reviving <$$paren> that now of
late , since I set my selfe more conscionably and earnestly to seeke out
the best waies of teaching by inquiring , conferring and practicing
constantly all the most likely courses , which I could heare or devise ,
God hath granted unto me , to finde so great contentation , and joy of
this same labour in my schoole , that it hath swallowed up the
remembrance of all my former grievances . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,3.38

For I doe plainely see such a change , that now I doe not only labour in
my place usually without griefe , or any wearinesse at all , but that I
can take ordinarily more true delight and pleasure in following my
children <paren> by observing the earnest strife and emulation which is
amongst them , which of them shall doe the best , and in the sensible
increase of their learning and towardnesse <$$paren> then anie one can
take in following hawkes and hounds , or in anie other the pleasantest
recreation , as I verily perswade my selfe . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,3.39

And the rather , because after my labour ended , my chiefest delight is
in the remembrance thereof ; and in the consideration of the certaine
good , that I know shall come thereby , both unto Church and
Common-wealth : <P_4> and also that my labour and service is acceptable
to the Lord , though all men should be unthankfull . So that now I am
never so well , as when I am most diligent in my place .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,4.40

Yea , I doe seeme to my selfe to find withall so great a blessing upon
my labours , above all former times , that if I had knowne the same
courses from the beginning , I doe assure my selfe that I had done ten
times more good , and my whole life had been full of much sweet
contentment , in regard of that which it hath bin .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,4.41

Although my labours have never been utterly unprofitable , but that I
have still sent forth for every yeere , some unto the Universities , and
they approved amongst the better sort of those which have come thither :
yet this hath beene nothing to that good which I might undoubtedly have
done . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,4.42

<font> Spoud. <$$font> Sir , I am perswaded that you speake as you
thinke : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,4.43

and therefore I doe grow into greater hope , that you having had so much
experience of the griefe in the one , and joy in the other , will be
more compassionate of me , and more readie also to impart your
experiments with me , to make me partaker of your comfort .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,4.44

<font> Phil. <$$font> For communicating unto you , for your helpe and
comfort , what God hath made knowne unto me , I take it to be my dutie .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,4.45

We all of us know the danger of hiding our talent , or keeping backe our
debt , when the Lord having given us abilitie , doth call upon us to pay
it . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,4.46

<font> Spoud. <$$font> I thank God unfainedly <paren> good Sir
<$$paren> for this heartie affection , which I doe finde in you , and
for this readinesse to communicate with mee the fruits of your travels .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,4.47

You shall see I hope , that I shall receive them , with like alacritie
and thankfulnesse , and be as readie to imploy them to the best , to doe
my uttermost service in my place and calling hereafter . So that
although my first beginnings have bin small , through ignorance of
better courses , yet I trust my after-fruits shall much increase .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,4.48

Hereby my last dayes shall proove my best , and make some amends for
that which is past : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,4.49

and also my new comforts shall sweeten all the remainder of my life ,
and make me likewise to forget the <P_5> daies that are past .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.50

How true is that Proverbe of wise <font> Salomon <$$font> , that
heavinesse in the heart of man doth bring it down , but a good word doth
rejoyce it ? BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.51

You have revived my heart , and put new spirits into mee , by that which
you have already said . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.52

<font> Phil. <$$font> The Lord will revive you , I hope , and all of us
also who labour in this toiling kind ; by causing us to find more sound
fruit , and pleasant content in our teaching , then ever yet we felt ;
if we will but set our selves to seeke of him , and readily impart our
several experiments for the good of all : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.53

if withall we will receive thankefully , and cheerefully put in practice
those gracious helpes of so many learned men , which he in this last age
of the world hath afforded aboundantly , above all former times , very
many whereof lie utterly hid and unknowne to the greatest sort , unto
this day : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.54

And that partly through lack of care and conscience , to do that good
which we might , and ought in our places ; partly through extreme
unthankfulnes , neglecting the rich gifts of the Lord , so plentifully
powred down from heaven upon us , to leave the world more without excuse
. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.55

But as for mine owne selfe , all that I can promise is , onely my study
and desire , to doe you and all other the greatest good that ever I
shall be able ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.56

and hereunto we have all bound our selves . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.57

If I know any thing wherein I have , or you may receive benefit , I
acknowledge it wholly where it is due , even to him who giveth liberally
to all who seeke him aright , and casteth no man in the teeth .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.58

And resting upo~ his rich bounty for a further supply , if you shall
propound in order the particular points , wherein you would wish my
advice , I shal very willingly go on with you , and acquaint you with
all things which hitherto I have learned in all my search , and more
hereafter as his wisdome shall adde unto me . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.59

<font> Spoud. <$$font> I rejoice in your confidence ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.60

& with that so it may bee . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.61

In the meane time I like well of your motion , of going thorow in order
the principall matters of difficultie . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,5.62

If therefore you shall thinke meete , I shall reduce all to certaine
heads , which a friend of mine shewed unto mee of late , <P_6> set down
in a certain Table , which it may be that your selfe have seene .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,6.63

<font> Phil. <$$font> Let me heare what was contained in it , and then
I shall soone answer you , whether I have seene it or no .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,6.64

<font> Spoud. <$$font> There was contained in it , a briefe summe of
sundry particular benefits , which may bee brought to Grammar schooles ,
to make schollers very perfect in every part of good learning meet for
their yeeres ; and that all both Masters and Schollers may proceede with
ease , certainty and delight , to fit all apt Schollers for the
Universitie every way , by fifteene yeeres of age . Concerning which
severall heads , although it were a most happy worke if they could be
attained unto <paren> all of them being in my minde very excellent , and
indeed the whole , such a worke as must needs bring a perpetuall benefit
, both to Church , and Common-wealth , and that not onely to the present
, but to all succeeding ages <$$paren> yet that I may speake freely ,
what I conceive of them , many of them seeme very strange unto me .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,6.65

And , although I will not say that they are utterly impossible : yet
indeed I take them to be altogether unlikely ; considering the
continuall paines and vexation that my selfe have undergone , and yet
could never come in many of them , neere unto the least part thereof .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,6.66

<font> Phil. <$$font> By that little which you have mentioned , I take
it that I have seene the very same : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,6.67

and for them I doe not only thinke it , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,6.68

but also doe know assuredly , that by the Lord's gracious assistance &
blessing , through constant diligence they may be all effected ; for
that I have knowne so much triall of all of them , as is sufficient to
induce any man therunto : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,6.69

besides that they doe all stand upon plaine and sure grounds , as I
trust I am able to make evident demonstration in each particular so as
any man of understanding may perceive cleerely , that they may be done .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,6.70

Neither doe I doubt but to satisfie you in every point , and to cause
you to yeeld unto the evidence hereof , before we part , if you will but
onely aske and still shew me wherein you are not satisfied .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,6.71

Moreover , I am so very confident herein , not onely <P_7> upon mine
owne reason and experience , but because I have knowne the judgements of
sundry very learned and experienced both Schoolemasters and others , who
have beene acquainted with these selfe-same heads , which you have
mentioned , who , though at the first reading of them , they have beene
of your judgement , and have thought as you doe , yet within a quarter
of an houre after that they have taken a little triall , in some of the
most unlikely , and seen the reason of them , have rested fully
satisfied and assured of the whole , that all might be done , as
standing on the like grounds . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,7.72

And therefore I have no cause to distrust the like successe with your
selfe . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,7.73

<font> Spoud. <$$font> Sir , if you shall doe this for me , I shall
acknowledge my selfe to have received a very great benefit , and be
thankfull unto the Lord & to your selfe as his instrument ; and doe my
uttermost endevour to put them all constantly in practice , that I may
confirme them by mine owne experience , and finde the same happy comfort
, that your selfe have done . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,7.74

I will therefore beginne in order according unto those heads , and so
propound the questions , how each thing may be done , and desire your
answer unto them severally . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,7.75

<font> Phil. <$$font> Nay rather , for the manner of proceeding , I
take this to be far more easie and commodious to us both , and wherby
God may direct this conference so , as to profit many others besides our
selves ; To go thorow all the whole course of learning , from the first
step , beginning at the very first Elements , even at the A.B.C. and so
to ascend to the highest top of learning , which can bee required in
Grammar schooles ; to make a scholler each way fit for the University .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,7.76

Thus to run thorow all the necessary points appertaining to the same ,
as neere as we can remember ; To make hereby the whole way easie and
ready to all good learning , and to ranke every head in the right order
& proper place , according to the due manner of proceeding in Schooles .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,7.77

So wee may insert these points which you have spoken of ; dividing the
whole into several Chapters , for the full distinguishing and <P_8>
plain setting down of every matter . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,8.78

To the end therefore that I may bee the better guided and occasioned to
impart all things unto you , I shall request you , first to propound all
the severall points of learning in order , from point to point as wee
preoceed . Secondly , in the propounding of them , to shew mee in every
one , what course you your selfe have taken , wherein you have found so
little fruit or comfort , as you complaine , and which you thinke to be
most ordinary in the countrey schooles . Wherein if {TEXT:missing_"if"}
you shall faile in omitting any necessary head or Chapter , or in
misplacing any , I shal afford you my best direction .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,8.79

<font> Spoud. <$$font> I will accomplish your desire so well as I can .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,8.80

I doubt not of your patience seeing you take mee thus of a suddaine ;
and that you who have beter thought of these things , wil guide me
continually , until we have gone thorow the whole .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,8.81

<font> Phil. <$$font> I trust you are so perswaded of mee .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,8.82

Therefore I pray you begin . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,8.83

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_1_here}

<P_16>

3 . You may helpe them to spell thus , besides that course which is
usuall . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.86

Let so many as are beginners , or who can@ @not reade perfectly , stand
together , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.87

and then poase them without booke , one by one .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.88

First , in syllables of two letters , as they are set downe in their
A.B.C. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.89

and where one misseth , let his next fellow tell :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.90

if he can@ @not , then , let some other . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.91

Then examine them in syllables of three letters , after in moe .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.92

And ever what {COM:sic} syllable they misse , marke it with a dent with
the nayle , or a pricke with a pen , or the like :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.93

and when you have marked out those wherein they so misse , poase them
oft over , not forgetting due praise to them who doe best .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.94

One halfe houre would be spent daily in this kind of examining , untill
they be perfect in any syllable , or word . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.95

To make children to take a delight in spelling , let them spell many
syllables together , which differ but only in one letter , as hand ,
band , land , sand , &c. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.96

These syllables and words following , I have observed , to bee of the
hardest for children to spell : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.97

I will set you them downe together in this short briefe .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.98

They may serve for spelling , reading , or writing ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.99

and may soone be gotten by being often poased , read or written over .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,16.100

{COM:word_list_omitted}

<P_17>

These are some of the hardest syllables , as I said :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.103

your selfe may adde moe as you meet with them .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.104

Also this is to be observed in spelling ; that before <paren> on
<$$paren> you spell or write commonly <paren> ti <$$paren> not <paren>
ci <$$paren> as salvation , not salvacion , though we pronounce it as
<paren> ci . <$$paren> BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.105

But this is to be knowne chiefly , by the Latine words from whence they
come . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.106

Right pronuntiation of words , and continuall practice in spelling , are
the surest way to come to spell truely . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.107

If you pronounce the word false , which you would have your childe to
spell , hee spelleth it false : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.108

for he spelleth according as it is pronounced to him , or as he useth to
pronounce . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.109

As for example ; aske the childe how hee spelles a strea , <paren> as in
many places the countrey manner is to pronounce it <$$paren> hee will
spell strea or stre : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.110

but aske him how hee spels a strawe and to pronounce it , and he will
spell strawe . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.111

To direct further how to come to perfection in spelling or writing right
, I shall have occasion to speake after . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.112

In joining syllables together , they must be taught to utter every
syllable by it selfe , truely , plainely , fully , and distinctly , as
we heard of the letters before ; and so also as that others who heare
may understand ; ever sounding out the last syllable : as sal-va-ti-on .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.113

Thus they may goe thorow their Abcie , and Primer .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.114

And if they reade them twise over , that they may be very perfect in
them , it will be the better for them . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.115

For , the second reading of any booke doth much incourage children ,
because it seemeth to be so easie then ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.116

and also it doth imprint it the more . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.117

Besides that , they will runne it over so fast at the second time , as
it wil be no losse of time at all unto them .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,17.118

After these they may reade over other English bookes . Amongst which ,
the Psalmes in metre would be one , because children will learne that
booke with most readinesse <P_18> and delight through the running of the
metre , as it is found by experience . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.119

Then the Testament , in which the discreet Master may keepe his scholler
lesse or more , untill he think him meet to enter into the Accedence .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.120

If any require any other little booke meet to enter children ; <font>
the Schoole of Vertue <$$font> is one of the principall and easiest for
the first enterers , being full of precepts of civilitie , and such as
children will soone learne and take a delight in , thorow the roundnesse
of the metre , as was said before of the singing Psalmes :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.121

And after it <font> the Schoole of good manners <$$font> , called ,
<font> the new Schoole of vertue <$$font> , leading the childe as by the
hand in the way of all good manners . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.122

By these meanes , children if they be well applyed , and continually
kept unto it , may be taught so to reade within a yeere or little more ,
as they may bee meet to enter into their Accedence , by that time that
they be six yeere old at the uttermost ; especially if they bee in any
measure apt , and much practised in spelling the hardest syllables .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.123

For dividing or distinguishing of syllables , this one observation is to
be remembred ; That what consonants are usually joined in the beginnings
of words , those are not to be disjoined and separate in the middest of
words , except in Compound words . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.124

But of this wee shall speake more fitly after .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.125

And thus much may suffice for the present , for the speedy reading of
English ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.126

for hereof I have had much certaine experience .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.127

<font> Spoud. <$$font> I can@ @not justly dislike of anything which you
have said herein , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.128

it standeth all with so great reason : chiefely to make children so
perfect in the hardest syllables . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.129

For , they being perfect in these , must need attain all the rest in a
short space . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.130

Except onely one thing which you uttered ; which indeede seemes a
strange Paradox to mee : Namely , that some wise & experienced , would
have childre~ taught to call and pronounce all their letters , and to
spell any syllable before they know a letter on the booke .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.131

<font> Phil. <$$font> This is very true which you say ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.132

it may seeme a Paradox to them who have not tryed it .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,18.133

I my selfe was of <P_19> your minde when I heard it first .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.134

Yet setting my selfe to make some triall of it , for the reverence I
bare to him of whom I heard it , and for that he shewed me experience of
it in a child not foure yeeres old , I found it the easiest ,
pleasantest and shortest way of all , where one would begin in a private
house with little ones playing . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.135

The manner is thus . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.136

1 . You must teach them , as I said , to call their five Vowels , and
to pronounce them right : Which they will presently learne , if you doe
but onely cause them to repeat them oft over , after you , distinctly
together thus : <font> a , e , i , o , u <$$font> , after the manner of
five bels , or as we say ; one , two , three , foure , five .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.137

2 . Then teach them to put the consonants in order before every vowell
, and to repeate them oft over together ; as thus : to begin with <font>
b <$$font> , and to say , ba , be , bi , bo , bu .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.138

So <font> d . <$$font> da , de , di , do , du . <font> f . <$$font>
fa , fe , fi , fo , fu . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.139

Thus teach them to say all the rest , as it were singing them together ,
la , le , li , lo , lu ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.140

The hardest to the last , as ca , ce , ci , co , cu : and ga , ge , gi ,
go , gu . In which the sound is a little changed in the second and
third syllables . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.141

When they can doe all these , then teach them to spell them in order ,
thus ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.142

What spels b-a ? BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.143

If the childe can@ @not tell , teach him to say thus ; b-a , ba : so
putting first <font> b . <$$font> before every vowell , to say b-a ba ,
b-e be , b-i bi , b-o bo , b-u bu . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.144

Then aske him againe what spels b-a , and hee will tell you ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.145

so all the rest in order . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.146

By oft repeating before him , hee will certainly doe it .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.147

After this if you aske him how hee spels b-a , he will answer b-a ba .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.148

So in all others . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.149

Next these , teach them to put the vowels first , as to say , ab , eb ,
ib , ob , ub . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.150

Then thus , a-b ab , e-b eb , i-b ib , o-b ob , u-b ub .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.151

After , what spelles a-b , e-b &c. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.152

Thus to goe with them backward and forward , crosse , in and out ,
untill they can spell any word of two letters .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.153

Then you may adjoine those of three letters : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.154

Afterwards , all the hard syllables , to tell what any of them spels ,
till they be perfect in all , or as you shall thinke meet .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,19.155

By this meanes , and by a little repeating of the letters of the
Alphabet over before them , by three or foure letters together , as they
stand in order , so <P_20> as they may best sound in the children's
eares , they will soone learne to say all the letters of the A.B.C. if
you will . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.156

As to repeat them thus : {COM:alphabet_omitted}
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.157

To say them thus by roat , will nothing hinder but further them .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.158

Then they may presently be taught to know the letters upon the booke ,
either one by one , finding first which is <font> a <$$font> , in the
Alphabet ; and after in any other place . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.159

Then to finde which is <font> b <$$font> , and so through all the rest
as you will . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.160

Then when they are cunning in their letters and spelling , if you make
them to understand the matter which they learne , by questions , for a
little at the first , they will goe on in reading , as fast as you will
desire . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.161

The easier and more familiar the matter is to them , the faster they
learne . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.162

Thus may any poore man or woman enter the little ones in a towne
together ; and make an honest poore living of it , or get somwhat
towards helping the same . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.163

Also the Parents who have any learning , may enter their little ones ,
playing with them , at dinners , and suppers , or as they sit by the
fire , and finde it very pleasant delight . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.164

So they may helpe to gaine their children a yeere or two in learning ,
at the beginning , & also the Grammar Schooles of this labour and
hindrance . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.165

<font> Spoud. <$$font> You have perswaded mee very much concerning this
doubt also . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.166

Surely , Sir , howsoever this may seeme but a toy , yet all tender
parents will much rejoice in it , and acknowledge it an exceeding
benefit , to have their children so entred ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.167

and this time being gotten in the beginning , will bee found in the end
as you truely said . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.168

Yet there is another matter that comes unto my remembrance , about which
I have taken no small griefe and discouragement many a time , concerning
this point of reading English . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.169

I will mention it here , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.170

and desire your judgement how to redresse it , although it might happely
come in fitter afterwards . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.171

The trouble is this : That when as my children doe first enter into
Latine , many of them will forget to reade English ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,20.172

<P_21>

and some of them bee worse two or three yeeres after that they have been
in construction , then when they began it . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,21.174

Now if you could teach me how to helpe this likewise that they might as
well goe forward still in reading English as in Latine , I should
account this a very great benefit . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,21.175

For , some of their Parents , who use me the kindliest , will bee at me
, that their children may every day reade some Chapters of the Bible ,
to helpe their reading of English . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,21.176

Now this I can@ @not possibly doe , but they must needs bee hindred in
their Latine , in some lessons or necessarie exercises ; and either be
behinde their fellowes , or else trouble all their fellowes very much ,
that they can@ @not goe so fast forward as they should , but stay for
these readers . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,21.177

Others being more ignorant or malicious , upon every light occasion ,
are readie to rage & raile at me , for that their children , as they say
, doe get no good under me , but are worse and worse .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,21.178

For , where as they could have read English perfectly <paren> it may be
<$$paren> when they came to me , now they have forgotten to doe it .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,21.179

Thus am I grieved on every side , and vexed daily , let mee labour never
so much , and spend my heart amongst them for to doe them good .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,21.180

<font> Phil. <$$font> Sir , herein I can say , as she in the Poet ;
<paren> Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco . <$$paren>
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,21.181

For I have tasted deepely of the same griefe untill verie lately ,
within this yeere or two . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,21.182

Yet now I seeme to my Selfe , to finde as sensible and continuall a
growth amongst all my Schollers , in their English tongue as in the
Latine . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,21.183

And not onely for the reading of it , but also for understanding it ,
and abilitie to utter their mindes of any matter , wherewith they are
acquainted , or which they learne in Latine ; and also how to expresse
the meaning of the Latine in proprietie , and puritie of our owne tongue
: so that I am quite delivered from that clamour .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,21.184

But to tell you what I thinke , wherein there seemes unto mee , to bee a
verie maine want in all our Grammar schooles generally , or in the most
of them ; whereof <P_22> I have heard some great learned men to
complaine ; That there is no care had in respect , to traine up
schollers so , as they may be able to expresse their minds purely and
readily in our owne tongue , and to increase in the practice of it , as
well as in the Latine or Greeke ; whereas our chiefe indevour should be
for it , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.185

and that for these reasons . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.186

1 . Because that language which all sorts and conditions of men amongst
us are to have most use of , both in speech and writing , is our owne
native tongue . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.187

2 . The puritie and elegancie of our owne language , is to be esteemed
a chiefe part of the honour of our Nation : which we all ought to
advance as much as in us lieth . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.188

As when Greece and Rome and other nations have most flourished , their
languages also have been most pure : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.189

and from those times of Greece and Rome , we fetch our chiefest patterns
, for the learning of their tongues . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.190

3 . Because of those which are for a time trained up in schooles ,
there are very few which proceed in learning , in comparison of them
that follow other callings . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.191

<font> Spoud. <$$font> This complaint is not without just cause :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.192

for I doe not know any schoole , wherein there is regard had hereof to
any purpose ; notwithstanding the generall necessitie and use of it ,
and also the great commendation which it brings to them who have
attained it : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.193

but I thinke every minute an houre , untill I heare this of you , how my
trouble and shame may be avoided , and how I may obtaine this facultie
to direct my children , how they may goe thus forward , not only in
reading English perfitly , but also in the proprietie , puritie and
copie of our English tongue , so as they may utter their mindes
commendably of any matter which may concerne them , according to their
age and place . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.194

<font> Phil. <$$font> I will but name the meanes unto you now :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.195

for I shall have occasion to shew them all more particularly hereafter .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.196

Besides the daily use of distinct reading over their English parts to
get them perfectly , and of right reading all other things which they
learne in Latine , as your selfe doe know ; these meanes following , by
the blessing of God will accomplish your desire .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,22.197

<P_23>

1 . The continuall use of the bookes of construing of <font> Lillies
<$$font> Rules , by causing them to learne to construe , and to keepe
their Grammar rules , onely by the helpe of those translations .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.199

This I finde one very good use of these books , besides some other which
I shall mention after . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.200

2 . The daily use , and practice of Grammaticall translation in English
, of all the Schoole Authours , which the yonger sort doe learne ;
causing them each day out of those to construe , and repeate ,
whatsoever they learne . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.201

This I also have prooved by happie experience , to be a rare helpe to
make young Schollers to grow very much , both in English and Latine .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.202

But of all these , for the manner , benefits , and use of them , I shall
have occasion to speake at large . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.203

3 . Besides these , they would have every day some practice of writing
English heedily , in true Orthographie ; as also of translating into
English ; or , of writing Epistles , or familiar Letters to their
friends , as well in English as in Latine . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.204

Amongst some of them , the reporting of a Fable in English , or the like
matter , trying who can make the best report , doth much further them in
this . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.205

And generally , amongst all those that can write , the taking of notes
of Sermons , and delivering them againe , or making repetitions , is a
speciall meanes . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.206

Also striving to expresse whatsoever they construe , not onely in
proprietie , but in varietie of the finest phrase , who can give the
best . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.207

This chiefly in the higher fourmes : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.208

So reading forth of Latine into English ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.209

first in proprietie , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.210

then in puritie . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.211

By these , and some use of the Historie of the Bible , and the like ,
which I shall be occasioned to mention after ; you may finde their
growth , according to your desire , and much above your expectation .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.212

<font> Spoud. <$$font> Undoubtedly Sir , these must needs be very
availeable ; because schollers may have hereby , so much use of the
English every day , above that which is practised in any Schoole which I
have knowne . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.213

But for any such translations of the Schoole-Authors , I have not heard
of them . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,23.214

<P_24>

Onely I have seene the bookes of construing <font> Lillies <$$font>
rules , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.216

and some of my children have them , though I feared that it would rather
make them idle , being but a truant's booke .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.217

Indeed I never conceived so much of them as you say :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.218

I shall better thinke of the use thereof . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.219

<font> Phil. <$$font> There is not the best thing but it may be abused
. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.220

But for that booke as the others , I shall shew and prove unto you the
commodities of them , above all that you would imagine .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.221

Experience makes mee confident : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.222

Yet to returne unto your selfe , concerning the complaint of the Parents
for their children going backward in reading English , when they first
learne Latine ; the chiefe fault in truth is in the Parents themselves ;
although wee poore schoolemasters must be sure to beare all .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.223

For if such murmuring Parents would but cause their children , every day
after dinner or supper , or both , to reade a Chapter of the Bible , or
a piece of a Chapter , as leisure would permit , and to doe it
constantly ; thereby to shew their love to the Lord , and his Word , and
their desire to have the Word dwell plentifully in their houses , to
have their children trained up in it , as young <font> Timothy <$$font>
was ; then , I say , this complaint would soon be at an end :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.224

for they should either see then , their children to increase in this ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.225

or else they should discerne the fault to bee in their children's
dulnesse , and not in our neglect . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.226

Notwithstanding , sith that they are so very few of whom wee can hope ,
that they have any care of this dutie in their houses , in respect of
all the rest who omit it , and yet all the blame must surely rest on us
, it concerneth us so much as we can to redresse it ; and therefore use
all good meanes , to cut off all occasions of clamours , and of
discrediting ourselves , and our schooles , and to contend for the
greatest profiting of our children , as well in this , as in any other
part of learning ; the use of this being , as we heard , most generall
and perpetuall . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P1,24.227

