<BEGIN_burnetcha-1698-e3-p1>

<P_1,164>

<heading>

BOOK II . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,164.4

Of the first twelve years of the reign of King Charles II , from the
year 1660 to the year 1673 . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,164.5

CHAPTER 1 . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,164.6

ENGLISH AND SCOTCH CHARACTERS OF THE RESTORATION .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,164.7

<$$heading>

I divide king Charles his reign into two books , not so much because ,
it consisting of twenty-four years , it fell , if divided at all ,
naturally to put twelve years in a book : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,164.9

but I have a much better reason for it , since as to the first twelve
years , though I knew the affairs of Scotland very authentically , yet I
had only such a general knowledge of the affairs of England as I could
pick up at a distance : whereas I lived so near the scene , and had
indeed such a share in several parts of it , during the last twelve
years , that I can write of these with much more certainty , as well as
more fully , than of the first twelve . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,164.10

I will therefore enlarge more particularly , within the compass that I
have fixed for this book , on the affairs of Scotland ; both out of the
inbred love that all men have to their native country , but more
particularly , that I may give some useful instructions to those of my
own order and profession , concerning the conduct of the bishops of
Scotland : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,164.11

for having observed , with more than ordinary niceness , all the errors
that were committed both at the first setting up of episcopacy and in
the whole progress of its continuance in Scotland , till it was again
overturned there , it may be of some use to see all that matter in a
full view and in a clear and true light . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,164.12

As soon as it was fixed that the king was to be restored , a great many
went over to make their court : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,164.13

among these <P_1,165> Sharp , who was employed by the resolutioners of
Scotland , was one . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,165.14

He carried with him a letter from the earl of Glencairn to Hyde , made
soon after earl of Clarendon , recommending him as the only person
capable to manage the design of setting up episcopacy in Scotland : upon
which he was received into great confidence .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,165.15

Yet , as he had observed very carefully the success of Monk's solemn
protestations against the king and for a commonwealth , it seemed he was
so pleased with the original , that he resolved to copy after it ,
without letting himself be diverted from it by anxious scruples , or any
tenderness of conscience : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,165.16

for he stuck neither at solemn protestations , both by word of mouth and
by letters , of which I have seen many proofs , nor at appeals to God of
his sincerity in acting for the presbytery , both in prayers and on
other occasions , joining with these many dreadful imprecations on
himself if he did prevaricate . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,165.17

He was all the while maintained by the presbyterians as their agent ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,165.18

and he continued to give them a constant account of the progress of his
negotiation in their service , while he was indeed undermining it .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,165.19

This piece of craft was so visible , he having repeated his
protestations to so many persons as they grew jealous of him , that when
he threw off the mask , about a year after this , it laid a foundation
of such a character of him , that nothing could ever bring people to any
tolerable thoughts of a man whose dissimulation and treachery was so
well known , and of which so many proofs were to be seen under his own
hand . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,165.20

{COM:insert_helsinki_1}

<P_1,175>

The earl of Manchester was made lord chamberlain : a man of a soft and
obliging temper , of no great depth , but universally beloved , being
both a virtuous and a generous man . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,175.23

The lord Robarts was made lord privy seal , afterwards <P_1,176> lord
lieutenant of Ireland , and at last lord president of the council .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,176.24

He was a man of a morose and cynical temper , just in his administration
, but vicious under the appearances of virtue : learned beyond any man
of his quality , but intractable , stiff and obstinate , proud and
jealous . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,176.25

These five , whom I have named last , had the chief hand in engaging the
nation in the design of the restoration . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,176.26

They had great credit , chiefly with the presbyterian party ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,176.27

and were men of much dexterity . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,176.28

So the thanks of that great turn was owing them :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,176.29

and they were put in great posts by the earl of Clarendon@ @'s means ,
by which he lost most of the cavaliers , who could not bear the seeing
such men so highly advanced and so much trusted .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,176.30

<P_1,177>

At the king's first coming over , Monk and Mountague were the most
considered BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,177.32

They both had the garter . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,177.33

<P_1,178>

The one was made duke of Albemarle , and the other earl of Sandwich ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,178.35

and they had noble estates given them . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,178.36

Monk was ravenous , as well as his wife , who was a mean and
contemptible creature . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,178.37

They both asked and sold all that was within their reach , nothing being
denied them for some time ; till he became so useless , that little
personal regard could be paid him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,178.38

But the king maintained still the appearances of it :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,178.39

for the appearance of the service he did him was such , that the king
thought it fit to treat him with great distinction , even after he saw
into him , and despised him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,178.40

He took care to raise his kinsman Grenville , who was made earl of Bath
, and groom of the stole , a mean_minded man , who thought of nothing
but of getting and spending money ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,178.41

only in spending he had <P_1,179> a peculiar talent of doing it with so
ill a grace and so bad a conduct , that it was long before those who saw
how much he got , and how little he spent visibly , would believe he was
so poor as he was found to be at his death : which was thought to be the
occasion of his son's shooting himself in the head a few days after his
death , finding the disorder of his affairs ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.42

for both father and son were buried together .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.43

The duke of Albemarle raised two other persons .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.44

One was Clarges , his wife's brother , who was an honest but haughty man
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.45

He became afterwards a very considerable parliament man ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.46

and valued himself on his opposing the court , and on his frugality in
managing the public money ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.47

for he had Cromwell's economy ever in his mouth ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.48

and was always for reducing the expense of war to the modesty and
parsimony of those times . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.49

Many thought he carried this too far : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.50

but it made him very popular . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.51

After he was become very rich by the public money , he seemed to take
care that nobody else should grow so rich as he was in that way .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.52

Another person raised by the duke of Albemarle was Morrice , who was the
person that had chiefly prevailed with Monk to declare for the king ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.53

upon that he was made secretary of state .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.54

He was very learned , but full of pedantry and affectation .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,179.55

He had no <P_1,180> true judgment about foreign affairs ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.56

and Albemarle's judgment of them may be measured by what he said when he
found the king grew weary of Morrice , but that in regard to him had no
mind to turn him out : upon which the duke of Albemarle replied , he did
not know what was necessary for a good secretary of state in which he
was defective , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.57

for he could speak French and write short_hand .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.58

Nicholas was the other secretary , who had been employed by king Charles
the first during the war , and had served him faithfully , but had no
understanding in foreign affairs . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.59

He was a man of virtue , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.60

but could not fall in to the king's temper , or become acceptable to him
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.61

So , not long after the restoration , Bennet , advanced afterwards to be
earl of Arlington , was by the interest of the popish party made
secretary of state , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.62

and was admitted into so particular a confidence that he began to raise
a party in opposition to the earl of Clarendon .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.63

He was a proud and insolent man . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.64

His parts were solid , but not quick . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.65

He had the art of observing the king's temper , and managing it beyond
all the men of that time . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.66

He was believed a papist ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.67

he had once professed it , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.68

and when he died he again reconciled himself to that church .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.69

Yet in the whole course of his ministry he seemed to have made it a
maxim , that the king ought to shew no favour to popery , but that all
his affairs would be spoiled if ever he turned that way ; which made the
papists become his mortal enemies , and accuse him as an apostate and
the betrayer of their interests . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.70

He was a man of great vanity , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,180.71

and lived at <P_1,181> a vast expense , without taking any care of
paying the debts which he contracted to support that .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,181.72

His chief friend was Charles Berkeley , made earl of Falmouth , who ,
without any visible merit , unless it was the managing the king's amours
, was the most absolute of all the king's favourites :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,181.73

and , which was peculiar to himself , he was as much in the duke of
York@ @'s favour as in the king's . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,181.74

He was generous in his expense : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,181.75

and it was thought if he had outlived the lewdness of that time , and
come to a more <P_1,182> sedate course of life , he would have put the
king on great and noble designs . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.76

This I should have thought more likely , if I had not had it from the
duke , who had so wrong a taste , that there was reason to suspect his
judgment both of men and things . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.77

Bennet and he had the management of the mistress ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.78

and all the earl of Clarendon@ @'s enemies came about them : the chief
of whom were the duke of Buckingham and the earl of Bristol .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.79

The first of these was a man of a noble presence .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.80

He had a great liveliness of wit , and a peculiar faculty of turning all
things into ridicule , with bold figures and natural descriptions .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.81

He had no sort of literature : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.82

only he was drawn into chemistry , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.83

and for some years he thought he was very near the finding the
philosopher's stone ; which had the fate that attends on all such men as
he was , when they are drawn in , to lay out for it .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.84

He had no principles either of religion , virtue , or friendship .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.85

Pleasure , frolic , and extravagant diversions , was all that he laid to
heart . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.86

He was true to nothing : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.87

for he was not true to himself . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.88

He had no steadiness nor conduct : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.89

he could keep no secret , nor execute any design without spoiling it .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.90

He could never fix his thoughts , nor govern his estate , though then
the greatest in England . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.91

He was bred about the king , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.92

and for many years he had a great ascendant over him :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.93

but he spake of him to all persons with that contempt that at last he
drew a lasting disgrace upon himself ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.94

and he also ruined both body and mind , fortune and reputation equally .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.95

The madness of vice appeared in his person in very eminent instances ;
since at last he became contemptible and poor , sickly , and sunk in his
parts , as well as in all other respects , so that his conversation was
as much avoided as ever it had been courted .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,182.96

He found the king , when he came from his travels in the year 45 , newly
come to Paris , sent over by <P_1,183> his father when his affairs
declined : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.97

and finding him enough inclined to receive ill impressions , he , who
was then got into all the impieties and vices of the age , set himself
to corrupt the king , in which he was too successful , being seconded in
that wicked design by the lord Percy . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.98

And to complete the matter , Hobbes was brought to him , under the
pretence of instructing him in mathematics :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.99

and he laid before him his schemes , both with relation to religion and
politics , which made deep and lasting impressions on the king's mind .
So that the main blame of the king's ill principles and bad morals was
owing to the duke of Buckingham . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.100

The earl of Bristol was a man of courage and learning , of a bold temper
and a lively wit , but of no judgment nor steadiness .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.101

He was in the queen's interests during the war at Oxford ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.102

and he studied to drive things past the possibility of a treaty or any
reconciliation ; fancying that nothing would make the military men so
sure to the king as his being sure to them , and giving them hopes of
sharing the confiscated estates among them ; whereas , he thought , all
discourses of treaty made them feeble and fearful .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.103

When he went beyond sea he turned papist ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.104

but it was after a way of his own : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.105

for he loved to magnify the difference between the church and the court
of Rome . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.106

He was esteemed a very good speaker : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.107

but he was too copious and too florid . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.108

He was set at the head of the popish party ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.109

and was a violent enemy of the earl of Clarendon .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,183.110

<P_1,184>

Having now said as much as seems necessary to describe the state of the
court and ministry at the restoration , I will next give an account of
the chief of the Scots , and of the parties that were formed among them
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.112

The earl of Lauderdale , afterwards made duke , had been for many years
a zealous covenanter : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.113

but in the year '47 he turned to the king's interests ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.114

and had continued a prisoner from Worcester fight , where he was taken .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.115

He was kept for some years in the Tower of London , in Portland castle ,
and in other prisons , till he was set at liberty by those who called
home the king . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.116

So he went over to Holland . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.117

And since he continued so long , and , contrary to all men's opinion ,
in so high a degree of favour and confidence , it may be expected that I
should be a little copious in setting out his character ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.118

for I knew him very particularly . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.119

He made a very ill appearance : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.120

he was very big : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.121

his hair was red , hanging oddly about him :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.122

his tongue was too big for his mouth , which made him bedew all that he
talked to : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.123

and his whole manner was rough and boisterous , and very unfit for a
court . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.124

He was very learned , not only in Latin , in which he was a master , but
in Greek and Hebrew . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.125

He had read a great deal in divinity , and almost all the historians
ancient and modern : so that he had great materials .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.126

He had with these an extraordinary memory , and a copious but unpolished
expression . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.127

He was a man , as the duke of Buckingham called him to me , of a
blundering understanding , not always clear , but often clouded , as his
looks were always . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.128

He was haughty beyond expression ; abject to those he saw he must stoop
to , but imperious and insolent and brutal to all others .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.129

He had a violence of passion that carried him often to fits like madness
, in which he had no temper . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,184.130

If he took a thing <P_1,185> wrong , it was a vain thing to study to
convince him : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.131

that would rather provoke him to swear he would never be of another mind
: BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.132

he was to be let alone , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.133

and then perhaps he would have forgot what he had said , and come about
of his own accord . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.134

He was the coldest friend and the violentest enemy I ever knew :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.135

I felt it too much not to know it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.136

He at first seemed to despise wealth : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.137

but he delivered himself up afterwards to luxury and sensuality
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.138

and by that means he ran into a vast expense ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.139

and stuck at nothing that was necessary to support that .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.140

In his long imprisonment he had great impressions of religion on his
mind : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.141

but he wore these out so entirely that scarce any trace of them was left
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.142

His great experience in affairs , his ready compliance with every thing
that he thought would please the king , and his bold offering at the
most desperate counsels , gained him such an interest in the king , that
no attempt against him , nor complaint of him , could ever shake it ,
till a decay of strength and understanding forced him to let go his hold
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.143

He was in his principles much against popery and arbitrary government :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.144

and yet , by a fatal train of passions and interests , he made way for
the former , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.145

and had almost established the latter . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.146

And , whereas some by a smooth deportment make the first beginnings of
tyranny less unacceptable and discernable , he , by the fury of his
behaviour , heightened the severity of his ministry , which was liker
the cruelty of an inquisition than the legality of justice , not to say
mercy . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.147

With all this he was at first a Presbyterian ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.148

and retained his aversion to king Charles I . and his party to his
death . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,185.149

<P_1,186>

The earl of Crawford had been his fellow prisoner for ten years ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.151

and that was a good title for maintaining him in the post he had before
, of being lord treasurer . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.152

He was a sincere but weak man , passionate and indiscreet ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.153

and continued still a zealous prebyterian .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.154

The earl , afterwards duke , of Rothes , had married his daughter ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.155

and had the merit of a long imprisonment likewise to recommend him :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.156

he had a ready dexterity in the management of affairs , with a soft and
insinuating address : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.157

he had a quick apprehension with a clear judgment :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.158

he had no advantage of education , no sort of literature ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.159

nor had he travelled abroad : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.160

all in him was mere nature , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.161

but it was {COM:preceding_word_"was"_emended} nature very much depraved
; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.162

for he seemed to have freed himself from all the impressions of virtue
or religion , of honour or good nature . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.163

He delivered himself , without either restraint or decency , to all the
pleasure of wine and women . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.164

He had but one maxim , to which he adhered firmly ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.165

that was to do every thing , and deny himself in nothing , that might
maintain his greatness , or gratify his appetites .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.166

He was unhappily made for drunkenness ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,186.167

for as he drank all his friends dead , and was able to subdue two or
three sets <P_1,187> of drunkards one after another , so it scarce ever
appeared that he was disordered ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,187.168

and after the greatest excesses , an hour or two of sleep carried them
off so entirely that no sign of them remained :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,187.169

he would go about business without any uneasiness , or discovering any
heat either in body or mind . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,187.170

This had a terrible conclusion ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,187.171

for after he had killed all his friends , he fell at last under such a
weakness of stomach , that he had perpetual cholics , when he was not
hot within and full of strong liquor , of which he was presently seized
; so that he was always either sick or drunk .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,1,187.172

{COM:insert_helsinki_2}

<P_2,165>

The session of parliament was to be opened within three days :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,165.175

and it may be easily imagined in what a temper they met .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,165.176

The court party were out of countenance : so the country party were
masters this session . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,165.177

All Oates's evidence was now so well believed , that it was not safe for
any man to seem to doubt of any part of it .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,165.178

He thought he had the nation in his hands ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,165.179

and was swelled up to a high pitch of vanity and insolence .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,165.180

And now he made a new edition of his discovery at the bar of the house
of commons . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,165.181

He said the pope had declared that England was his kingdom , and that he
had sent over commissions to several persons : and had by these made
Arundel of Wardour chancellor , Powys treasurer , sir William Godolphin
, then in Spain , privy seal , Coleman secretary of state , Bellasys
general , Petre lieutenant general , Ratcliffe major <P_2,166> general ,
Stafford paymaster general , and Langhorn advocate general ; besides
many other commissions for subaltern officers .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.182

These he said he saw in Langhorn's chamber ; and that he had delivered
out many of them himself , and saw many more delivered by others .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.183

And he now swore , upon his own knowledge , that both Coleman and
Wakeman were in the plot ; that Coleman had given eighty guineas to four
ruffians , that went to Windsor last summer , to stab the king ; that
Wakeman had undertaken to poison him , for which 10,000 <font> l.
<$$font> was offered him , but that he got the price raised to 15,000
<font> l. <$$font> BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.184

He excused his not knowing them , when confronted with them ; that he
was then so spent by a long examination , and by not sleeping for two
nights , that he was not then master of himself ; though it seemed very
strange that he should then have forgot that which he made now the main
part of his evidence : and should have then objected only reports upon
hearsay , when he had now such matter against them , as he said , upon
his own knowledge : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.185

and it seemed not very congruous , that those who went to stab the king
had but twenty guineas apiece , when Wakeman was to have 15,000 <font>
l. <$$font> for a safer way of killing him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.186

Many other things in the discovery made it seem ill digested and not
credible . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.187

Bellasys was almost perpetually ill of the gout .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.188

Petre was a weak man , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.189

and had never any military command . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.190

Ratcliffe was a man that lived in great state in the north ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.191

and had not stirred from home all the last summer .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.192

Oates also swore he delivered a commission to be a colonel in May last
to Howard , Carlisle's brother , that had married the duchess of
Richmond . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.193

But a friend of mine told me he was all that month at Bath , lodged in
the same house with Howard , with whom he was every day engaged at play
: BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.194

he was then miserably ill of the gout , of which he died soon after .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,166.195

Oates did also charge general Lambert as one engaged in the design , who
was to have a great post when <P_2,167> set at liberty .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.196

But he had been kept in prison ever since the restoration ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.197

and by that time had lost his memory and sense .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.198

It was thought strange that since Oates had so often said , what I once
heard him say , that he had gone in among them on design to betray them
, that he had not kept any one of all these commissions to be a real
proof in support of his evidence . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.199

He had also said to the king , that whereas others ventured their lives
to serve him , he had ventured his soul to serve him :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.200

and yet he did suffer the four ruffians to go to Windsor to kill him ,
without giving him any notice of his danger .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.201

These were characters strong enough to give suspicion , if Coleman's
letters and Godfrey's murder had not seemed such authentic confirmations
, as left no room to doubt of any thing .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.202

Tillotson indeed told me , that Langhorn's wife , who was still as
zealous a protestant as he was a papist , came oft to him , and gave him
notice of every thing she could discover among them ; though she
continued a faithful and dutiful wife to the last minute of her
husband's life . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.203

Upon the first breaking out of the plot , before Oates had spoke a word
of commissions , or had accused Langhorn , she engaged her son into some
discourse upon those matters , who was a hot indiscreet papist .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.204

He said their designs were so well laid , it was impossible they could
miscarry : and that his father would be one of the greatest men of
England , for he had seen a commission from the pope constituting him
advocate general . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.205

This he told me in Stillingfleet's hearing .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.206

The earl of Shaftesbury had got out of the Tower in the former session ,
upon his submission , to which it was not easy to bring him ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.207

but when he saw an army raised , he had no mind to lie longer in prison
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,167.208

The matter bore a long <P_2,168> debate , the motion he had made in the
king's bench being urged much against him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.209

But a submission always take {COM:sic} off a contempt :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.210

so he got out . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.211

And now the duke of Buckingham and he , with the lords of Essex and
Halifax , were the governing men among the lords .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.212

Many hard things were said against the duke ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.213

yet when they tried to carry an address to be made to the king to send
him away from court , the majority was against them .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.214

While things were thus in a ferment at London , Bedloe delivered himself
to the magistrates of Bristol , pretending he knew the secret of
Godfrey's murder : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.215

so he was sent up to London . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.216

The king told me that when the secretary examined him in his presence ,
at his first coming he said he knew nothing of the plot ; but that he
had heard 40,000 men were to come over from Spain , who were to meet as
pilgrims at St. Jago's , and were to be shipped for England but he knew
nothing of any fleet that was to bring them over .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.217

So this was looked on as very extravagant .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.218

But he said he had seen Godfrey's body at Somerset house ; and that he
was offered 4000 <font> l. <$$font> by a servant of the lord Bellasys
to assist in carrying it away : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.219

but upon that he had gone out of town to Bristol , where he was so
pursued with horror that it forced him to discover it .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.220

Bedloe had led a very vicious life . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.221

He had gone by many false names , by which he had cheated many persons .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.222

He had gone over many parts of France and Spain as a man of quality ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.223

and he had made a shift to live on his wits , or rather by his cheats :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,168.224

so a tenderness of conscience did not seem to be that to <P_2,169> which
he was much subject . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.225

But the very next day after this , when he was brought to the bar of the
house of lords , he made a full discovery of his knowledge of the plot ,
and of the lords in the Tower : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.226

for all those against whom Oates had informed were now prisoners .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.227

The king was upon this convinced that some had been with Bedloe after he
had been before him , who had instructed him in this narration , of
which he had said the night before that he knew nothing :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.228

and yet he now not only confirmed the main parts of Oates's discovery ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.229

but added a great deal to them . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.230

And he now pretended that his rambling over so many places of Europe was
all in order to the carrying out this design ; that he was trusted with
the secret , and had opened many of the letters which he was employed to
carry . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.231

Here were now two witnesses to prove the plot , as far as swearing could
prove it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.232

And among the papers of the Jesuits , that were seized on when they were
clapt up , two letters were found that seemed to confirm all .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.233

One from Rome mentioned the sending over the patents , of which it was
said in the letter that they guessed the contents , though their patrons
there carried their matters so secretly , that nothing was known but as
they thought fit . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.234

The Jesuits , when examined upon this , said these were only patents
with relation to the offices in their order .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.235

Another letter was writ to a Jesuit in the country , citing him to come
to London by the 24th of April ; which was the day in which Oates swore
they held their consult , and that fifty of them had signed the
resolution of killing the king , which was to be executed by Grove and
Pickering . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.236

Now in the end of that letter it was added , ' I need not enjoin secrecy
, BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.237

for the nature of the thing requires it . '
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.238

When the Jesuit was examined to this , he said it was a summons for a
meeting according to the rule of their order :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,169.239

and they being to meet during the sitting of the parliament , that
<P_2,170> was the particular reason for enjoining secrecy .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.240

Yet , while men's minds were strongly prepossessed , these answers did
not satisfy , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.241

but were thought only shifts . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.242

At this time Carstares , of whose behaviour in Scotland mention has been
made , not having met with those rewards that he expected , came up to
London , to accuse duke Lauderdale , as designing to keep up the
opposition that was made to the laws in Scotland , even at the time that
he seemed to prosecute conventicles with the greatest fury ; because he
had often drawn the chief of their teachers into such snares , that upon
the advertisements that he gave they might have been taken ; but that
duke Lauderdale had neglected it : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.243

so he saw he had a mind that conventicles should go on at the same time
that he was putting the country in such a flame to punish them .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.244

This he undertook to prove by those witnesses of whom on other occasions
he had made use . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.245

He also confessed the false date of that warrant upon which Baillie had
been censured . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.246

He put all this in writing , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.247

and gave it to the marquess of Athol , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.248

and pressed him to carry him to duke Hamilton and the earl of Kincardine
, that he might beg their pardon , and be assured of their favour .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.249

I was against the making use of so vile a man ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.250

and would have nothing to do with him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.251

He made his application to lord Cavendish , and to some of the house of
commons , to whom I gave such a character of him that they would see him
no more . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,170.252

While he was thus looking about to see where he could find a lucky piece
of villainy , he happened to go into an eating-house in Covent Garden ,
that was over against the <P_2,171> shop of one Staley , the popish
banker , who had been in great credit , but was then under some
difficulties ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.253

for all his creditors came to call for their money .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.254

Staley happening to be in the next room to Carstares and his company ,
Carstares pretended he heard him say in French , that the king was a
rogue , and persecuted the people of God ; and that he himself would
stab him if nobody else would . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.255

The words were writ down , which he resolved to swear against him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.256

So next morning they went to him , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.257

and told him what they would swear against him ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.258

and asked a sum of money of him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.259

He was in much anxiety , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.260

and saw great danger on both hands : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.261

yet he chose rather to leave himself to their malice , than be preyed on
by them . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.262

So he was seized on , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.263

and they swore the words against him : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.264

and he was appointed to be tried within five days .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.265

When I heard who the witnesses were , I thought I was bound to do what I
could to stop it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.266

So I sent both to the lord chancellor and to the attorney general , to
let them know what profligate wretches these witnesses were .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.267

Jones , the attorney general , took this ill of me , that I should
disparage the king's evidence . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.268

The thing grew public , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.269

and raised great clamour against me . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.270

It was said I was taking this method to get into favour at court .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.271

I had likewise observed to several persons of weight , how many
incredible things there were in the evidence that was given .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.272

I wished they would make use of the heat the nation was in to secure us
effectually from popery : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.273

we saw certain evidence to carry us so far , as to graft that upon it :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.274

but I wished they would not run too hastily to the taking men's lives
upon such testimonies . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.275

Lord Holles had more temper than I expected from a man of his heat .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.276

Lord Halifax was of the same mind . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.277

But the earl of Shaftesbury could not bear the discourse .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,171.278

He said we must support the evidence , and that all those who undermined
the credit of the witnesses <P_2,172> were to be looked on as public
enemies . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.279

And so inconstant a thing is popularity , that I was then most bitterly
railed at by those who seemed formerly to put some confidence in me .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.280

It went so far that I was advised by some not to stir abroad for fear of
public affronts . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.281

But these things did not daunt me . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.282

Staley was brought to his trial , which did not hold long .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.283

The witnesses gave a full evidence against him ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.284

and he had nothing to offer to take away their credit .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.285

He only shewed how improbable it was , that in a public house he should
talk such things with so loud a voice as to be heard in the next room ,
in a quarter of the town where almost every body understood French .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.286

He was cast : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.287

and prepared himself very seriously for death .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.288

Dr. Lloyd went to see him in prison . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.289

He was offered his life if he would discover their plots :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.290

he protested he knew of none , and that he had not said the words sworn
against him , nor any thing to that purpose .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.291

And thus he died , the first of those who suffered on the account of the
plot . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.292

Duke Lauderdale , having heard how I had moved in this matter , railed
at me with open mouth , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.293

and said I had studied to save Staley , for the liking I had to any that
would murder the king : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.294

and he infused this so into the king ; that he repeated it in the house
of lords to a company that were standing about him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,172.295

Yet so soon could he turn to make use of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} a man whom <P_2,173> he had censured
so unmercifully , that two days after this he sent the earl of Dumbarton
, that was a papist , and had been bred in France , but was duke
Hamilton's brother , to me , to desire me to come to him secretly ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.296

for he had a mind to talk with me . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.297

He said he believed I could do him service , if I had a mind to it :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.298

and the see of Chichester being then void , he said he would not dispose
of it till he saw whether I would deserve it or not .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.299

I asked , if he fancied I would be a spy , or betray any body to him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.300

But he undertook to me that the king should ask me no questions , but
should in all things leave me to my liberty .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.301

An accident fell in , before I went to him , which took off much from
Oates's credit . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.302

When he was examined by the house of lords , and had made the same
narrative to them that he had offered to the commons , they asked him if
he had now named all the persons whom he knew to be involved in the plot
? BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.303

He said there might be some inferior persons , whom he had perhaps
forgot , but he had named all the persons of note .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.304

Yet he , it seems , afterwards bethought himself :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.305

and Mrs. Elliot , wife to Elliot of the bedchamber , came to the king ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.306

and told him Oates had somewhat to swear against the queen , if he would
give way to it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,173.307

The king was willing to give Oates line enough , as <P_2,174> he
expressed it to me , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,174.308

and seemed to give way to it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,174.309

So he came out with a new story : that the queen sent for some Jesuits
to Somerset house , and that he went along with them , but stayed at the
door when they went in ; where he heard one , in a woman's voice ,
expressing her resentments of the usage she had met with , and assuring
them she would assist them in taking off the king :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,174.310

upon that he was brought in , and presented to her ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,174.311

and there was then no other woman in the room but she .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P1,2,174.312

