<BEGIN_burnetroc-1680-e3-p1>

<P_28>

I have now made the Decription of his former Life , and Principles , as
fully as I thought necessary , to answer my end in Writing : And yet
with those reserves , that I hope I have given no just cause of offence
to any . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,28.3

I have said nothing but what I had from his own mouth ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,28.4

and have avoided the mentioning of the more particular Passages of his
<P_29> life , of which he told me not a few : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,29.5

But since others were concerned in them , whose good only I design , I
will say nothing that may either provoke or blemish them .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,29.6

It is their Reformation , and not their Disgrace , I desire :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,29.7

This tender consideration of others has made me suppress many remarkable
and useful things he told me : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,29.8

But finding that though I should name none , yet I must at least Relate
such Circumstances , as would give too great Occasion for the <font>
Reader <$$font> to conjecture concerning the Persons intended right or
wrong , either of which were inconvenient enough , I have chosen to pass
them quite over . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,29.9

But I hope those that know how much they were <P_30> engaged with him in
his ill Courses , will be somewhat touched with this tenderness I
express toward them : and be thereby the rather induced to reflect on
their Ways , and to consider without prejudice or passion what sense
this Noble Lord had of their case , when he came at last seriously to
reflect upon his own . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,30.10

I now turn to those parts of this <font> Narrative <$$font> , wherein I
my self bore some share , and which I am to deliver upon the
Observations I made , after a long and free conversation with him for
some months . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,30.11

I was not long in his Company , when he told me , He should treat me
with more freedom than he had ever used to men of my Profession .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,30.12

He would conceal <P_31> none of his Principles from me , but lay his
thoughts open without any Disguise ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,31.13

nor would he do it to maintain Debate , or shew his Wit , but plainly
tell me what stuck with him ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,31.14

and protested to me , That he was not so engaged to his old Maxims , as
to resolve not to change , but that if he could be convinc'd , he would
choose rather to be of another mind ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,31.15

He said , He would impartially Weigh what I should lay before him , and
tell me freely when it did convince him , and when it did not .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,31.16

He expressed this disposition of mind to me in a manner so frank , that
I could not but believe him , and be much taken with his way of
Discourse : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,31.17

So we entred into almost all the parts of Natural <P_32> and Revealed
Religion , and of Morality . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,32.18

He seemed pleased , and in a great measure satified {COM:sic} , with
what I said upon many of these Heads : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,32.19

And though our freest Conversation was when we were alone , yet upon
several Occasions , other persons were Witnesses to it .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,32.20

I understood from many hands that my Company was not distastful to him ,
and that the Subjects about which we talked most were not unacceptable :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,32.21

and he expressed himself often , not ill pleased with many things I said
to him , and particularly when I visited him in his last Sickness , so
that I hope it may not be altogether unprofitable to publish the
substance of those matters about which We argued so freely , with our
reasoning upon <P_33> them : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,33.22

And perhaps what had some effects on him , may be not altogether
ineffectual upon others . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,33.23

I followed him with such Arguments as I saw were most likely to prevail
with him : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,33.24

and my not urging other Reasons , proceeded not from any distrust I had
of their force , but from the necessity of using those that were most
proper for him . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,33.25

He was then in a low state of health , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,33.26

and seemed to be slowly recovering of a great Disease :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,33.27

He was in the Milk-diet , and apt to fall into Hectical-@ @Fits ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,33.28

any accident weakened him ; so that he thought he could not live long ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,33.29

and when he went from <font> London <$$font> , he said , He believed he
should never come to Town more . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,33.30

Yet during his being in Town <P_34> he was so well , that he went often
abroad , and had great Vivacity of Spirit . So that he was under no
such decay , as either darkened or weakened his Understanding ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,34.31

Nor was he any way troubled with the Spleen , or Vapours , or under the
power of Melancholy . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,34.32

What he was then , compared to what he had been formerly , I could not
so well judge , who had seen him but twice before .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,34.33

Others have told me they perceived no difference in his parts .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,34.34

This I mention more particularly , that it may not be thought that
Melancholy , or the want of Spirits , made him more inclined to receive
any impressions : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,34.35

for indeed I never discovered any such thing in him .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,34.36

<P_35>

Having thus opened the way to the Heads of our Discourse , I shall next
mention them . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,35.38

The <font> three <$$font> chief things We talked about , were <font>
Morality , Natural Religion <$$font> and <font> Revealed Religion ,
Christianity <$$font> in particular . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,35.39

For <font> Morality , <$$font> he confessed , He saw the necessity of it
, both for the Government of the World , and for the preservation of
Health , Life and Friendship : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,35.40

and was very much ashamed of his former Practices , rather because he
had made himself a Beast , and had brought pain and sickness on his Body
, and had suffered much in his Reputation , than from any deep sense of
a Supream Being , or another State : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,35.41

But so far this went with him , that he resolved firmly to change the
Course of <P_36> his Life ; which he thought he should effect by the
study of <font> Philosophy <$$font> , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,36.42

and had not a few no less solid than pleasant Notions concerning the
folly and madness of Vice ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,36.43

but he confessed he had no remorse for his past Actions , as Offences
against God , but only as Injuries to himself and to Mankind .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,36.44

Upon this Subject I shewed him the Defects of <font> Philosophy <$$font>
, for reforming the World : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,36.45

That it was a matter of Speculation , which but few either had the
leisure , or the capacity to enquire into . But the Principle that must
reform Mankind , must be obvious to every Mans Understanding .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,36.46

That <font> Philosophy <$$font> in matters of Morality , beyond the
great lines of our Duty , had no very certain fixed <P_37> Rule , but in
the lesser Offices and Instances of our Duty went much by the Fancies of
Men , and Customs of Nations ; and consequently could not have Authority
enough to bear down the Propensities of Nature , Appetite or Passion :
For which I instanced in these two Points ; the <font> One <$$font> was
, About that <font> Maxim <$$font> of the <font> Stoicks <$$font> , to
extirpate all sort of Passion and concern for any thing .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,37.47

That , take it by one hand , seemed desireable , because if it could be
accomplish'd , it would make all the accidents of life easie ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,37.48

but I think it can@ @not , because Nature after all our striving against
it , will still return to it self : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,37.49

Yet on the other hand it dissolved the Bonds of Nature and Friendship ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,37.50

and slackened Industry <P_38> which will move but dully , without an
inward heat : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,38.51

And if it delivered a man from many Troubles , it deprived him of the
chief pleasures of Life , which rise from Friendship .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,38.52

The <font> other <$$font> was concerning the restraint of pleasure , how
far that was to go . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,38.53

Upon this he told me the two <font> Maxims <$$font> of his <font>
Morality <$$font> then were , that he should do nothing to the hurt of
any other , or that might prejudice his own health :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,38.54

And he thought that all pleasure , when it did not interfere , with
these , was to be indulged as the gratification of our natural Appetites
. BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,38.55

It seemed unreasonable to imagine these were put into a man only to be
restrained , or curbed to such a narrowness : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,38.56

This he applied to the <P_39> free use of Wine and Women .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,39.57

To this I answered , That if Appetites being Natural , was an Argument
for the indulging them , then the revengeful might as well alledge it
for Murder , and the Covetous for Stealing ; whose Appetites are no less
keen on those Objects ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,39.58

and yet it is acknowledg'd that these Appetites ought to be curb'd .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,39.59

If the difference is urged from the Injury that another Person receives
, the Injury is as great , if a Mans Wife is defiled , or his Daughter
corrupted : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,39.60

and it is impossible for a man to let his Appetites loose to Vagrant
Lusts , and not to transgress in these particulars :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,39.61

So there was no curing the disorders , that must rise from <P_40> thence
but by regulating these Appetites : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,40.62

And why should we not as well think that God intended our bruitish and
sensual Appetites should be governed by our Reason , as
{we_should_think} that the fierceness of Beasts should be managed and
tamed , by the Wisdom , and for the use of Man ? So that it is no real
absurdity to grant that Appetites were put into Men , on purpose to
exercise their Reason in the Restraint and Government of them : which to
be able to do , ministers a higher and more lasting pleasure to a Man ,
than to give them their full scope and range .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,40.63

And if other Rules of <font> Philosophy <$$font> be oberved , such as
the avoiding those Objects that stir Passion ; Nothing raises higher
Passions than ungovern'd <P_41> Lust , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,41.64

nothing darkens the Understanding , and depresses a mans mind more ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,41.65

nor is any thing managed with more frequent Returns of other
Immoralities , such as Oaths and Imprecations which are only intended to
compass what is desired : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,41.66

The expence that is necessary to maintain these Irregularities makes a
man false in his other dealings . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,41.67

All this he freely confessed was true , Upon which I urged , that if it
was reasonable for a man to regulate his Appetite in things which he
knew were hurtful to him ; Was it not as reasonable for God to prescribe
a Regulating of those Appetities , whose unrestrained Course did produce
such mischievous effects ? BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,41.68

That it could not be denied , <P_42> but doing to others what we would
have others do unto us , was a just Rule : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,42.69

Those men then that knew how extream sensible they themselves would be
of the dishonour of their Families in the case of their Wives or
Daughters , must needs condemn themselves , for doing that which they
could not bear from another : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,42.70

And if the peace of Mankind , and the entire satisfaction of our whole
life , ought to be one of the chief measures of our Actions , then let
all the World judge , Whether a Man that confines his Appetite , and
lives contented at home , is not much happier , than those that let
their Desires run after forbidden Objects . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,42.71

The thing being granted to be better in it self , than the question
<P_43> falls between the restraint of Appetite in some Instances , and
the freedom of a mans thoughts , the soundness of his health , his
application to Affairs , with the easiness of his whole life .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,43.72

Whether the one is not to be done before the other ?
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,43.73

As to the difficulty of such a restraint , though it is easie to be done
, when a man allows himself many liberties , in which it is not possible
to stop ; Yet those who avoid the Occasions that may kindle these impure
flames , and keep themselves well employed , find the Victory and
Dominion over them no such impossible , or hard matter , as may seem at
first view . So that though the <font> Philosophy <$$font> and <font>
Morality <$$font> of this Point were plain ; Yet there is <P_44> not
strength enough in that Principle to subdue Nature , and Appetite .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,44.74

Upon this I urged , that <font> Morality <$$font> could not be a strong
thing , unless a man were determined by a Law within himself :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,44.75

for if he only measured himself by Decency , or the Laws of the Land ,
this would teach him only to use such caution in his ill Practices ,
that they should not break out too visibly : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,44.76

but would never carry him to an inward and universal probity :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,44.77

That Vertue was of so complicated a Nature , that unless a man came
entirely within its discipline , he could not adhere stedfastly to any
one Precept : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,44.78

for Vices are often made necessary supports to one another :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,44.79

That this can@ @not be done , either steddily , or with any satisfaction
, <P_45> unless the Mind does inwardly comply with , and delight in the
Dictates of Virtue : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,45.80

And that could not be effected , except a mans nature were internally
regenerated , and changed by a higher Principle :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,45.81

Till that came about , corrupt Nature would be strong and <font>
Philosophy <$$font> but feeble : especially when it strugled {COM:sic}
with such Appetites or Passions as were much kindled , or deeply rooted
in the Constitution of ones Body . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,45.82

This , he said , sounded to him like <font> Enthusiasme <$$font> , or
<font> Canting <$$font> : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,45.83

He had no notion of it , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,45.84

and so could not understand it : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,45.85

He comprehended the Dictates of <font> Reason <$$font> and <font>
Philosophy <$$font> , in which as the Mind became much conversant ,
there would soon follow as he believed , a greater <P_46> easiness in
obeying its Precepts : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,46.86

I told him on the other hand , that all his Speculations of <font>
Philosophy <$$font> would not serve him in any stead , to the reforming
of his Nature and Life , till he applied himself to God for inward
assistances . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,46.87

It was certain , that the Impressions made in his Reason governed him ,
as they were lively presented to him : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,46.88

but these are so apt to slip out of our Memory , and we so apt to turn
our thoughts from them , and at some times the contrary Impressions are
so strong , that let a man set up a reasoning in his Mind against them ,
he finds that Celebrated saying of the Poet , <P_47> <font> Video
meliora proboq ; deteriora sequor . I see what is better and approve it
: but follow what is worse <$$font> . to be all that <font> Philosophy
<$$font> will amount to . Whereas those who upon such Occasions apply
themselves to God , by earnest Prayer , feel a disengagement from such
Impressions , and themselves endued with a power to resist them . So
that those bonds which formerly held them , fall off .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,47.89

This he said , must be the effect of a heat in Nature :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,47.90

it was only the strong diversion of the thoughts , that gave the seeming
Victory , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,47.91

and he did not doubt but if one could turn <P_48> to a <font> Problem
<$$font> in <font> Euclid <$$font> , or to Write a Copy of Verses , it
would have the same effect . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,48.92

To this I answered , That if such Methods did only divert the thoughts ,
there might be some force in what he said : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,48.93

but if they not only drove out such Inclinations , but begat Impressions
contrary to them , and brought Men into a new disposition and habit of
mind ; then he must confess there was somewhat more than a diversion ,
in these changes , which were brought on our Minds by true Devotion .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,48.94

I added , that Reason and Experience were the things that determined our
perswasions : that Experience without Reason may be thought the delusion
of our Fancy , so Reason without Experience <P_49> had not so convincing
an Operation : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,49.95

but these two meeting together , must needs give a man all the
satisfaction he can desire . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,49.96

He could not say , It was unreasonable to believe that the Supream Being
might make some thoughts stir in our Minds with more or less force , as
it pleased : especially the force of these motions , being , for most
part , according to the Impression that was made on our brains : which
that power that directed the Whole frame of Nature , could make grow
deeper as it pleased . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,49.97

It was also reasonable to suppose God a Being of such goodness that he
would give his assistance to such as desired it :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,49.98

For though he might upon some greater Occasions in an <P_50>
extraordinary manner turn some peoples minds ; Yet since he had endued
Man with a faculty of Reason it is fit that men should employ that ; as
far as they could ; and beg his assistance : which certainly they can do
. BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,50.99

All this seemed reasonable , and at least probable ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,50.100

Now good men who felt upon their frequent Applications to God in prayer
, a freedom from those ill Impressions , that formerly subdued them , an
inward love to Vertue and true Goodness , an easieness and delight in
all the parts of Holiness , which was fed and cherished in them by a
seriousness in Prayer , and did languish as that went off , had as real
a perception of an inward strength in their Minds , that did rise and
fall with true <P_51> Devotion , as they perceived the strength of their
Bodies increased or abated , according as they had , or wanted good
nourishment . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,51.101

After many Discouses upon this Subject , he still continued to think all
was the effecte of Fancy : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,51.102

He said , That he understood nothing of it , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,51.103

but acknowledged that he thought they were very haypy {COM:sic} whose
Fancies were under the power of such Impressions ; since they had
somewhat on which their thoughts rested and centred :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,51.104

But when I saw him in his last Sickness , He then told me ; He had
another sense of what we had talked concerning prayer and inward
assistances . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,51.105

This Subject led us to discourse of God , and of the <P_52> Notion of
Religion in general . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,52.106

He believed there was a Supream Being : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,52.107

He could not think the World was made by chance ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,52.108

and the regular Course of Nature seemed to demonstrate the Eternal Power
of its Author . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,52.109

This , he said , he could never shake off ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,52.110

but when he came to explain his Notion of the Deity , he said , He
looked on it as a vast Power that Wrought every thing by the necessity
of its Nature : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,52.111

and thought that God had none of those Affections of Love or Hatred ,
which breed perturbation in us , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,52.112

and by consequence he could not see that there was to be either reward
or punishment . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,52.113

He thought our Conceptions of God were so low , that we had better not
<P_53> think much of him : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,53.114

And to love God seemed to him a presumptuous thing , and the heat of
fanciful men . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,53.115

Therefore he believed there should be no other Religious Worship but a
general Celebration of that Being ; in some short Hymn :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,53.116

All the other parts of Worship he esteemed the Inventions of Priests ,
to make the World believe they had a Secret of Incensing and Appeasing
God as they pleased . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,53.117

In a word , he was neither perswaded that there was a special Providence
about Humane Affairs ; Nor that Prayers were of much use since that was
to look on God as a weak Being , that would be overcome with
Importunities . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,53.118

And for the state after death , though he thought the Soul <P_54> did
not dissolve at death ; Yet he doubted much of Rewards or Punishments :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,54.119

the one he thought too high for us to attain , by our slight Services ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,54.120

and the other was too extream to be inflicted for Sin .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,54.121

This was the substance of his Speculations about God and Religion .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,54.122

I told him his Notion of God was so low , that the Supream Being seemed
to be nothing but Nature . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,54.123

For if that being had no freedom , nor choice of its own Actions , nor
operated by Wisdom or Goodness , all those Reasons which lead {COM:sic}
him to acknowledge a God , were contrary to this Conceit ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,54.124

for if the Order of the Universe perswaded him to think there was a God
, He must at the same <P_55> time conceive him to be both Wise and Good
, as well as powerful , since these all appear'd equally in the Creation
: though his Wisdom and Goodness had ways of exerting themselves , that
were far beyond our Notions or Measures . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,55.125

If God was Wise and Good , he would naturally love , and be pleased with
those that resembled him in these Perfections , and dislike those that
were opposite to him . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,55.126

Every Rational Being naturally loves it self ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,55.127

and is delighted in others like it self , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,55.128

and is averse from what is not so . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,55.129

Truth is a Rational Natures acting in conformity to it self in all
things , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,55.130

and Goodness , is an Inclination to promote the happiness of other
Beings : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,55.131

So Truth and <P_56> Goodness were the essential perfections of every
reasonable Being , and certainly most eminently in the Deity :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,56.132

nor does his Mercy or Love raise Passion or Perturbation in him ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,56.133

for we feel that to be a weakness in our selves , which indeed only
flows from our want of power , or skill to do what we wish or desire :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,56.134

It is also reasonable to believe God would assist the Endeavours of the
Good , with some helps suitable to their Nature . And that it could not
be imagined , that those who imitated him , should not be specially
favoured by him and therefore since this did not appear in this State ,
it was most reasonable to think it should be in another , where the
Rewards <P_57> shall be an admission to a more perfect State of
Conformity to God , with the felicity that follows it , and the
Punishments should be a total exclusion from him , with all the horrour
and darkness that must follow that . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,57.135

These seemed to be the natural Results of such several Courses of life ,
as well as the Effects of Divine Justice , Rewarding or punishing .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,57.136

For since he believed the Soul had a distinct subsistance , separated
from the Body ; Upon its dissolution there was no Reason to think it
passed into a State of utter Oblivion , of what it had been in formerly
: but that as the reflections on the good or evil it had done , must
raise joy or horrour in it ; So those good or ill Dispositions
accompanying <P_58> the departed Souls , they must either rise up to a
higher Perfection , or sink to a more depraved , and miserable State :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,58.137

In this life variety of Affairs and Objects do much cool and divert our
Minds ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,58.138

and are on the one hand often great temptations to the good ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,58.139

and give the bad some ease in their trouble ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,58.140

but in a State wherein the Soul shall be separated from sensible things
, and employed in a more quick and sublime way of Operation , this must
very much exalt the Joys and Improvements of the good , and as much
heighten the horrour and rage of the Wicked . So that it seemed a vain
thing to pretend to believe a Supream Being , that is Wise and Good as
well as great , and not to <P_59> think a discrimination be made between
the Good and Bad , which , it is manifest , is not fully done in this
life . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,59.141

As for the Government of the World , if We believe the Supream Power
made it , there is no reason to think he does not govern it :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,59.142

For all that we can fancy against it , is the distraction which that
Infinite Variety of Second Causes , and the care of the Concernments ,
must give to the first , if it inspects them all .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,59.143

But as among men , those of weaker Capacities are wholly taken with some
one thing , whereas those of more enlarged powers can , without
distraction , have many things within their care , as the Eye can at one
view receive a great Variety of Objects , in that narrow Compass ,
<P_60> without confusion ; So if we conceive the Divine Understanding to
be as far above ours , as his Power of creating and framing the whole
Universe , is above our limited activity ; We will no more think the
Government of the World a distraction to him :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,60.144

and if we have once overcome this prejudice , We shall be ready to
acknowledge a Providence directing all Affairs ; a Care well becoming
the Great Creator . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,60.145

As for Worshipping Him , if we imagine our Worship is a thing that adds
to His Happiness or gives Him such a fond Pleasure as weak people have
to hear themselves commended ; or that our repeated Addresses do
overcome Him through our meer Importunity , We have <P_61> certainly
very unworthy thoughts of him . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,61.146

The true ends of Worship come within another consideration : which is
this , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,61.147

A man is never entirely Reformed , till a new Principle governs his
thoughts : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,61.148

Nothing makes that Principle so strong , as deep and frequent
Meditations of God ; whose Nature though it be far above our
Comprehension , yet his Goodness and Wisdom are such Perfections as fall
within our Imagination : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,61.149

And he that thinks often of God , and considers him as governing the
World , and as ever observing all his Actions , will feel a very
sensible effect of such Meditations , as they grow more lively and
frequent with him ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,61.150

so the end of Religious Worship either publick <P_62> or private , is to
make the Apprehension of God , have a deeper root and a stronger
influence on us . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,62.151

The frequent returns of these are necessary : Lest if we allow of too
long intervals between them , these Impressions may grow feebler ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,62.152

and other Suggestions may come in their room :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,62.153

And the Returns of Prayer are not to be considered as Favours extorted
by meer Importunity , but as Rewards conferred on men so well disposed ,
and prepared for them : according to the Promises that God has made ,
for answering our Prayers , thereby to engage and nourish a devout
temper in us , which is the chief root of all true Holiness and Vertue .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,62.154

<P_63>

It is true we can@ @not have suitable Notions of the Divine Essence ; as
indeed we have no just <font> Idea <$$font> of any Essence whatsoever :
Since we commonly consider all things , either by their outward Figure ,
or by their Effects : and from thence make Inferences what their Nature
must be . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,63.156

So though we can@ @not frame any perfect Image in our Minds of the
Divinity , Yet we may from the Discoveries God has made of Himself ,
form such Conceptions of Him , as may possess our Minds with great
Reverence for Him , and beget in us such a love of those Perfections as
to engage us to imitate them . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,63.157

For when we say we love God ; the meaning is , We love that Being that
is <P_64> Holy , Just , Good , Wise ; and infinitely perfect :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,64.158

And loving these Attributes in that object , will certainly carry us to
desire them in our selves . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,64.159

For what ever We love in another , We naturally , according to the
degree of our love , endeavour to resemble it .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,64.160

In sum , the Loving and Worshipping God , though they are just and
reasonable returns and expressions of the sense We have of his Goodness
to us ; Yet they are exacted of us not only as a Tribute to God , but as
a mean to beget in us a conformity to his Nature , which is the chief
end of pure and undefiled Religion . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,64.161

If some men , have at several times , found out Inventions to Corrupt
this , and cheat the <P_65> World ; It is nothing but what occurs in
every sort of Employment , to which men betake themselves .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,65.162

<font> Mountebanks <$$font> Corrupt Physick ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,65.163

<font> Petty-Foggers <$$font> have entangled the matters of Property ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,65.164

and all Professions have been vitiated by the Knaveries of a number of
their Calling . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,65.165

With all these Discourses he was not equally satisfied :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,65.166

He seemed convinced that the Impressions of God being much in Mens minds
, would be a powerful means to reform the World :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,65.167

and did not seem determined against Providence ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,65.168

But for the next State , he thought it more likely that the Soul began
anew , and that her sense of what she had done in this Body , lying in
the figures <P_66> that are made in the Brain , as soon as she dislodged
, all these perished , and that the Soul went into some other State to
begin a new course . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,66.169

But I said on this Head , That this was at best a conjecture , raised in
him by his fancy : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,66.170

for he could give no reason to prove it true ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,66.171

nor was all the remembrance our Souls had of past things seated in some
material figures lodged in the Brain : Though it could not be denied but
a great deal of it lay in the Brain . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,66.172

That we have many abstracted Notions and <font> Idea's <$$font> of
immaterial things which depends {COM:sic} not on bodily Figures :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,66.173

Some Sins , such as Falshood , and ill Nature were seated in the Mind ,
as Lust and Appetite were in the Body : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,66.174

and as the whole Body <P_67> was the Receptacle of the Soul , and the
Eyes and Ears were the Organs of Seeing and Hearing , so was the Brain
the Seat of Memory : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,67.175

Yet the power and faculty of Memory , as well as of Seeing and Hearing ,
lay in the Mind : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,67.176

and so it was no unconceivable thing that either the Soul by its own
strength , or by the means of some subtiler Organs , which might be
fitted for it in another state , should still remember as well as think
. BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,67.177

But indeed We know so little of the Nature of our Souls , that it is a
vain thing for us to raise an <font> Hypothesis <$$font> out of the
conjectures We have about it , or to reject one , because of some
difficulties that occur to us ; since it is as hard to understand how we
remember things now , <P_68> as how We shall do it in another State ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,68.178

only we are sure we do it now , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,68.179

and so we shall be then , when we do it . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,68.180

When I pressed him with the secret Joys that a good Man felt ,
particularly as he drew near Death , and the Horrours of ill men
especially at that time ; He was willing to ascribe it to the
Impressions they had from their Education : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,68.181

But he often confessed , that whether the business of Religion was true
or not , he thought those who had the perswasions of it , and lived so
that they had quiet in their Consciences , and believed God governed the
World , and acquiesced in his Providence , and had the hope of an
endless blessedness in another State , the happiest men <P_69> in the
World : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,69.182

And said , He would give all that he was Master of , to be under those
Perswasions , and to have the Supports and Joys that must needs flow
from them . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,69.183

I told him the main Root of all Corruptions in Mens Principles was their
ill life ; Which as it darkened their Minds , and disabled them from
discerning better things ; so it made it necessary for them to seek out
such Opinions as might give them ease from those Clamours , that would
otherwise have been raised within them : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,69.184

He did not deny but that after the doing of some things he felt great
and severe Challenges within himself : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,69.185

But he said , He felt not these after some others which I would perhaps
call far greater <P_70> Sins , than those that affected him more
sensibly : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,70.186

This I said , might flow from the Disorders he had cast himself into ,
which had corrupted his judgment , and vitiated his tast of things ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,70.187

and by his long continuance in , and frequent repeating of some
Immoralities , he had made them so familiar to him , that they were
become as it were natural : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,70.188

And then it was no wonder if he had not so exact a sense of what was
Good or Evil ; as a Feaverish man can@ @not judge of Tasts .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,70.189

He did acknowledge the whole Systeme of Religion , if believed , as a
greater foundation of quiet than any other thing whatsoever :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,70.190

for all the quiet he had in his mind , was , that he could not think so
good <P_71> a Being as the Deity would make him miserable .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,71.191

I asked if when by the ill course of his life he had brought so many
Diseases on his Body , he could blame God for it : or expect that he
should deliver him from them by a Miracle . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,71.192

He confessed there was no reason for that : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,71.193

I then urged , that if Sin should cast the mind by a natural Effect ,
into endless Horrours and Agonies , which being seated in a Being not
subject to Death , must last for ever , unless some Miraculous Power
interposed , could he accuse God for that which was the effect of his
own choice and ill life . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,71.194

He said , They were happy that believed : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,71.195

for it was not in every mans power . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,71.196

And upon this we discoursed <P_72> long about <font> Revealed Religion
<$$font> . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,72.197

He said , He did not understand that business of Inspiration ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,72.198

he believed the Pen-men of the Scriptures had heats and honesty , and so
writ : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,72.199

but could not comprehend how God should reveal his Secrets to Mankind .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,72.200

Why was not Man made a Creature more disposed for Religion , and better
Illuminated ? BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,72.201

He could not apprehend how there should be any corruption in the Nature
of Man , of a lapse derived from <font> Adam <$$font> .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,72.202

Gods communicating his Mind to one Man , was the putting it in his power
to cheat the World : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,72.203

For Prophesies and Miracles , the World had been always full of strange
Stories ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,72.204

for the boldness and cunning of Contrivers meeting with the <P_73>
Simplicity and Credulity of the People , things were easily received ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,73.205

and being once received passed down without contradicton .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,73.206

The Incoherences of Stile in the Scriptures , the odd Transitions , the
seeming Contradictions , chiefly about the Order of time , the Cruelties
enjoyned the <font> Israelites <$$font> in destroying the <font>
Canaanites <$$font> , Circumcision , and many other rites of the <font>
Jewish <$$font> Worship ; seemed to him insutable to the Divine Nature :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,73.207

And the first three Chapters of <font> Genesis <$$font> , he thought
could not be true , unless they were Parables .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,73.208

This was the substance of what he Excepted to <font> Revealed Religion
<$$font> in general , and to the <font> Old Testament <$$font> in
particular . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,73.209

<P_74>

I answer'd to all this , that believing a thing upon the testimony of
another , in other matters where there was no reason to suspect the
testimony , chiefly where it was confirmed by other circumstances , was
not only a reasonable thing , but it was the hinge on which all the
Government and Justice in the World depended : Since all Courts of
Justice proceed upon the Evidence given by Witnesses ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,74.211

for the use of Writings is but a thing more lately brought into the
World . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,74.212

So then if the credibility of the thing , the innocence and
disinteredness of the Witnesses , the number of them , and the
publickest Confirmations that could possibly be given , do concur to
perswade us of any matter of <P_75> Facts , it is a vain thing to say ,
because it is possible for so many men to agree in a Lye , that
therefore these have done it . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,75.213

In all other things a man gives his assent when the credibility is
strong on the one side , and there appears nothing on the other side to
ballance it . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,75.214

So such numbers agreeing in their Testimony to these Miracles ; for
instance of our Saviours calling <font> Lazarus <$$font> out of the
Grave the fourth day after he was buried , and his own rising again
after he was certainly dead ; if there had been never so many Impostures
in the World , no man can with any reasonable colour pretend this was
one . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,75.215

We find both by the <font> Jewish <$$font> and <font> Roman <$$font>
Writers that lived in that time , that our Saviour was Crucified :
<P_76> and that all his Disciples and Followers believed certainly that
he rose again . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,76.216

They believed this upon the Testimony of the Apostles , and of many
hundreds who saw it , and died confirming it :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,76.217

They went about to perswade the World of it , with great Zeal , though
they knew they were to get nothing by it , but Reproach and Sufferings :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,76.218

and by many wonders which they wrought they confirmed their Testimony .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,76.219

Now to avoid all this , by saying it is possible this might be a
Contrivance , and to give no presumption to make it so much as probable
, that it was so , is in plain <font> English <$$font> to say , <font>
We are resolved BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,76.220

let the Evidence be what it will , We will not believe it . <$$font>
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,76.221

He said , If a man says he can@ @not <P_77> believe , what help is there
? BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,77.222

for he was not master of his own Belief , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,77.223

and believing was at highest but a probable Opinion .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,77.224

To this I Answered , That if a man will let a wanton conceit possess his
fancy against these things , and never consider the Evidence for
Religion on the other hand , but reject it upon a slight view of it , he
ought not to say he can@ @not , but he will not believe :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,77.225

and while a man lives an ill course of life , he is not fitly qualified
to examine the matter aright . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,77.226

Let him grow calm and vertuous , and upon due application examine things
fairly , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,77.227

and then let him pronounce according to his Conscience , if to take it
at its lowest , the Reasons on the one hand are not much stronger <P_78>
than they are on the other . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,78.228

For I found he was so possessed with the general conceit that a mixture
of Knaves and Fools had made all extraordinary things be easily believed
, that it carried him away to determine the matter , without so much as
looking on the Historical Evidence for the truth of <font> Christianity
<$$font> , which he had not enquired into , but had bent all his Wit and
Study to the support of the other side . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,78.229

As for that , that belieivng is at best but an Opinion ; if the Evidence
be but probable , it is so : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,78.230

but if it be such that it can@ @not be questioned , it grows as certain
as knowledge : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,78.231

For we are no less certain that there is a great Town called <font>
Constantinople <$$font> , the seat of the <font> Ottoman <$$font> Empire
, <P_79> than {we_are_certain} that there is another called <font>
London <$$font> . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,79.232

We as little doubt that Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> once Reigned ,
as {we_doubt} that King <font> Charles <$$font> now Reigns in <font>
England <$$font> . So that believing may be as certain , and as little
subject to doubting as seeing or knowing . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,79.233

There are two sorts of believing Divine matters ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,79.234

the one is wrought in use by our comparing all the evidences of matter
of Fact , for the confirmation of <font> Revealed Religion <$$font> ;
with the Prophesies in the Scripture ; where things were punctually
predicted , some Ages before their completion ; not in dark and doubtful
words , uttered like Oracles , which might bend to any Event : But in
plain terms , as the foretelling that <font> Cyrus <$$font> by name
should send <P_80> the <font> Jews <$$font> back from the Captivity ,
after the fixed period of seventy years : The History of the <font>
Syrian <$$font> and <font> Egyptian <$$font> Kings so punctually
foretold by <font> Daniel <$$font> , and the Predicton of the
destruction of <font> Jerusalem <$$font> , with many Circumstances
relating to it , made by our <font> Saviour <$$font> ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,80.235

joyning these to the excellent Rule and Design of the Scripture in
matters of <font> Morality <$$font> , it is at least as reasonable to
believe this as any thing else in the World .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P1,80.236

