<BEGIN_capel-1676-e3-p1>

<P_47>

<heading:edcomment:XXXIX_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ORRERY>

Dublin Castle CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,47.4

May 6=th= 1676 CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,47.5

My Lord Just as I was taking shipping at Holyhead I recd Two of yr
L=trs= , one of ye 27 and ye other of ye 29=th= of Aprill together with
a small paper in cypher , wch truly I have not yet had leisure to
decypher , CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,47.6

for at sea I was soe sicke as I could not doe it CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,47.7

and since I came hither ye perpetuall crowd of visitts hath hindered mee
. CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,47.8

As to your own affaire I hope ye Report you have recd gives yr L=p=
satisfaction CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,47.9

for I doe not apprehend but it is as secure to you <P_48> by making ye
Remainder <paren> if any shall be unpayd out of ye 5000@ @=D= <$$paren>
to bee payd out of ye Rents , as if ye whole were payable out of ye
Rents : CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.10

For ye clause mentiond in ye Letter yt yr L=ds= discharge to ye Farmers
may bee sufficient to acquitt them , I conceive it would bee a very
dangerous thing for me to confirme any such clause by a Report ,
CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.11

for I should thereby alter ye course of ye Exchequer
CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.12

and I desire yr L=p= to remember what had like to have befalne my Lord
Treasurer upon that score . CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.13

I did indeed hear while I was at London yt my Lord of Ossory and Lord
Duras had gott such clauses in their grants , CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.14

but nothing in any Report of mine lead to it , CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.15

and I can assure yr L=p= yt so soon as I knew it , their patents being
past having some occasion to discourse with my Lord of Ormond I askd him
if his son had gott such a clause . CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.16

Hee told mee hee had , CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.17

I made answer agen yt it was very well CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.18

for my Lord of Ossory Hee passt his patent in England ,
CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.19

for tho I had a great respect for my Lord of Ossory and a particular
desire to serve him , yet had such a direction come into Ireland I would
have represented against it and not have past it without a second
command ; CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.20

This matter I only communicate to yourself CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.21

and desire yr L=p= will keepe it private , CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.22

only you may please to finde some means to have my Lord of Ormond askt
whether hee remembers not such a discourse between himself and mee :
CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.23

Tho I shall ever bee ready to serve my friend and particularly yr L=p= ,
yet I hope it will not bee taken unkindly if according to ye duty of my
place I endeavour to keepe all matters in their proper forme .
CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.24

I am , etc. CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.25

<heading:edcomment:XL_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX_TO_SIR_HENRY_CAPEL>

Dublin Castle CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.27

May 9=th= 1676 CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.28

Dear Brother I have received yrs of ye 2=nd= of May ;
CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.29

I finde by my Intelligence here yt ye same project , wch yr Lre mentions
, and we discusst of at Dunstable is really driving on in England ,
CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,48.30

and if they can <P_49> worke ye King to resolve ye calling of a
Parliam=t= and consequently place justices viz my lord of Orrery , Lord
Conway and Lord Granarde , they have their ends , CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,49.31

and after these Justices are placed they will find ways enough to shift
off ye Parlm=t= and then in a little time to remove ye Justices , and
bring all into my Lord Conway@ @'s hand as Deputy ;
CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,49.32

T'@ @were very fit ye King and Duke were now and then minded of this
matter yt they may not bee surprisd therein . CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,49.33

I have nothing further to adde , CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,49.34

but remaine , etc. CAPEL-1676-E3-P1,49.35

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2,_letter_72,_here}

