<BEGIN_charles-1657-e3-p1>

<P_5,B>

<heading:edcomment:KING_CHARLES_II_TO_QUEEN_HENRIETTA_MARIA>

Antwerp , CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,5,B.4

26 July {COM:1657?} . CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,5,B.5

Madame , I hope your Majestie hath that good opinion of me , as to
beleeue <P_6,B> that your commandes carries euer so much waight with me
, that at any time when I doe not comply with them , your Majestie may
conclude the inconveniences on my parte are so greate , as I am
confident you would be troubled if I should obay you ,
CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,6,B.6

and the truth is , this businesse of my Lord Balcarres is of that nature
; CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,6,B.7

for your Majestie may be confident , that , after haueing giuen him so
good a carrecter as I did at his first comming to Paris , I would not
call my iudgement so farre in question , or run the venture of being
thought apte to change my opinion of men vpon light groundes , if I had
not those proofes against him of duble dealing and dishonesty as would
iustifie me to all the world , though I had proceeded against him with a
much seuerer sentence then hetherto I haue declared ;
CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,6,B.8

and , because your Majestie shall not take my single worde for it , I
will sende you , as soone as I come where the papers are , the proofes
of what I say vnder his owne hande , which , if your Majestie will
consider with an indifferent eye , you will at least conclude him not
very fitt to put obligations vpon ; CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,6,B.9

and , for the promise your Majestie and my sister are ingaged in , can
be of no waite in this particular , CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,6,B.10

for certainly at the same time the person misbehaues him selfe he
forfetts also the engagement , CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,6,B.11

and I am confident your Majestie thinkes whosoeuer is faulty to me is so
to you ; CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,6,B.12

I am sure it shall euer be so on my parte towardes your Majestie .
CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,6,B.13

I should say much more to your Majestie but that I deferre it till I can
sende you the papers I mention , CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,6,B.14

and will only now assure your Majestie that I am and ever will be ,
Madame , Your Majesties most humble and most obedient sone and seruant ,
Charles R CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,6,B.15

{COM:neither_addressed_nor_sealed}

<P_7,B>

<heading:edcomment:II_KING_CHARLES_II_TO_LORD_JERMYN>

Bruges , CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,7,B.19

21 July {COM:1656?} CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,7,B.20

I haue three of yours vpon my handes , one of the 7 , an other of the 14
, of this month , and that of the 24 of the last which Tom Talbott
brought me yesterday . CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,7,B.21

I must tell you there is a mistake <P_8,B> in your bill for the 350
pistols , CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,8,B.22

for Tom Blagge shewes me your letter wherein you tell him you haue
returned him 200 crowns , for which he is to receaue 465 gilders out of
my bill , whereas I am informed by the marchant whome I haue imployd to
receaue the mony for me , that there is but 21 poundes Flemish <paren>
which amounts but to 120 gilders and some odd shillings <$$paren> more
then is due to me vpon the exchange for the 250 pistols ,
CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,8,B.23

therfore you must returne to him what is due ouer and aboue that summe .
CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,8,B.24

I hope you haue before this time receaued an order for the six monthes
that are due , which I pray returne with all possible speede to me ,
CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,8,B.25

for I want it very much , though the ratification be come to me from
Spayne as fully as I could expect , of which I hope to receaue frute
very shortly , to which purpose I intende to send to Brusselles within
few dayes ; CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,8,B.26

there greate worke of Valancienes being as you know well ouer , I shall
be very glade that a treaty betweene the two crownes may follow .
CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,8,B.27

Now , concerning what you write to me by Tom Talbot , I am of your
opinion that I must be advised by these ministers heere in the
conducting that businesse , there creditt and authority being likly to
be of most vse to me in that place . CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,8,B.28

I haue seald the Earle of Inchequin@ @'s pattent , which I had signed so
<P_9,B> longe since , CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,9,B.29

therfore I pray lett notice be taken of it that he may enioy all his
rights . CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,9,B.30

{COM:postscript} I would haue you pay to S=r= R. Foster 200 liuers out
of the first mony you receaue for me . CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,9,B.31

{COM:addressed} For my Lord Jermin . CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,9,B.32

<P_10,B>

<heading:edcomment:III_KING_CHARLES_II_TO_LORD_JERMYN>

Bruges , CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.35

20 October {COM:1656?} CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.36

I haue receaued yours of the 13 , CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.37

and am so farre from being vnsatisfied with the Cardinall's retrenching
my pention , that I am sure I haue tould you before , if he had inclined
to haue continued it , I would absolutly haue refused it .
CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.38

I pray therfore sende me worde to what time they haue pay'd it , and so
how much I haue receaued from them , as likewise how much is in truth in
arreare to that time , that I may be able as well to say how much they
haue failed of making good what they promised , as to acknowledge what I
haue receaued . CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.39

You say the Cardinall preserues one equality towards me , that is , if
here be any thing attempted vpon England , he shall complayne of nothing
that is done ; CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.40

and yett , whilst he hath much more reason to beleeue that will be the
case then the contrary , he complayns more then would become him
whateuer the case shall be , CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.41

and in all companyes talkes of establishing Cromwell ,
CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.42

and vses other expressions then I expected from his discretion , when I
gaue ouer expecting any thing from his kindenesse .
CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.43

I wish you should tell him , that a man who hath thought a necessity of
his owne making warrant enough for such proceedings against me as no
necessity could in truth excuse , should allowe a reall visible
necessity , which he can@ @not but decerne , a good iustification of my
doeing what all the world would laugh at me if I should not do ;
CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.44

and you shall do well to put him in minde that I am not yett so low ,
but that I may returne both the courtisyes and the iniuryes I haue
receaued . CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.45

{COM:addressed} For my Lord Jermin . CHARLES-1657-E3-P1,10,B.46

