<BEGIN_clowes-1602-e2-p1>

<P_1>

<heading>

<font> An Introduction , With an Apologie or answere to certain
malicious back-byters <$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,1.4

<$$heading>

It is certainly affirmed , and confidently reputed and holden , of
diuers worthy Phisitians and Chirurgians , both Ancient and such as haue
florished of late yeeres , which haue intreated of the Cure of the
before named dolorous Maladie : and they all by one vniforme consent and
voice , conclude and agree , that it is a <font> Glandulus Tumour
<$$font> or swelling , hard , knotty , and kyrnelly , hauing their
beginning and growing , contrarie and besides nature , and is ingendred
of grosse matter and Phlegme : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,1.6

And <paren> as saith <font> Iacobus Ruffus <$$font> <$$paren> they are
most commonly included within their peculiar <font> Cistis <$$font> ,
filme or skinne , as is Steatoma , Atheroma , and Melicertis , which
aforesaid skin is knowne to be engendred of a colde congealed , tough ,
glewish humour or substance of the Kirnels , whereof a skinne is made
which compasseth them about : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,1.7

Howbeit I have seen <paren> and also it is a most experimented truth
<$$paren> that some kindes of these Phlegmaticall Abscessions , <P_2>
when they haue been besiedged as it were , or beset with vehement
daungerous accidents , as heereafter shall be declared , which in
continuance of time haue ben y=e= cause they haue growne corrupted &
vnmoueable , or fixed vnto the parts adioyning : whereby after there
hath bin seperation made , there hath not bin found any bladder or skin
at all , notwithstanding the great care & diligence that then was had .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,2.8

This most miserable infirmity <paren> saith <font> Paulus Aegineta
<$$font> <$$paren> doth scituate or seate it self in the fore_part of
y=e= necke & under the Chin : also on the sides of the cheekes ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,2.9

& sometime spreadeth it selfe on the brest , & vnder the Arme-pits , &
Groynes , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,2.10

& some be deeply lodged a_far off in the flesh , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,2.11

& also do often times possess the great Vaines and <font> Arteryes
<$$font> called <font> Carotides <$$font> : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,2.12

And those that are thus vexed & subiect to this troublesome Infirmity ,
are for the most part Phlegmatick persons , greatly giuen to ouermuch
Idleness & slouthfulnes of life , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,2.13

& are addicted to excessiue and inordinate eating of grosse &
Flegmaticke meates : which manifolde Malady , I haue also found by
experience , that the Cure thereof stretcheth it selfe beyond the bounds
of other ordinary sicknesses & diseases . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,2.14

<font> Cornelius Celsus <$$font> likewise saith , that <font> Scrophula
<$$font> is a <font> Tumour , <$$font> in the which are certain kyrnels
ingendred of matter and bloud , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,2.15

and doe most chiefly grow in the fore_part of the Necke , & in the
Arme-pits , the Groyne , & in the sides , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,2.16

and hath bin found in Womens brestes . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,2.17

<font> Vigo <$$font> a man <paren> for his learning and experience in
this Cure , & in many other great Infirmities <$$paren> as it appeareth
, was wonderfully graced with the good opinion and fauour of the time
wherein hee liued , & since his death greatly honoured by dyuers learned
Writers , and many other men famous in Phisicke and Chyrurgery :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,2.18

He also sayth , that <font> Scrophula <$$font> taketh the name of <font>
Scropha <$$font> , which signifieth a Sow , that is a Gluttonous <P_3>
and Phlegmaticke beaste : and it groweth in them by reason of their
ouermuch eating . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,3.19

There be other some againe which say , that it is called <font>
Scrophula <$$font> , eyther because that Sowes which giue sucke be
subiect to this disease , and that is by reason of their greedy eating :
or else because the Sow that giueth Milke brings forth many young ones
at once . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,3.20

Now heere it is to be further noted , that <font> Vigo <$$font> doth not
promise or warrant alwaies , and to euery one a certaine absolute Cure ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,3.21

but doth <paren> as I , and many other also haue done <$$paren> ascribe
the praise and dignity therof vnto Kings and Queenes of England , and of
<font> France <$$font> : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,3.22

In deed I haue oftentimes read , and I haue also been credibly enformed
by Master <font> Francis Rasis <$$font> , and Master <font> Peter Lowe
<$$font> , two of the French Kinges Chururgians , that the French King
doth also Cure many <font> Strumous <$$font> people , onely by laying on
of his hand , and saying : <font> God make thee whole ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,3.23

the King toucheth thee ; CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,3.24

or , The King toucheth thee , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,3.25

the Lord make thee whole <$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,3.26

It is further said , that this disease happeneth not alwayes vnto young
children , which bee subiect to much crudity , & rawe humours by
voracity : but likewise vnto middle_aged persons , of a stronger
constitution ; and also vnto very olde folkes . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,3.27

Many therefore imitating <font> Vigo <$$font> and other of our Sages , &
graue learned Forefathers , do affirme that these <font> Scrophulous
Tumours <$$font> bee the lesse daungerous to be cured by the Arte of
Chyrurgery , which is taken in the beginning of the sicknes , so far
forth as it wil please Almighty God to giue a grace and blessing to our
labours . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,3.28

But vndoubtedly , if it be of any long continuance , the Cure thereof
may proue very hard and difficult : yea , if it be in the bodies of yong
persons : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,3.29

But in olde folkes I have obserued very sildome , that they do receiue
any curatio~ perfectly , <P_4> by the Arte of Chirurgery .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,4.30

I meane , that it is then aboue my learning and weake capacity to cure
the same , if the disease bee confirmed , hauing certaine occult and
hidden , hard , knotty , kyrnelly swelling , <paren> being deepely
lodged and placed in the flesh <$$paren> but especially about <font>
Trachea Arteria <$$font> or the Winde_Pipe , or neer the <font> Nerui
Recurrentes <$$font> , or amongst the great Veynes and <font> Arteries
<$$font> before named : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,4.31

these <paren> indeede <$$paren> I holde to bee for the most part very
daungerous to be attempted , for feare of violating or touching the said
principall Vessels , eyther by incision or Caustick remedies , which
often time bring with them many vnfortunate <font> Symptomes <$$font> or
iniurious accidents , as heereafter more at large shall appeare .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,4.32

Also , it is hard to cure a noysome , corrupt and malignant vlcerous
<font> Struma <$$font> , which doth many time degenerate into incurable
, Cancerous & rebellious <font> Phistulous Vlcers <$$font> :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,4.33

Likewise , I hold it for a certaine truth , that the Cure is not to be
attempted by the Arte of Chirurgery , if a man haue it by inheritance ,
and so naturally borne from their Parents : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,4.34

These kindes of <font> Scropholus <$$font> abcessions doe rather presage
a Diuine and holy curation , which is most admirable to the world , that
I haue seene and knowne performed and done by the sacred and blessed
hands of the Queenes most Royall Maiesty , whose happinesse and felicity
the Lord long continue . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,4.35

But sith the barrennesse of my learning , and wit is such , and that my
memorie will not affoord mee , heere orderlie to set downe in fewe words
, that which I doe conceiue and vnderstand , touching this my determined
purpose , for the Cure of this haynous Maladie , which , in the
Pilgrimage of my practize and contemplations , I haue most diligentlie
obserued , not onely by mine owne selfe , with such portion of knowledge
as the Lord <P_5> hath endued me withal : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,5.36

But also I haue been a diligent and a painfull obseruer of the labours
and practises of others , being men of great knowledge and sound
judgement in the Arte : Wherefore to make heere manifest , the cause
which hath pricked me heere forward to leaue my other affaires , and so
to drawe me from my ordinarie practises and studies , being more
beneficiall for my maintenances , is not that I goe about heereby to
impaire the credit or reputation of others , being more auncient
Professors . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,5.37

It is <paren> the Lord God knoweth <$$paren> farre from my true meaning
, CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,5.38

they are those whome I loue , honour and reuerence :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,5.39

Neyther doe I heer ambitiously goe about with the sweet impression of
fayre promises <paren> greater then my abilitie is <$$paren> to teach
and instruct , or curiously to set downe , a better and perfecter way of
curing this haynous Malady <paren> then others more learned men before
me <$$paren> CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,5.40

I may not well say so . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,5.41

Neuertheless , he hardlie may be accompted for a good Soldier , which
hath learned no more then his Captaine hath taught him : or a barren
sconce , that hath no inuentions in it : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,5.42

But I will confesse heere the onely cause , <paren> why I haue
enterprized , or taken vpon me to write of this forenamed Infirmite
<$$paren> is I protest , a token of my loue and diligence towards all
young Practisers of this noble Arte of Chirurgerie , <paren> howsoeuer
otherwise , a painfull and tedious trauel vnto me . <$$paren>
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,5.43

Notwithstanding , I could in no wise satisfie the expectation of certain
of my vnfained friends , but that I must make here a true & briefe
rehearsall of my owne obseruations and knowledge , touching the cure of
the foresaid Euill , which a long time I have practised .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,5.44

How_be_it , being sorry to minister offence to any , by reason of
publication heereof , notwithstanding , I haue been crediblie enformed ,
and also it is vnto my selfe well knowne , there bee some whome I litle
suspected , and lesse thought vpon , would <P_6> haue been so wilfully
bent , without iust cause to giue occasion of offence ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,6.45

and did seeme as it were to repine and mislike of this my enterprise :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,6.46

and as it were , did partly reiect my knowledge and iudgement ,
concerning the Cure before named : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,6.47

and in the presence of certaine persons of good sort , brake out with
ambitious curiosity , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,6.48

and said I was not capable of the <font> Theoricke <$$font> of this my
Subiect , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,6.49

and so wanted knowledge of my self to publish these matters , which I
have heere taken vpon mee in some measure to performe :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,6.50

and thus went about , not onely to discredit mee , but likewise to put
me to vtter silence , as though I had spent all the daies of my life in
the rude woodes or wild Forrest of Ignorance . Which thing as it
greeued me to heare , so in maner it forced mee to answere : Let these
men sooth themselues <paren> I say <$$paren> neuer so much ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,6.51

they are knowne to be of no such deep learning nor exquisite Literature
, as they would make the world beleeue : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,6.52

Howbeit , if it please these enuious men to speake & iudge of me with
equity & right : it is wel knowne to most men , that I have studied &
practised this worthy Arte of Chirurgery , sithence the 4. yeare of her
Maiesties Raigne , <font> Anno Dom. 1563 . <$$font> Where , first I
serued in her Highnes wars at <font> New-Hauen <$$font> , vnder the
commaund of the Right Honorable <font> Ambrose <$$font> Earle of <font>
Warwicke <$$font> , Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter , then
Lieuetenant of the Army & Forces in those parts . After w=c= seruice
being ended & before , I was appointed Chirurgian , to serue in her
Maiesties Nauy in her ships Royall , & also in other men of war :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,6.53

Within a smal time after , I was imployed in the <font> Hospitalles
<$$font> in <font> London <$$font> , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,6.54

and there practised the said Arte of Chirurgery for certaine yeeres ,
untill I was sent for vnto the wars in the Low Countries , by y=e= Noble
Earle of <font> Leicester <$$font> : and further , commaunded by her
Maiesty , with all speed to repaire vnto the said Earle , <P_7> where I
continued for the space of 9. Moneths : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.55

& since & before I haue had conference , & also often practised , with
the best and skilfullest Chyrurgians , both English and Strangers ,
within the City of <font> London <$$font> and else where :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.56

and now as it were , partly ouer-worne with yeares and Seruices .
Nothwithstanding , by her Maiesties fauour and good liking <paren> whome
the Almighty long preserue <$$paren> now I am sworne & admitted one of
her Highnes Chirurgians . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.57

And therefore in all reasonable likely-hood , I am not so barren or
grosse_witted , and vnlearned in the Arte , as some haue termed mee to
bee . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.58

And yee shall further vnderstand , it was not long before , it pleased
some of them to say , they had graced me with the good opinion they had
of me : and moreouer stood in the gap of my defence against other such ,
which then were also sore troubled with the Fluxe of a fowle mouth , &
bled me at their pleasure for their common Table talke , with scoffing ,
fleering , and deriding aboue manners and modesty .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.59

The same being tolde mee , me thought it was a strange alternation :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.60

howebeit , I did take their good speeches very kindly ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.61

and so would haue done still , if it had pleased them to continue in the
same good opinion of me , or to haue bin silent .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.62

But it is truly said , <font> Hanibal <$$font> knew wel how to subdue
the <font> Romanes <$$font> , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.63

yet he knew not how to entertaine his Victories .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.64

It is not enough for a man to haue begun a good worke , vnlesse he stil
preseuer & continue in the same : Wherefore I wil heere abreuiate my
speeches , wishing to God , that this my labor were so perfect , that I
needed not to regard the curious examination & censure of any aduersary
: CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.65

neyther will I detaine you with many moe circumstances ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.66

but here acknowledge my own vnworthynes . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,7.67

And therefore I beseech thee friendly Raeder , in a word to suffer mee
with pacience to signifie vnto you , that I doe not heere peremptorily
goe about to teach or instruct <P_8> such persons which are already
grounded in the principles and knowledge of Arte :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,8.68

But my onely meaning is to direct my whole course , according <paren> as
I haue obserued <$$paren> the best learned haue heeretofore done in all
times and ages , that is vnto the <font> Iunior <$$font> or yonger
Chirugions : who , as it were , haue made but an entrance into the
practice of the said facultie , whose skill <paren> peradventure
<$$paren> is as yet not so profound , that they are able to search or
obtaine y=e= knowledge out of strange tongues , so farre fourth that
they can@ @not possibly in a short time come to the highest of that
knowledge , which they hartely wish for . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,8.69

Indeede , it is <paren> I suppose <$$paren> vnpossible in the whole
course of mans life , euen vnto that <font> Period , <$$font> which
<paren> of the Learned <$$paren> is called <font> Mans Age <$$font> :
that hee is able without great care , study and much diligence , to
labour commendably , and with a good conscience to worke in the Vineyard
of Chyrurgery : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,8.70

yet I know there be many young Students in the Arte , will be alwaies
ready , and most willing to discharge their duetyes in such matters as
they shal take vpon them to deale in , whether it be in this kind of
cure , or otherwise . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,8.71

And also will be very carefull , not onely for conscience sake , but
euen by a naturall desire , to seeke to increase their skill and
necessary knowledge , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,8.72

and therefore it is truely said : the good intent of such honest and
well_meaning persons , requireth a fauourable acceptation , which is as
well to be esteemed , as the performance of them that be best able .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,8.73

And these will bee ready to manifest the same by yeelding some fruite of
their painful labour and diligence : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,8.74

And now I will leaue off discoursing , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,8.75

and begin to speake of my determined purpose , and to make the same more
plainely knowne , which I haue heertofore kept secret vnto my selfe :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,8.76

howbeit , the greatest secret that is , may no longer be called a Secret
, when the whole multitude is made acquainted with it .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,8.77

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_here}

<P_36>

<heading>

<font> Another obseruation <$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,36.81

<$$heading>

Vpon a time there was brought vnto me a certain Master of a Ship , by a
seruant of mine , called <font> Robert Coulter <$$font> , a man who
<paren> for his knowledge and skill in the Arte of Chirurgery <$$paren>
was greatly esteemed of diuers Nobles , and worthy Persons .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,36.83

This Master of the Ship was mightily infected with many <font> Vlcerous
Strumaes <$$font> in his necke , throate and brest , with much
out-growing flesh , loathsome and vnpleasant to beholde :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,36.84

his hard swelling exceeded in number , magnitude and greatnesse :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,36.85

he had a crasie and vnsound body : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,36.86

his minde much troubled with pensiuenesse and melancholy fansies .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,36.87

Therfore being loath to admit any thing needfull , or commit anything
<P_37> hurtfull , I did take the aduise and counsaile of a graue and
learned Phisitian : who prepared and purged his body from much crude and
rawe indigested excrementall humours , with the Pilles of Sagapenum de
Agarico Coctiae , An. {TEXT:dram_symbol} ss. CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,37.88

Misce . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,37.89

In like manner he did set him down a good regiment of dyet , which was
thinne and sparing and light of digestion . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,37.90

He also forbad him eating and drinking at vnaccustomed houres :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,37.91

also he did refraine those meates that were grosse and tough : as Beefe
, Milke , fryed Egges , hard cheese , all pulse and nuttes , and other
meates which cause thicke Juyce : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,37.92

Also he did appoint him after his first purgings euery morning and
euening for a space , to receiue this drinke following , which procured
him to auoyde much Phlegmaticke rawe humours , especially by Urine .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,37.93

Rx. Apij Rusticj et Eupatorij . An. M. i. Soldanellae . M. ii.
Petroselini Macedonici . Herbae Trinitatis . An. M. j. ss. Mellis
com. lib. ss. Gingiberis . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ss. Vini Albi et
Aquae com. An. lib. vi. And of fine Mythridat. {TEXT:dram_symbol}
iii. CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,37.94

But be sure yee gather the hearbes when the Sunne is on them ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,37.95

and boyle them to the consumption of the third part , in an earthen pot
nealled and close couered , so that no ayre go foorth :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,37.96

when it is colde , straine it CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,37.97

and keep it in cleane vessels . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,37.98

And for that this my Patient was subiect to much Restriction of his
belly : hee did also admit him to forbeare the foresaid drinke , and to
drink of his Laxatiue decoction a quarter of a pinte at a time , which
he received first in the morning , & at 3. or 4. of the clocke in the
<P_38> afternoone , and last in the euening . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.99

Rx. Sarsaeparillae . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iiij. Rad. sassafras .
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} ij. Ligni sancti . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iii.
Epithymi . Hermodactil et Stachados , An. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i.
Seminis Anisi . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. Liquerisiae .
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} ss. Senae Orientall. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii.
Saccari albi . lib. ss. Mithridati . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. Vini
albi . Aquae com. An. lib. viii. CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.100

Boyle them vnto the third part , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.101

and last put in your Senae and Mithridate , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.102

and let it not boyle much aboue half_a_dozen walmes .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.103

Et fiat . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.104

Now for that his Ulcers were many , and subiect to a hotte distemper ,
for that cause hee might the better admitte bloud_letting , being also a
man of a growne age , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.105

therefore I tooke the more quantity thereof . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.106

Then next I proceeded with the Cure of the beforenamed malignant Ulcers
, CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.107

and did first bathe or washe them for a good space with Hydromel <paren>
that is , Well-water and Hony boyled together <$$paren> by reason of the
hotte distemperature , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.108

and did subdue the whole <font> Scrophula <$$font> , following <font>
Vigoes <$$font> direction : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.109

After Incision I did put againe of the Causticke into the middle of the
Carnosity , which deceiued me not , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,38.110

and so after caused him to auoyde much noysome matter and <P_39>
filthynes : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.111

Then after I did mundifye them with Vnguentum Apostolorum Mesuei , and
of Vnguentum Aegiptiacum An. Oun. 2. Oleum Ouourum , Mel Rosarum An.
Oun. 2. Lapis Calaminaris preparat made into most subtill powder .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.112

Misce et fiat Vnguentum . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.113

I found this aforesaid <font> Vnguent <$$font> very commodious and
profitable in this Cure , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.114

and did continue with it till I perceiued pure and quicke flesh :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.115

then I did also constitute and ordaine these two remedyes which in their
operation for the cure of the said <font> Struma <$$font> , is approoved
profitable . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.116

Recipe . Saccari Plumbj . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ss. Ol. Ouorum lutorum
. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ij. CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.117

Misce . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.118

This place will not admit me heere orderly , to set down at large ,
those great cures which I haue seene healed by other Chirurgians , of
whome I obtained the knowledge of the foresaid remedyes :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.119

And I haue also with the same , cured and healed many of the like cures
, but especially in the curing of fraudule~t Ulcers in Ano , the said
remedy being Artifically made and prepared according to the Chimistes
Arte , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.120

the subiect is onely Plumbj rub. et Acetj fort.
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.121

Also I have thought it good to set down the manner of making the
foresaid Ol. Ouor. CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.122

that is : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.123

take 20 or 30 Egges , more or lesse , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.124

& let them be sodden very hard : which done , lay aside the whites ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.125

and reserue onely the yolks , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.126

so let them be wel laboured and beaten in a cleane morter :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.127

then put them into a Frying pan , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.128

& cause the~ be well fryed , continually stirring them , till it come to
an Oylye substance , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.129

and after presse it foorth according to Arte . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,39.130

<P_40>

<font> Recipe . White Varnish . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ij. Lytarge of
golde {TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. <$$font> CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.132

Put the Varnish in a litle broad earthen Pan , being made flat and well
nealed , the bignes of a great Sawcer , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.133

and strewe in the <font> Litarge <$$font> by little and little ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.134

and stire it together euery two houres , and it will in the end come to
a certaine hardness , in such sort that you may beate it to powder ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.135

and strew of this powder vpon your Pledgets , for the cure of y=e=
outward Abscession , which likewise troubled him greatly , being so hard
, nody and knotty , so that I feared they would haue degenerate into a
Scirrhus , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.136

but I did mollify and dissolue them with these remedyes following .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.137

Recipe . Turnips and Lilly rootes An. lib. ss. boyled in stronge Ale
or Malmesey , q. s. which being boyled very tender , then straine
gently foorth the lyquors , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.138

and beate the roote very well in a stone morter ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.139

and adde therunto Beane meale and Barly meale , and Ote-meale , of each
a handfull : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.140

then take the liquors that the forenamed rootes were boyled in ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.141

and adde thereunto Marsh Mallow rootes two handfuls , of Fenygreke and
Lineseede , each of them a handfull . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.142

Let these stand infused 12. houres , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.143

then boyle it to a thicknesse , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.144

and so straine it strongly . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.145

Then take of this Mussilage lib. ss. CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.146

and adde to it also Oyle of Lineseede and sweet Butter An. q. s. and
of Saffron the waight of 4. d. CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.147

Then boyle all together to a consistence . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.148

Et fiat Cataplasma . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.149

Also , I often vsed Emplastrum de Ranis cum Mercurio et Emplastrum
Dyachilon maius , Emplastrum de Muscilaginibus , as is before named :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.150

And thus I cured this Sea-faring man , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.151

and so continued <paren> to my knowledge <$$paren> 11. yeares :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.152

in the end hee dyed in the last voyage with Sir <font> Frances Drake
<$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,40.153

<P_41>

<heading>

<font> An Obseruation of a Maide , whose friends supposed she had the
Euill before rehearsed , when I was but a young Professor in this
faculty and Arte of Chyrurgerie . <$$font> CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,41.156

<$$heading>

About thirty yeeres past <paren> as it were in the minority of this my
practice <$$paren> I did obserue there was brought vnto me <paren> by a
Preacher , then being Vicar of <font> Yalding <$$font> , a towne in
<font> Kent <$$font> a Maiden about the age of 22. yeares , hauing a
stronge and able body , and of a reasonable good constitution , who was
supposed to haue the Euill , called <font> Struma <$$font> .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,41.158

Yee shall vnderstand , this Vicar was a man that did practise both
Phisicke and Chirurgery : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,41.159

this Mayden was a long time troubled with an Ulcer in one of her legges
, and a great swelling in one side of her necke : which Maladyes , the
foresaid Vickar did take vpon him to cure and heale :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,41.160

how_be_it , in continuance of time he grew weary of his worke ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,41.161

and tolde a neighbour of his , called Paster <font> Eden <$$font>
<paren> a Gentleman dwelling also in <font> Yalding <$$font> that the
Maide his Patient <paren> as hee supposed <$$paren> had the Queenes
Euill <paren> which Gentlemans Daughter not long before I had cured of
the same : <$$paren> CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,41.162

The sayd Gentleman perswaded the Vicar not to spend time too long , but
to cause her to be sent vp to <font> London <$$font> to mee , whose
consaile presently he followed , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,41.163

& the Vicar and the Maide and her father consulted together ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,41.164

and came to mee to <font> London <$$font> , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,41.165

and shewed me her griefe , and the continuance of the same .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,41.166

So after diligent view taken by me , I found it was not the Euil <paren>
as he supposed <$$paren> but <P_42> a sort of crude and rawe humours ,
flocking together in her neck , with a putrifyed corrupt <font> Vlcer
<$$font> vpon her right leg , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.167

& so I told him he was deceiued in her griefe .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.168

Then they went their way CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.169

and asked further counsell , which all were of my opinion .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.170

Then they came vnto me the next day , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.171

and I did vndertake the cure with the counsaile of one Doctor <font>
Spering <$$font> a graue and learned Phisition , who prescribed her an
order of dyet , with conuenient purging . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.172

It is to be noted , hee gaue vnto her in three seuerall boxes , three
sundry purgations to be taken at three seuerall times , set downe in
writing very plainely , as might be deuised . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.173

In like manner I deliuered vnto them all such locall remedies as was fit
for both her griefes : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.174

amongst the rest I noted in writing , that the first thing shee should
vse vnto the <font> Vlcer <$$font> on her legge , was Vnguentum
Aegiptiacum , which I made very strong , and of a high and thicke body ,
for that I would have her spred it upo~ pledgets somwhat thick , and
after to proceede with other meete remedies . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.175

But note what ill hap followed by the Maydes carelesness , and too much
negligence : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.176

In the morning after she came home to <font> Yalding <$$font> by 7. of
the clocke , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.177

and tooke one of the 3. Purgations which the Doctor gaue vnto her to
take , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.178

shee set it vpon a stoole by the fire , where she meant first to dresse
her legge : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.179

in conclusion <paren> by great ouersight <$$paren> she laide the
Purgation to her legge , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.180

and did eate vp the whole boxe of Aegiptiacum , which was nere 2. oun.
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.181

and <paren> as she said afterwards <$$paren> it was very vntoothsome and
loathsome in tasting . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.182

All this while for two hours space she felt litle working of it ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.183

but did begin in the end greatly to burne , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.184

& did complaine in her stomacke , throate & mouth ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.185

and casted extreamely , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.186

& also shortly after purged downe very greatly ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.187

& thus continued for the space of one day , & one night before she
sought for helpe . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,42.188

In the end , the Vicar was <P_43> not to be found ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.189

but stayed in <font> London <$$font> , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.190

then they sent vnto <font> Maidestone <$$font> to an <font> Italian
<$$font> Phisitian called <font> Santa-cilia <$$font> ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.191

and he being giuen to vnderstand by them , that by meanes of a purgation
, shee was in a great burning heate in her body , & purged & vomited too
aboundantly , and so wanted sleepe greatly , for the which hee gaue them
a prescript vnto the Apothecary : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.192

but first that they themselues should apply her with butter-milke , and
new milke , and some good fat Mutton brothes : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.193

and to helpe to stay her purging , he counsailed them to giue her to
drinke oftentimes , Red-wine and Conserue of Sloes together , and to
procure her to sleepe with this potion following .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.194

Rx. Diascordij . {TEXT:dram_symbol} i. ss. Diacodij .
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. Aquae Cardui Benedicti .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.195

Fiat potio . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.196

But this did small pleasure . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.197

The next night hee sent her this ensuing . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.198

Rx. Diascordij . {TEXT:scruple_symbol} iiii. Philonij Romanij .
{TEXT:scruple_symbol} i. Aquae Cardui Benedicti . {TEXT:ounce_symbol}
iii. Sir. de Succo Lymonum . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i.
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.199

Misce . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.200

With this she had some comfort but not to the purpose they looked for :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.201

so after the third night , in the next morning they sent with all speede
to my house in <font> London <$$font> with a letter , of the great
daunger she was in , & the Phisitians billes with all what she had done
: CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.202

and presently I sent it to D. <font> Spering <$$font> , who was greatly
greeued to heare of it , & said he was sure there was some extraordinary
matter in it , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.203

for the purgations he sent would neuer bring her into such danger .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,43.204

The~ after he had well considered of the matter , & present daunger that
might <P_44> ensue , hee prescribed foorth_with that his Apothecary
should make first , for to coole and quench her great and extreame
thirst , and to helpe her to her tasting againe , this <font> Iulip
<$$font> which was thus made . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.205

Rec. Barly Water lib. iiii. Conserue of red Roses and of Barberyes ,
of each 2. Oun: Whereunto was added 20. droppes of Oyle of Vitrioll .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.206

Misce . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.207

And then she did drinke for a space , which wrought to good effect in
cooling of her , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.208

& so brought her to a good taste againe . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.209

For the staying of the Fluxe of her Belly and Vomiting , she tooke of
this Electuary at diuers times a day , the quantity of 3. Oun. at a
time . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.210

The making heereof is as followeth . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.211

Recipe Bol. Armoniacj Orient. {TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. Cynamomj
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} i. . Cloues and Nutmegs roasted An.
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} ss. . Macis {TEXT:dram_symbol} j. . Sanguinis
Hominis , dryed in the Sun , and made into fine powder
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} ij. . Corticis Balasteij . {TEXT:ounce_symbol} j.
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.212

Of white Paper shred into a number of small peeces :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.213

of Sorrel seedes , and of Plantine seedes , dryed and made into fine
powder , of each {TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.214

Boyle these in 12. Ounc. of Strupe of Vineger , til it come vnto the
thicknes of an Electuary , &c. CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.215

He gaue also vnto her the first night , a Pill of Ladanum , onely to
procure sleepe and quiet rest , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.216

and caused her to be couered with many cloathes ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.217

and so procured sweate : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.218

Thus within an houre and a quarter shee fell a sleepe ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.219

and rested quietly untill nine of the clocke the next morning ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.220

and neuer casted CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.221

nor went to the stoole : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.222

and <paren> being awaked <$$paren> confessed shee was greatly refreshed
, CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.223

and felt no paines at all till towards night , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.224

and then she casted a litle , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,44.225

and went now and then to the stoole : <P_45> for which cause she tooke
her fore said Electuary . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.226

She earnestly required to haue an other Pill , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.227

but the Doctor gaue his direction to the contrary ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.228

and would first see how Nature did dispose her selfe :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.229

so the night following she rested but litle , how_be_it {she_rested} a
great deale better then before . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.230

Then the third night hee gaue her the second Pill ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.231

and after that she neuer vomitted or purged disorderly againe :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.232

the excellency of these remedyes is aboue beliefe and vncredible , that
I haue done and seen done by these last worthy remedyes , both by Sea
and by land CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.233

The seauenth day after she had receiued her infortunate Purgation of
<font> Aegiptiacu~ <$$font> , then speeches was made by me to see the
Ulcer of her legge , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.234

but they regarded it not ; CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.235

in the ende she opened it , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.236

and found it almost cleane cured , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.237

then shee commended mee , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.238

and so did her friends for this my excellent remedy :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.239

but shee said would neuer take the like Purgation againe , for
a_thousand pound : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.240

thus she was cured by Fortune and not by Arte .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.241

Then I required of her , where the Boxes were , that the Purgations and
the Vnguentum Aegiptiacum were in : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.242

she said she threwe them both into the fire : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.243

For <paren> said shee <$$paren> the Purgation had a filthy taste ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.244

and was so clammy , and so sticked to her mouth and teeth , that I had
neuer so much a_doe <paren> said she <$$paren> to get it downe my
throate . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.245

Then I perceiued shee had taken the wrong thing ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.246

& it was the more apparant by reason of the blacknes of her teeth , &
the staines of her cloathes wherwith she had often wiped her mouth : and
also by staining of the Basons and the dishes , wherin she had so often
times vomitted . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.247

After this I stayed with her ten daies , til her legge and mouth was
perfectly cured , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.248

and then wee were royally payde , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.249

and thus went to <font> London <$$font> to the Doctor ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.250

and tolde him what had hapned , that she had eaten the box of
Aegiptiacum , and layde the Purgation to her legge , whereat he was
greatly grieued : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,45.251

<P_46>

and much controuersie in speeches was after betweene the Doctor and the
Maides father , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.253

but in the ende they were made friends . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.254

Now I will set downe the composition of the said Pill of Ladanum , which
I obtained of a very deere friend , being a pretious Jewell , as it is
vsed : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.255

otherwise , <paren> as I haue said in other of my writings <$$paren> the
best Medicine that is , is not Medicine vnlesse it be in the hands of a
skilfull man . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.256

<heading>

<font> The true maner and making of Ladanum . <$$font>
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.258

<$$heading>

Take of Opium , first sliced thinne and then dryed in an Earthen platter
, one Oun. & a halfe . of the gum of the roote of Henbane 3. Oun.
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.260

Make the Gum thus . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.261

Gather the rootes of white Henbane in March <paren> the Moone being full
<$$paren> CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.262

and drie them in the shadow : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.263

after slice them CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.264

and boyle them in good white Wine : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.265

<paren> the rootes being boyled vntil they be very soft <$$paren> poure
off the wine , being full of the tincture therof ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.266

and presse strongly the rootes , the licour <paren> being by filtration
clensed from all dregs <$$paren> in an earthen broad pan vpon warme
ashes ; CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.267

Vapour away the moysture vntill the tincture of the Henbane rootes come
to the consistence of Hony , which is very sweet and pleasant .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.268

After this , take all these <paren> being beaten to powder <$$paren>
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.269

of the seedes of white Poppy one Ounce , of Mummia one scruple , of
Cloues and Cinamon , of each 2. Ounces , of Louagerootes , Calamus ,
Aromaticus , Galingale and Ginger , of each one Ounce , of Castorium ,
blacke Pepper , Cubebs and Saffron , of each halfe an Ounce , of Ladanum
and Beniamin , of each 2. {TEXT:dram_symbol} .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.270

Put all these together in a glass hauing a narrow mouth , which will
holde a pottle , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,46.271

and poure in so much good and strong Aqua Vitae as will be aboue them
foure <P_47> inches , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.272

then with a Corke and a peece of Leather stop it ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.273

and let it stand vntill the Aqua Vitae be of a darke red colour ,
shaking it three times a day in y=e= glasse : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.274

the Aqua Vitae being full of tincture , let it bee poured off & strayned
, and so much againe be poured on , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.275

do this till the Aqua Vitae can draw no colour .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.276

Then take all the tinctured Aqua Vitae , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.277

and in Balnea Mariae in a great glasse body , distill it vntill the
tinctures doe come to the consistence of a Syrope :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.278

Afterwardes poure them in a broad earthen glased pan ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.279

and on warme Ashes by evaporation bring them to the consistence and body
of a Pill , which Malax with 2. drams of the oyle of Cloues , let the
masse be kept in a cleane glasse . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.280

The Dose is from three graines to fiue , to procure sleepe , to aswage
the paines of those that are troubled with the collicke , with the
Plurisie , with the Stone , and with the Goute : to stay the Cough , the
Fluxe of the Belly , spitting of bloud , and Defluxions of humours , &c.
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.281

It is said , it were as good for a Chirurgian that followeth the warres
, eyther by Sea or Land , to bee without his right hand , as to bee
without these remedyes last rehearsed . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.282

My selfe haue knowne cured of Dysenteria , or the bloudy Flix , and
other Fluxes of the belly in a Shippe <paren> being vpon the coaste of
<font> Indyes <$$font> <$$paren> forty Marriners and Soldiers at one
time , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.283

and not one of them all perished , by the discreet administration of the
said remedyes by seruantes of mine . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.284

Within the Citty of <font> London <$$font> also there be aliue at this
present day , which were cured of the Fluxe of the belly , by the
forenamed remedyes , when they were supposed of many to be past all
recouery , by reason also of the long continuance and their extreame
weakenes withall . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.285

And here I wish the like good successe vnto others <paren> which I my
selfe haue had heereby <$$paren> that is the onely cause I haue heere
made so large mention thereof . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,47.286

<P_48>

<heading>

A most miraculous Cure , healed onely by the Queenes most excellent
Maiesty , when neither Phisicke nor Chirurgery could take place or
preuaile . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,48.289

<$$heading>

Amongst an infinite nu~ber <paren> which I haue knowne dayly cured by
her Highnes , of the foresaid euill <$$paren> this cure following is
worthy of great admiration~ : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,48.291

there came into my handes not many yeares past , a certayne Stranger ,
borne <paren> as he said <$$paren> in the Land of <font> Gulicke
<$$font> neere vnto <font> Cleaueland <$$font> .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,48.292

This Stranger had been in Cure a long time before he came vnto me , with
diuers skilfull Chirurgians , both English and Strangers , being then
greatly molested and sore troubled with diuers pernitious <font>
Cancerous Fistulous Vlcers <$$font> in certaine places of his body :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,48.293

likewise he had many knotty swellings or abscessions , gathered together
vpon heapes in the fore part of his necke , neere vnto the Winde-pipe ,
and some in the hinder part of the necke : and also amongst the
principall and notable vessels , <font> viz. <$$font> the great Sinewes
, Vaines and Arteryes , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,48.294

and therfore could not without great perill and danger be safely taken
away , eyther by Launce or Causticke remedies , by reason of their neere
knitting together , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,48.295

& were also very vnfit , to be brought to suppuration .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,48.296

The cause was , they were for the most part ingendred of dull and slowe
or tough <P_49> slimie matter , for the which I craued now and then the
aduyce and counsaile of diuerse learned and expert Phisitians and
Chirurgians , onely to preuent and auoide those pernitious daungers that
oftentimes doe follow : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,49.297

Howbeit , <paren> in conclusion <$$paren> notwithstanding all our
turmoiling , much care , industry and diligence , with the application
of most excellent medicines <paren> very remediable and appropriate for
that cure <$$paren> yet was his griefe rather the worse then better .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,49.298

For looke what way soeuer we tooke with approoued medicines , some milde
, some vehement , and some stronger <paren> which by naturall reason and
common sense , were very good and commendable <$$paren> yea , and which
brought oftentimes all his Ulcers to bee very neere whole : Yet vpon a
sodaine <paren> without any iust cause to vs knowne <$$paren> his sores
did putrifye and breake foorth againe , with much loathsome filthinesse
, so that I feared his Ulcers would gangrenize , by reason of the
concursion and vigour of the vnexpected accidents , so that his disease
wearied vs all . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,49.299

In the end , after hee had been twelue or thirteene monethes in my cure
, perceiuing we al mist of our expected hope and purpose for the curing
of this Infirmity : And likewise himself being ouertyred with extreame
paines and griefe , so that oftentimes hee bewailed his owne great
misery and wretchednes : for which cause hee went his waies , and came
no more vnto mee for any cure : but by the counsaile of some of his owne
countrimen and friends , made meanes <paren> vnknowne to me <$$paren>
vnto other of my fellowes the Queenes Maiesties Chirurgians , which are
in place of preferment before mee . Who pitying his miserable estate ,
vpon a time <paren> amongst many others <$$paren> he was then presented
vnto our most Sacred and renowned Prince the Queenes most excellent
Maiesty , for the cure of the said Euill : which through the gift and
power of Almightie God , by her <P_50> Graces onely meanes laying of her
blessed and happie handes vpon him , shee cured him safely within the
space of sixe monthes . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.300

Heereby it appeareth it is a more diuine then humane worke ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.301

so afterwards vpon a time I did meete with him by chaunce in <font>
London <$$font> , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.302

but I did not wel know him , his Colour & complexion was so greatly
altered & amended : And being in very comely maner attired , otherwise
then before I had seene him , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.303

and he tolde me who he was : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.304

Then I asked him how he did w=t= his griefe CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.305

& he answered me , I thank God and the Queene of England ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.306

I am by her Maiesty perfectly cured and healed :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.307

and after her Grace had touched me , I neuer applyed any Medicine at all
, CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.308

but kept it cleane , with sweet and fresh cleane cloathes ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.309

and now and then washed the sore with white Wine :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.310

and thus all my griefes did consume and washe cleane away .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.311

And that I should credit him the more , he shewed mee the Angell of
golde which her Maiesty did put about his neck ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.312

truely a cure <paren> as I haue said <$$paren> requireth diuine honour
and reuerence : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.313

And heere I doe confidently affirme and steedfastly beleeue , that
<paren> for the certaine cure of this most miserable Malady <$$paren>
when all Artes and Sciences doe faile , her Highnesse is the onely
Daystarre , peerelesse and without comparison : for whose long life ,
much happines , peace and tranquillity , let vs all <paren> according to
our bounden dutyes <$$paren> continually pray vnto the Almighty God ,
that he will blesse , keepe and defend her Sacred person , from the
malice of all her knowne and vnknowne enemies , so that shee may for
euer raigne ouer vs , <paren> if it please the Lord God <$$paren> euen
vnto the ende of the world , still to cure and heale many thousands moe
, then euer she hath yet done . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.314

Amen . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,50.315

<P_51>

<heading>

An history and obseruation of a Gentleman which sent for me , to cure
him of the foresaid Euill , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.318

but it prooued otherwise . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.319

<$$heading>

Vpon a time I was sent for to a Gentleman , lying in a Marchantes house
at Broken-wharfe in <font> London <$$font> : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.321

after I was brought into his presence , he did foorthwith giue me to
vnderstand , y=t= he was greatly polluted & molested with much impurity
of corrupt & rotten matter , with great exulceration in his throate ,
being of a filthy and carrionish sauour : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.322

also the Almond of his throate was greeuous and painful vnto him , &
meruailously swolne : for the which cause <paren> he said <$$paren> he
entertained <paren> a litle before <$$paren> one D. <font> Simonds
<$$font> , a very learned and Judiciall Phisitian , who <paren> as he
reported <$$paren> did administer a dyet to him for certaine daies ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.323

but it apppered that he was smally relieued thereby .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.324

And further he laide open vnto mee , that of late there was commended
vnto him a New-come Stranger , who <paren> vpon report <$$paren> was
supposed to be y=e= onely <font> Phoenix <$$font> of the world , for his
rare and exquisite knowledge in Phisicke and Chirurgery :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.325

I answered the Gentleman , that those speeches were so absurd as nothing
could be more , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.326

for <paren> said I <$$paren> it is impossible for one ma~ to haue all
knowledge in himself , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.327

but it is truely said : <font> One man may know , that which another
knoweth not <$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.328

Well quoth he , I perceiue I haue take~ a wrong pig by y=e= eare ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.329

and so haue brought my hogs to a faire market , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.330

& therefore I know not what to say : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.331

& I doubt me I shal find a wofull experience , of that he hath practised
on me : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,51.332

And therefore said , he I pray you let me haue your good help <P_52> in
curing of me , for preue~ting further danger . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.333

Indeed he is more to be esteemed that preuenteth a danger before it doth
come , then hee that doth cure it after it is come ;
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.334

Wel said he , the first time he had giuen me a litle Phisicke , hee did
very boldly corrosiue mee in two seuerall places of my throate ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.335

and yet neuerthelesse I receiued no profit thereby ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.336

but hee hath tormented me greatly : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.337

So in the end he prayed me to vnbinde his grief , where the corrosiue
was applyed , which was directly vpon the outward part of the Amigdales
or Kernels of the roote of the tongue , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.338

but as good hap was , he being a fat man , the Caustick wrought not too
deep : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.339

also he shewed mee diuers nodosities , knobs and knottes vpon his shin
bones . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.340

Then I tolde the Gentleman it was not the Kings Euil :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.341

when he heard me speake these words , he was in a wonderfull rage ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.342

and did sweare like a mad man . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.343

By the way yee shal vnderstand , that this gentlemans vices exceeded his
vertues , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.344

hee was a man knowne to be as vnconstant & vncertaine as the weathercock
: won with a feather & lost with a straw , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.345

today a friend , tomorrow none : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.346

at one time he would magnifye his Phisitian and Chirurgian <paren> as it
were <$$paren> aboue the heauens , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.347

and for the wagging of a rush , hee would discredit them & dispraise
them againe , down to the pit of hell . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.348

But to returne vnto my matter , from whence I haue a litle digressed ,
forsooth in all poste_hast this good Gentleman would needes haue me ride
into the Country to his house <paren> being fifty miles from <font>
London <$$font> <$$paren> to cure him there : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.349

But I tolde him , it was not possible , for that I was dayly to attend
vpon the Lord <font> Thomas <$$font> Earle of Sussex , then being Lord
Chamberlaine vnto her Maiesty . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,52.350

In the meane space there came in his Phisitian and Chirugian whome he
reported before to be matchlesse , and without comparison in Phisicke
<P_53> and Chirugery : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,53.351

but the case is altered , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,53.352

for now he did againe , most bitterly reuile him , for mistaking of his
griefe : CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,53.353

I must needs say , his Phisitian was a man of a curteous inclination ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,53.354

and partly after speeches had , he did confesse his error and ouer-sight
: CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,53.355

yet he said hee had been a professor of this faculty forty yeeres ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,53.356

and indeed he had the testimonies of many great townes and Cityes beyond
the Seas , of diuers whome hee had cured of the Kings Euill :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,53.357

To iudge and iudge aright , <paren> as I tolde the Gentleman <$$paren>
hee did nothing of set purpose to abuse him , CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,53.358

for truely he was learned , though a bad Phisitian and a worse
Chirurgian . CLOWES-1602-E2-P1,53.359

