<BEGIN_coverte-1612-e2-p1>

<P_1>

The 14. day of March , 1607. wee came into the Downes ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,1.3

and there ancored against <font> Deale <$$font> , about 3. miles from
<font> Sandwich <$$font> , where we staied vntill the 25. day of the
same moneth , being by computation the first day of the yeere , 1608 ,
vpon which day , about foure of the clock in the morning , we waighed
ancor COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,1.4

and past by <font> Douer <$$font> , betweene three and foure of the
clocke in the afternoone , without any staying , but giuing them notice
with 3. peeces of Ordinance of our passing by , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,1.5

and so passed forwards some three leagues , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,1.6

and then by a contrary winde we were driuen backe againe into <font>
Douer <$$font> roade where we ancored and staied till fiue of the clocke
in the morning , being the twenty_sixe day of <font> March <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,1.7

and then weighing ancor , we sailed some three leagues , when the winde
contrarying constrained vs againe to cast ancor vntill the 27. day in
the morning about seuen <P_2> or eight of the clocke ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.8

and then hauing a faire gale of winde , we sailed to <font> Plimouth
<$$font> , where we arriued the 29. day between tenne and eleuen of the
clocke in the forenoone , where we staied till the thirtie_one day of
March . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.9

And then hauing a faire gale of winde , wee waighed ancor
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.10

and sailed vntill wee came in sight of an Iland called the <font>
Saluages <$$font> , on Sunday being the tenth day of <font> Aprill
<$$font> , being about fiue_hundred leagues from <font> Plimouth
<$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.11

and still sailed forwards vntill the next morning , that we came within
sight of the grand Canaries , which belong to the <font> Spaniard
<$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.12

And vpon the twelfth day of Aprill , about eight or nine of the clocke
in the night we ancored , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.13

and discharged a peece of Ordinance , for a boat to come aboard , but to
no effect : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.14

For before our ariuall in the road , there was a rumor of twelue saile
of <font> Flemmings <$$font> that were co~ming that way , to no good
intent <paren> as the <font> Spaniards <$$font> afterward told vs
<$$paren> to be some of those <font> Flemmings <$$font> that had
ouerrunne the rest , where upon they sent vp into the Countrey for
one_hundred_and_forty horse and foot or more , for their defence and
safegard <paren> if neede should be <$$paren> COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.15

nor would they be perswaded to the contrarie , vntill two of our Factors
went on shore , and fully satisfied them in any thing they demanded or
doubted , and that our intent was only to make prouision for such things
as we wanted , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.16

and the next morning , <paren> as the manner there is <$$paren> we
discharged another peece of Ordinance . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.17

And then the Gouernour of the Towne sent a boat to know what we craued ,
whereupon we certified them of our wants , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.18

and they told vs they would giue the Gouernour intelligence , and
returne vs an answere , which was , that vnlesse wee came into the road
, it was beyond his Commission to releeue vs , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,2.19

yet hauing first sworne and examined our Factors , and so knowing the
truth of our intended voiage , they gaue them a warrant to take a boat ,
to come aboard at their pleasures with licence to supply our wants , if
<P_3> they had any thing that might content vs .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.20

Yet one thing aboue the rest made vs much to maruell , which was , two
<font> English <$$font> ships <paren> which wee perceiued and knew by
their flagges <$$paren> being in the road , who had not so@ @much
kindnesse in them as to giue vs notice , of the custome or manners of
these subtill and currish people . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.21

And of this doubt , wee were also resolued , that no man whatsoeuer ,
being once within their Dominions , may come aboard any ship , that
shall arriue there , and lie out of the roade , although they be of
their owne Nation , without their Gouernors and Councels permittance or
licence . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.22

At our being there some of them came aboard of vs euery day for the
space of fiue daies that wee staied there , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.23

and eat and dranke with vs , after an vnsatiable manner , and very
greedily . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.24

Also we sent the Gouernor a present of two cheeses , a Gammon of bakon ,
and fiue or sixe barrels of pickle Oisters , which he accepted very
thankefully and returned vs in requital therof , two or three Goats and
a Sheepe or two , and good store of Onions . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.25

And there we tooke in fresh water , Canarie wine , Marmalad of Quinces
at twelue pence the pound , little barrels of Suckets at three shillings
the barrell , Oranges , Limmons , Pomcitrions and excellent faire white
bread made with Anniseeds , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.26

and is by them called Nunnes bread . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.27

The eighteenth day of Aprill about seuen of the clocke in the morning ,
we weighed Ancor COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.28

and set saile hauing a faire gale wind for some three houres
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.29

and being then becalmed , we houered too & fro till the 21. day ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.30

and hauing then againe a faire gale of winde , we sailed vntill the 27.
day about two or three of the clock in the afternoone , that we ariued &
ancored at <font> Mayo <$$font> , being about three_hundred leagues from
the <font> Canaries <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.31

and comming from thence , wee were determined to take in fresh water at
a place called <font> Bonauista <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,3.32

but hauing ancored we found the water to bee two or three <P_4> miles ,
vp in the land , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.33

neither was it cleare water , so that we tooke the smaller quantity .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.34

But there were other good commodities . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.35

For at our first comming we were told by two <font> Negroes <$$font> ,
that there wee might haue as many Goats as we would , <font> gratis
<$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.36

and I well remember , we had to the number of two_hundred , or
there_abouts in both our ships . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.37

Also they told vs that there were but twelu {COM:sic} men in the Iland ,
and that there was verie great store of Salt growing out of the ground
so that <paren> if we pleased <$$paren> we might lade both our ships
therewith , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.38

it is excellent good white salt , and as cleare as euer I saw any in
<font> England . <$$font> COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.39

Ouer against the Ile of <font> Mayo <$$font> , some eight leagues
distance , is an Iland called <font> S. Deago <$$font> ;
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.40

wee staied at <font> Mayo <$$font> from the twenty_seuenth of Aprill in
the afternoone vntill the fourth day of May at sixe of the clocke in the
morning , when we set saile and sailed vntill the twentieth day of May ,
that we were past the Equinoctiall line , about 4. or 6. of the clocke
in the morning , being distant fro~ the Ile of <font> Mayo <$$font>
about three_hundred_fourty_eight leagues or there_abouts , as our master
<font> Philip de Groue <$$font> noted it downe in his owne Booke of the
description of the whole Voiage . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.41

And thence we still sailed forwards vntill the fourth of July , that wee
came to a part of <font> Souldania <$$font> with our men in health ,
Gods name be praised , but two which were touched a little with the
scuruy , which soone after recouered themselues on shore to their former
health . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.42

Also the same day we espied Land which is called <font> Cape bona
Speranse <$$font> being some fifteene or sixteene leagues of <font>
Souldania <$$font> COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.43

and standeth in some thirty_fiue Degrees or thereabouts .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.44

At <font> Souldania <$$font> wee refreshed our selues excellently well
so long as we were there , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,4.45

and had , and tooke in for our prouision about foure_hundred head of
Cattel , as Oxen , Steeres , Sheepe and Lambes , and foules , and fish
of sundry sorts very plentifull , and fresh water <P_5> great store .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.46

Also in that place is an Iland called <font> Pengwin <$$font> , some
fiue or sixe Leagues from the maine Land , where are great store of
fowles called also <font> Pengwins <$$font> , infinite number of seales
: COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.47

And to fetch some of those Seales , we went twice thither
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.48

and filled our boat each time , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.49

and made tranie Oile thereof for Lampes . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.50

Also in this Iland we found 20. fat sheepe , being left there by the
<font> Hollanders <$$font> , for a Pinnis which we met some two_hundred
leagues from <font> Cape bona Speranse <$$font> , which sheepe we tooke
with vs and left fiue beasts of burden in their steade .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.51

At our first comming to <font> Souldania <$$font> , wee began to build
or set vp our Pinnis , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.52

and launched her the fifth day of September next following ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.53

and in seuen or eight dayes after , she was rigged and ready in all
points to haue gone away , if any such necessity had beene .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.54

<font> Souldania <$$font> is within the kingdome of <font> Ethiopia
<$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.55

Now the <font> Ethiopians <$$font> are by nature very brutish or beastly
people , especially in their feeding . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.56

For I haue seene them eate the guts & garbedge , yea euen the very panch
where the dung & filth lieth . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.57

Also when we haue cast off those Seale_fishes into the riuer neere
adioining where they haue lyen the space of fourteen daies , and that
they haue been putrified and stuncke so vehimently , that it could
almost haue stifled one of vs to come by them , these people haue taken
them vp and eaten them when they haue swarmed with crauling maggots .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.58

Also in this Countrey are sundry sorts of wilde beasts , which my selfe
and others of our Company <paren> going on shore of purpose <$$paren>
haue seene , and perceiued some of them to be very fierce and cruell :
so that afterwards when we found their dens , we durst not enter them ,
nor come very neere them , lest they should be in them .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,5.59

The <font> Ethiopians <$$font> brought downe to the shore side to <P_6>
sell Ostridges egges and some empty shels , with a small hole in one end
, with Ostridges feathers and Porpentines quils ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.60

and for all their Traffique and Commodities , they chiefly desire Iron ,
esteeming it more then either gold or siluer . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.61

For with our old iron , we bought all our Cattell and any thing else
that we had of them . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.62

At this Countrey wee remained from the foureteenth day of July until the
twentieth day of September then next following .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.63

The 20. day of September earely in the morning we waighed ancor ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.64

and that night we lost the good ship called the <font> Vnion <$$font> ,
and our Pinnis called by the name of the <font> Good hope <$$font> , the
night being very darke and windy , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.65

now , the euening before we lost them , the <font> Vnion <$$font>
<paren> about fiue of the Clocke <$$paren> put out her Ensigne ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.66

but to what intent we knew not , nor could imagine ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.67

but all that night we lay at hull . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.68

The next day being the 21. day hauing a faire and strong gale of winde
, and afterwards sundry contrary windes and many calmes , yet at length
we attained to the height of <font> S. Laurence <$$font> on the 27.
day of October standing in the height of 26. degrees , from whence we
sailed with many crosse and contrary winds , and calmes .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.69

Yet at length on the 22. day of Nouember in the morning wee descried
two or three small Ilands , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.70

and in the afternoone we spied an Iland called <font> Gomora <$$font> a
very high Land : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.71

and on the 24. day we sent our boat to the shore side ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.72

and there came to the shore side fiue or sixe men of that Countrey ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.73

and sold vs Plantains , and nothing else at that time .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.74

The next day we sent our boat againe , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.75

but a little before they came to the shore they espied a <font> Canooe
<$$font> and two men in it a fishing , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.76

we went betweene them and the shore COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.77

but would not violently take them , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.78

then we shewed them a knife or two , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.79

and they came both into our Boat , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.80

and we brought them aboard our Ship COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,6.81

<P_7>

and vsed them very kindly , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.83

and gaue one of them a Turbant to put on his head and to the other a
little glasse of a quarter of a pinte full of <font> Aquauitae <$$font>
, COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.84

and sent them ashore . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.85

From the 22. day that wee espied the Iland <font> Gomora <$$font> , and
came amongst the Ilands wee could haue no steedy gale of wind to carry
vs forward , vntill the 25. day that with the wind and aid of our
Pinnis , which towed our ship betweene the two Ilands adioining to the
shore , we came to an ancor that night betweene foure and fiue of the
Clocke in some 17. or 20. fathome water . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.86

The 26. day wee sent our boat to the shore with a present to the King ,
by master <font> Iordan <$$font> who went himselfe alone with the
present , leauing only a pledge or two in the boate till his returne :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.87

The present was a paire of kniues , a Shash or Turbant , and a looking
glasse with a combe in it , to the value of some 15. shillings in all ,
which the king receiued somewhat scornefully , not scarse looking on it
, or at least thinking it to be but of small value ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.88

and gaue it to one of his Noble men , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.89

and told master <font> Iordan <$$font> our Factor , that if our Generall
would come on shore , hee should haue any thing that they had ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.90

and with this answer he departed , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.91

and at his comming from the King , the king bowed himselfe towards him
in very courteous manner COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.92

and after his departure <paren> as it may seeme <$$paren> hee better
perused the present . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.93

For in the afternoone he sent our Generall in requittal , a very fat
yongue Bullocke , which wee receiued , and gratified the messengers with
a couple of peny kniues , wherewith they thought themselues verie
royally contented . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.94

The 27. day our Generall went on shore and some 12. with him ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.95

and carried with him a small banquet : as , a box of Marmaled , a
barrell of Suckets , and Wine , which they did eat before the King ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.96

but he would neither eat nor drinke , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.97

but his Nobles did both eat and drinke . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,7.98

And after the banket hauing some conference <P_8> with the King by his
Interpreter concerning our wants , by whom wee vnderstood that they had
, some dealings with the <font> Portugals <$$font> , of which language
he could speake a little , which was sufficient to satisfie vs with what
they had . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.99

The 28. day the King had determined to come aboard our ship ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.100

but his Interpretor told vs , that his Councel and the common people
would not suffer him so to doe . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.101

Also that day towards night I went ashore where our people were cutting
downe woode , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.102

and came aboard againe with the boat . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.103

The 29. day I went ashore againe , with our Master , master <font>
Tindall <$$font> , master <font> Iordan <$$font> , and our whole noise
of Trumpeters , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.104

and at the shore side were very kindly entertained by the Interpretor ,
who brought vs to the king , being then by his Pallace side , who at our
approch bowed himselfe vnto vs very courteouslie .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.105

He hath for his gard when he walketh abroad sixe or eight men with
kniues of a foot long , and as broad as hatchets and very sharpe , which
goe next to his person , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.106

and more goe before him , and many behinde him , to keepe and defende
him , from what iniurie or wrong soeuer may come or happen .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.107

These people seeme to be ciuill , kinde , and true_hearted to strangers
, COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.108

for in going too and fro , a shore and aboard , one of our men carelesly
left his sword behinde him at night when he came aboard , which being
found by one of the people of <font> Gomora <$$font> , he brought it to
the King , who perceiuing it to bee some of ours , demanded how hee came
by it , who answered , hee found it , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.109

and the King againe told him , that if he proued the contrary it should
cost his best blood , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.110

the next day at our comming on shore , the Kings Interpretor brought vs
the sword COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.111

and told vs the Kings pleasure therein . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.112

Also they seeme to haue a very ciuill gouernment amongst them ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,8.113

for at their meeting in the morning , <P_9> they will shake hands each
with other , and speake one to another , which to vs seemed to bee their
kinde and friendly salutations one to another .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.114

They are verie modest , streight , big_limmed , and very comely in
gesture both men and women . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.115

Their Religion Mahometicall , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.116

and goe almost naked , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.117

onely their priuities are couered with linnen cloth ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.118

and Turbants on their heads . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.119

The women haue a linnen cloth , that couereth their breasts before and
reacheth to the middle , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.120

and from the middle to the knee and somewhat lower , they are couered
round about with linnen , next to their skin , and sedges tied round
about them like a rowle at their waste , and hung down , which doth
become them very well . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.121

They goe all barefoot except the king , who hath a paire of soles on his
feet : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.122

and for his apparell when I saw him , he had a white wrought networke
Cap , a Scarlet wastcote loose about him , and open before , with
sleeues and a linnen cloth about his middle , and another which hanged
downe from his shoulders to his feet . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.123

Also at our being there at the Town , they brought vs Coquo_nuts to sell
, as bigge as a mans head , and round , and some bigger and some lesser
, with water in them according to the proportion or bignesse or the
shell , and as much meat in one shell as would suffice for a mans dinner
. COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.124

Also they brought vs Goats , Hens , Chickens , Limons , Rice , Milke ,
Fish , and such like , which wee bought for Commodities , as two hens
for a penny knife , Limmons and Coquonuts for old Iron , as nailes ,
broken pickes , and such like . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.125

But for fresh water there is small store , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.126

and that they haue is gotten out of the sands , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.127

<font> viz. <$$font> First they make a hole in the sands
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.128

and when the water commeth into the hole , they lade it out into their
Coquo shels , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,9.129

and so drinke <P_10> it . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.130

They brought vs of that water COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.131

but none of our company would drinke thereof it looked so thicke and
muddy . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.132

In this Iland of <font> Gomora <$$font> we staied from the 25. of
Nouember vntill the 29. of the same , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.133

and then we waighed Ancor COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.134

and departed . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.135

The tenth day of December about two or three of the Clocke in the
morning , and the Moone shining , we espied on a sudden a low land with
high trees growing by the shore side , we being not a league from the
shore , so that if we had not espied the trees , we should haue thought
the land to haue beene but the shadow of the Moone and so might haue run
our selues on shore , and cast our selues away with ship and goods :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.136

but it was Gods good prouidence thus to defend vs from so great and
imminent danger , whose name be blessed and praised now and euermore .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.137

This was the Iland of <font> Pemba <$$font> , which we tooke to be
<font> Zinzabar <$$font> , vntill by one of the people of the Countrie
we found it to be <font> Pemba <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.138

At the sight of this low Iland , after we plainely perceiued it , wee
presently tackt about COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.139

and set from the shore till day , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.140

and then we tackt about againe to the shore side ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.141

and neering alongst the shore side for a harbour to ancor in , wee sent
our Pinnis in the meane time , to the shore with the Gang onlie and
master <font> Elmore <$$font> to seeke for a conuenient watering place ,
wee keeping our course till our Pinnis came to the shore side .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.142

Then two or three of the people of the Iland demanded in the <font>
Portugall <$$font> language what we were , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.143

and one of our men made answer , that we were <font> Englishmen <$$font>
. COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.144

Then they demanded againe what we had to doe there , in regard the King
of <font> Portugall <$$font> was King of that Iland :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.145

wee replied , that wee knew not so much , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.146

neither came we thither for any euill intent whatsoeuer , but only to
water , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.147

and would giue them satisfaction , for any other thing that we should
haue of them . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,10.148

Then it drew <P_11> towards night , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,11.149

and our men came aboard COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,11.150

and acquainted the whole Company with this their parly on shore .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,11.151

The 11. day our boat went ashore to the same place ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,11.152

but found it void of people COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,11.153

and returned , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,11.154

and presently we came to an ancor , about fiue or sixe of Clocke in the
afternoone neere vnto two or three broken Ilands there , adioyning neere
to the maine Ilaud of <font> Pemba <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,11.155

This place of our then ancoring standeth in the height of fiue Degrees
and 20. minutes . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,11.156

{COM:insert_helsinki_1}

<P_19>

At sight of us , the Ilanders made a fire , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,19.159

and wee sent our skiffe an shore , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,19.160

but the people fled with great feare and trembling , hauing <paren> as
it seemed <$$paren> been formerly iniured by some that had passed that
way : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,19.161

but <P_20> our men looking about , found no likelie-hood of any releefe
there , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.162

and so came aboard COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.163

and certified the Generall therof ; so that about fiue of the clock in
the afternoone , wee waighed ancor , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.164

and sailed along to find out the chief harbor .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.165

The 31. day we stood of into the main Sea , wher we met with a <font>
Guzarat <$$font> ship , laden with Cotton wools , Callicoes , and
Pentathoes , beeing bound for <font> Adden <$$font> , whether wee kept
her company , in regard they told vs it was a Towne of great trading ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.166

but wee found it quite contrary : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.167

for it was onely a Towne of garison , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.168

and many Souldiers in it : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.169

and at the very entring into the towne , is a Castle cut out of the
maine , and incompassed round with the Sea , wherein are thirty_two
peeces of Ordinance , and fiftie peeces in the towne .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.170

The 10. day of Aprill wee arriued there , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.171

and the <font> Guzarat <$$font> ship went into the Towne ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.172

and told the Gouernour , there was an English Ship come to trade there .
Who presently sent his Admirall to vs , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.173

and our Generall vnaduisedly went on shore , where hee , and his
fellowes were receiued with 4. great Horses , and were caried before
the Gouernour , in as great pomp and state , as the Towne could yeeld .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.174

But the Gouernor finding him to be a plaine and simple man , put him in
a house with a <font> Chowe <$$font> or keeper , with many Ianyzaries or
Souldiers to gard him , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.175

and so kept him prisoner sixe weekes , my self being prisoner with him .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.176

And then the Gouernor caused him to send aboard for Iron , Tinne , and
Cloath , to the value of 2500. Dollars , with promise to buy the same ,
which when he had on shore , hee claimed and made stay thereof , for the
Custome of the ship onely : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.177

and when hee saw hee had gotten as much as hee could , hee sent him
aboard the 27. day of May , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.178

and kept 2. of our Merchants for 2000. Dollars , which he said was for
ancorage : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,20.179

but the generall <P_21> voice of the company was , that hee should haue
none : whereupon hee sent the Merchants vp into the Countrey some 8.
daies iourney , to a place called <font> Siany <$$font> where the Bashaw
then lay . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.180

The 28. day , our Pinnace came to vs , who told vs their Master was
dead , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.181

and inquiring where , and how , the company told vs , he was knockt in
the head with a Mallet hammer , by one <font> Thomas Clarke <$$font> ,
with the consent of <font> Francis Driuer <$$font> his mate , <font>
Andrew Euans <$$font> , and <font> Edward Hilles <$$font> , being foure
murderous and bad_minded men , who beeing asked why , and vpon what
occasion they did it , they could make no excuse , nor alledge any cause
, saue onely , that hee had some small quantity of <font> Aquauitae
<$$font> and <font> Rosa solis <$$font> , for his owne store , and for
the good of them , or any one aboard , that should stand in neede
thereof , and was prouident to keepe and preserue the same , till great
need should be , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.182

and therefore out of meere malice , and chieflie by the instigation of
<font> Francis Driuer <$$font> his mate , they thus murdered an innocent
man , who thought them no harme , nor suspected any such danger .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.183

The 31. day of May , a Jury was called , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.184

and vpon iust and due proofe , according to our English lawes , they
were conuicted , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.185

and <font> Francis Driuer <$$font> and <font> Thomas Clarke <$$font>
were condemned and iudged to die , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.186

and were hanged in the Pinnace , where they did the fact :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.187

and on the other two , God shewed his iust iudgement afterwards .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.188

For <font> Edward Hilles <$$font> was eaten with Caribs or Man-eaters ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.189

and the other died COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.190

and rotted where he lay . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.191

The third day of June , wee waighed ancor COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.192

and sailed into the Red-sea , thorow the straights of <font> Mockoo
<$$font> ; which are some league ouer from shore to shore , and 18
fathome water , close aboard the Iland shore , and about 3. leagues in
length . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.193

When you are within the Straigts , there lieth a great shole , some two
leagues of into the Sea , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,21.194

and to <P_22> shunne it you must take a good breadth off ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.195

and so you shal come in no danger , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.196

and then you haue to <font> Mockoo <$$font> , some 6. league , where is
a good Road to ancor in , and faire ground , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.197

and you may ride at 14. fathome water . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.198

It is a place that is neuer without shipping , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.199

for it is a Towne of great trade of merchandize ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.200

and hath Carauans or Conuoies that come from <font> Seena <$$font> ,
from <font> Mecha <$$font> from <font> grand Cairo <$$font> , and <font>
Alexandria <$$font> and all those places . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.201

It is a City of great trading for our Commodities : as Tynne , Iron ,
Lead , Cloth , Sword blades , and all English commodities .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.202

It hath a great Bussart or Market every day in the weeke .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.203

There is great store of fruit , as Apricocks , Quinces , Dates , Grapes
abundance , Peaches , Limmons , and Plantines great store , which I much
maruelled at , in regards the people of the Countrey told vs , they had
no raine in seuen yeeres before , and yet there was very good Corne and
good store , for eighteene pence a bushell . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.204

There are Oxen , Sheepe , and Goates abundance : as an Oxe , for 3.
Dollars , a Goat for halfe a Dollar , and a Sheepe for halfe a Dollar :
as much Fish for three pence , as will suffise ten men to a meale . As
Dolphines , More-fish , Basse , Pullets , and other good Fish .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.205

The Town is <font> Arabian <$$font> , and gouerned by the Turk ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.206

and if an Arabian offend , hee is seuerely punished by their Law .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.207

For they haue Gallies and Chaines of purpose , which offenders are put
into , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.208

else were they not able to keepe them in awe and subiection .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.209

At <font> Mockoo <$$font> , wee staied from the 13. of June till the
18. of Julie , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.210

and then weighed ancor , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.211

and went out to the mouth of <font> Mockoo <$$font> , where wee lost two
ancors , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.212

and from thence wee set saile to <font> Sacatora <$$font> :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.213

and about the 5. of August , wee cast ancor ouer against the Towne of
<font> Saiob <$$font> , where the King lieth , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.214

and one of our Merchants went on shore COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.215

and gaue the King a present , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,22.216

and desired <P_23> that we might buy Water , Goats , and other prouision
, which hee would not grant , because the women of the Country were much
afraid : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.217

yet hee told him , if hee would goe to the Road some fiue leagues of ,
wee should haue any thing his Countrey would afford : where we bought
Goats , Water , aloes Socotrina , Dragons bloud , and what else the
Countrey would afford . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.218

Heere at <font> Sawb <$$font> , wee remained from the 5. day of August
, till the 18. day , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.219

and set saile with an ancor and a halfe , for <font> Cambaia <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.220

And on the 28. day of August , we came to <font> Moa <$$font> , where
one of the Countrey people told vs that for the value of 20. Dollars ,
wee might haue a Pilot to bring vs to the bar of <font> Surot <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.221

But our wilfull Master refused it , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.222

and said he would haue none . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.223

The 29. day wee set saile from thence , thinking to hit the Channell to
goe to the bar , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.224

but wee came out of 10. fathome water into 7. fathome , and into sixe
fathome and a halfe . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.225

Then we tackt about to the Westward , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.226

and came into 15. fathome , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.227

and then wee tackt about againe to the Eastward ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.228

and came into 5. fathome water . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.229

Then some of the companie asked whether the Master would goe , who
answered let her go ouer the height , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.230

and presently the ship strooke , which I presently went vp and told him
of : who turning about asked who durst say shee strooke ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.231

then presently shee strooke againe , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.232

and strooke off her Rudder , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.233

and lost it in the Sea : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.234

then wee came to an ancor , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.235

and rode there two daies , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.236

then our Skiffe split in peeces , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.237

and we had no more but our long boat to helpe our selues withall :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.238

yet wee made such shift , that wee got the peeces of our skiffe into the
ship , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.239

and the Carpenter went so roundly to worke , that they had bound her vp
together with woldings , so that when our greatest need was , shee
brought 16. men one shore . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.240

The second day of September about six of the clock at night , our ship
strooke COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.241

and began to founder , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,23.242

and hauing strooke twise , we had presently 24. inches of <P_24> water
in the Well , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.243

then we plied the pumpe , some four houres , <font> viz. <$$font> from
seuen of the clocke to eleuen of the Clocke at night ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.244

then the water encreased so fast that we were able to keepe her no
longer , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.245

but were forced to take our boats . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.246

The Merchants had some 10000. l. lying between the maine Maste and the
Stearidge , wherof the Generall bid the Company take what they would ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.247

and I thinke they tooke amongst them some 3000. pounds some hauing 100.
pounds , some 50. pounds , some 40. pounds , some more , and some
lesse , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.248

and so we left the ship , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.249

and tooke neither meat nor drinke with vs . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.250

And between twelue and one of the clocke , wee set saile to come ashore
, which was at the least 20. leagues to the Eastward ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.251

and so we sailed all that night , and the next day , without any
sustenance at all , till fiue or six of the Clocke at night , being the
third day of September , that we made the Land being a little iland ,
standing vpon the bar , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.252

and then a gust came down vpon us , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.253

and brok the midship thought {COM:sic} of our long boat , wherein were
55. persons , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.254

yet it pleased God that we recouered our Maste ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.255

and <paren> the gust ceasing <$$paren> we went ouer the barre ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.256

and got into the Riuer of <font> Gandeuee <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.257

But when the Country people saw so many men in two boats , they strooke
vp their drums COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.258

and were in Armes , taking vs to be <font> Portugales <$$font> , and
that wee came to take some of their Townes , which wee perceiuing ,
<paren> and hauing by chance a <font> Guzarat <$$font> , aboard wee sent
him ashore to tell them truly what wee were : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.259

and when they knew we were Englishmen , they directed vs to the city of
<font> Gandeuee <$$font> , where was a great Gouernour , who at our
comming thither <paren> and vnderstanding we were Englishmen <$$paren>
seemed to be very sory for our misfortunes , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.260

and welcomed vs very kindly . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.261

And there ended our trauels by Sea for that time .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.262

The fourth day of September , 1609. we came to the City of <font>
Gandeuee <$$font> , which is a very faire hauen ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,24.263

<P_25>

and great store of shipping built there , whereof some are of foure or
fiue_hundreth Tun , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.265

it standeth in a good Soile , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.266

and is gouerned by the <font> Gentiles <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.267

The 25. day of September , we tooke our iourney towards <font> Surrot
<$$font> , to a Towne called <font> Sabay <$$font> , which is a Towne ,
only consisting of Spinners and Weauers , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.268

and there is much Calico made , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.269

and from thence wee came to <font> Surrate <$$font> , where we found one
<font> William Finch <$$font> an English Merchant , and seruant to
Master <font> Iohnson <$$font> in <font> Cheapside <$$font> , who very
curteously went to the Gouernour , and acquainted him with our distresse
, who <paren> as hereafter we found it to be true <$$paren> was bribed
by the <font> Portugals <$$font> , which told him we were a kinde of
turbule~t people that would make mutinies and sow ciuill discention in
the towne , and so aduenture to surprise the Towne , whereupon we were
put into a Monastery , where we liued three daies ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.270

nor could this suffice , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.271

but we were remooued to a great house , being a <font> Gentiles <$$font>
house , where we lay 14. daies ; in which time , <paren> by the good
aduise of the said <font> William Finch <$$font> <$$paren> we made
prouision of Coaches , Horses , and other things to trauell to the great
<font> Mogol <$$font> , & certifie him of our great distresse and
misfortunes . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.272

This is a city of great fame & Antiquity , being walled about with free
stone , and a strong Garrison lying therin , and a City of great trading
for Merchandize , and great store of shipping , wherof some are of 500.
Tun , which they can@ @not lade at the Town but carry them ouer the bar
with their ballance only , & there lade the~ , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.273

but for their smaller shipping they lade them at the Town ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.274

and so goe ouer the bar , where at a high water , they have 16. foot
water . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.275

The 23. of September , we tooke our iourney from <font> Surrat <$$font>
to <font> Agra <$$font> , with our Generall and 52. men , with 21.
Coaches of our owne , and some others being hired , and 19. horses to a
great city called <font> Bramport <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.276

and the first two nights we lay in the fields .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,25.277

The 26. day wee came to <font> Nawbon <$$font> where Sugar groweth in
abundance , with cottone and all maner <P_26> of graine , as Rice ,
Wheat , Beanes , Pease , Cheecore , Lanteechoes , Motte , &c.
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.278

For the Countrey is so plentifull , that you may haue a gallon of milk
for a halfe penny , a Hen for three halfpence , & 16. Egs for a penny .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.279

From <font> Gandeuee <$$font> to <font> Sabay <$$font> is 12. course ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.280

& from <font> Sabay <$$font> to <font> Surrot <$$font> is 12. course ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.281

and euery two course is three English miles . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.282

The 27. day , we trauelled 12. course COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.283

and came to a City of the <font> Bannions <$$font> called <font>
Daytaotote <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.284

and there Master <font> Reuet <$$font> one of our Merchants died .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.285

This City could neuer be conquered by the great <font> Mogol <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.286

but yeelded vpon composition , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.287

and still holdeth his title of King of the <font> Bannians <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.288

and at this City we staied two daies . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.289

This City yeeldes great store of Drugs , fine Pentathoes and Calico
Lawnes . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.290

The first of October we trauelled 12. course ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.291

and lay in the fields . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.292

The second day we trauelled 14. course to a great City of the <font>
Bannians <$$font> called <font> Netherberry <$$font> , where is a great
<font> Basar <$$font> or Market , and all maner of brasen wares to be
sold , as Pots , Kettles , Candlesticks , and Caldrons of foure foot
long , Shirts of Male , Swords and Bucklers , Lances , Horses in Armour
of Arrowe_proofe , Camels , and all maner of beasts .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.293

There is also great store of Cotten wools , Cotten yarne , Pentathoes ,
Callico Lawnes , Shashes for Turbants for their heades , Limmons ,
Potatoes , three pound for a penny , and all maner of Drugs .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.294

And surely cloth would be a very vendible commodity there :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.295

for course felt is there extreame deare . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.296

Also Gold and Siluer is there very plentifull ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.297

and these are very good people to deale withall .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.298

The third day we trauelled ten course , to a small Towne of Husbandry
called <font> Sailote <$$font> , where is also great store of Sugar ,
and fruits of all sorts . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,26.299

The next day we trauelled 18 course to a Garrison <P_27> Towne called
<font> Saddisee <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.300

and there is the Riuer of <font> Tyndee <$$font> which runneth to <font>
Surrat <$$font> , wherin is great store of Fish of all sorts ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.301

and this Riuer diuideth the confines , of the <font> Bannians <$$font>
and the <font> Guzarates <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.302

The <font> Bannians <$$font> are a strange people in their beliefe ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.303

and honour God in a strange fashion , <font> viz. <$$font> in pictures
of stone , hanging their beades on the heades of the pictures ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.304

and then with their faces towards the sun doe worship it , saying , that
all their comforts proceede from it . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.305

And yet I saw more then this , which was a Cow adorned with a veste of
gold and many Jewels , her head bedecked with garlands and flowers ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.306

and then being brought to a buriall place , where they doe vse to make
Sermons , they kisse her feet and teats , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.307

and worship her , that it grieued mee to see the fond superstition , and
abhominable idolatry . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.308

And asking why they did it , they answered , that shee was the mother of
beasts , and brought them , milke , butter , cheese , and the Oxe to
till the ground , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.309

and lastly , her hide did make leather to make them shooes .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.310

Moreouer , they say , she is blest by the Mother of god , to be honoured
aboue all beasts . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.311

And so leauing the <font> Bannians <$$font> , wee crossed the Riuer to
<font> Tindee <$$font> into the <font> Gentiles <$$font> Countrey .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.312

Now at <font> Saddisee <$$font> , we being many , some in Coaches , some
on Horseback , they thought we had come to take their Town ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.313

and did shut their gates , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.314

& bent their Ordinance vpon vs . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.315

But our General sent our Linguist or Interpeter to certifie them , what
wee were , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.316

and then the Gouernour opened the Gates , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.317

and came himself to entertaine vs with great curtesie and state .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.318

Yet that night we lay by the Riuer side , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.319

and the next day being the fifth of October , wee came into the Towne ,
where we lay that night : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.320

And the next day we trauelled some 12. Course ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.321

and lay at a Monastery : COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,27.322

and the seuenth day wee went to the great City of <font> Bramport
<$$font> where the great Generall called the <font> Can Canawe <$$font>
<P_28> liueth , this being his Garrison or resting place when he is out
of the warres , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,28.323

and on the twelfth of October , he came from the warres with 1500.
Elephants , 30000. Horses , 10000. Camels , 3000. Drumdaries .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,28.324

The Elephant serueth in the Field with a small tower of wood or timber
vpon his back , wheron is placed 4. peeces of brasse as big as Rabnets
, and 10. men very artifically placed in the said Tower , with bows and
arrowes , and to discharge those peeces . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,28.325

The Elephants skin is musket_proofe , vnlesse it be on his face and
belly , COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,28.326

and he is a beast of so great vnderstanding , that he is ruled and
gouerned by word of mouth , vnderstanding what his keeper commandeth him
to doe . COVERTE-1612-E2-P1,28.327

