<BEGIN_cromwell-1534-e1-p1>

<P_3.2,181>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXC_CROMWELL_TO_WOLSEY>

{COM:rest_of_heading_omitted}

<P_3.2,182>

Please it your Grace to be advertised , that after the receipt of your
Lettres dated at Southwell on Saynt Laurence day , I perceyved how that
your <P_3.2,183> Grace remayned in som displeasure and anxietie of mynde
, for that I , by my Lettres , had before certefied you of the fynding
certen offices concerning your busshopriche of York , the ffynding
whereof , as I perceyve by your lettres , ye do suppose should be moche
to your dishonour and detriment ; ffor the which intent that your Grace
may put yourself in repose and quietacion of mynde , I have sent unto
you this berer , who shall at length declare unto you , besids the
demonstracion of the copies of such offices as be drawen , for that
purpose , that the ffynding of the said offices , <paren> savyng onelie
that in the preamble of the same there is touched the conviction of your
Grace in the Premunire , which all the World alredie knoweth , <$$paren>
shal@ @be for your good onlie , proffit , and availe ;
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,183.6

and yet your pardon and restitucion stand in good and perfite effecte :
so that your Grace shall have no nede nether to be in fere of losse of
any of your spirituall or temporall goods , or to be troubeled for the
same ; ne also to bee put to any new sute in the obteyning of any other
pardon or restitucon . CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,183.7

And if {COM:sic} in case your said pardon and restitucion were in any
parte insufficient , I assure your Grace I know that the Kings Highnes
wold it should be made as good as by any counsaill it could be devised .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,183.8

And doubt ye not but his Highnes is your gracyous and benigne Sovereigne
Lorde , and wold in no wise that ye should be greved , molested , or
troubeled . <P_3.2,184> Wherfore it may please your Grace to quiet your
self and to take the fynding of these offices pacientlie ,
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,184.9

and uppon the retourne of the same , there shal@ @be such orders taken
that your Grace shall not be interrupted in the receyving of your
revenues , ne otherwise be molested in any maner case for any new sute .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,184.10

As touching your Colledges the offices shal@ @be founde : howbeit the
Deane , and such other as have sued to the Kings Highnes , have had
veray good answer , wherof I think they have certefied your Grace or
this tyme . CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,184.11

As touching the M=l= marks of the revenues of Wynchester , I doubt not
but it shal@ @be obteyned at the audite .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,184.12

And concerning Batyrsey it may please your Grace that such things as ye
have sent me the copies of , may be sent hither under seale ,
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,184.13

for they woll trust no scrowes , CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,184.14

and also that serche may be made for Busshop Bothes will concerning the
same . CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,184.15

Strangwissh contynually cryeth , CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,184.16

and maketh exclamaco~n in the Courte of you , insomoch that the Lords of
the Counsaill have determyned to wryte unto you in that behalf ,
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,184.17

wold to our Lorde your Grace were rid of that man .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,184.18

As concerning the Prebend of Witwang doubt ye <P_3.2,185> not , but in
that all thing is , and shal@ @be , ordered to your good contentacion .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P1,3.2,185.19

{COM:continued_in_cromwell.e1.p2}

