<BEGIN_dell-1688-e3-p1>

<P_350>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCCLXXXVII_MR_DELL_TO_..._UPON_THE_ARRIVAL_OF_KING_WILLIAM_IN_LONDON>

{COM:rest_of_editorial_material_omitted}

<P_351>

London DELL-1688-E3-P1,351.6

18 Dec. 1688 . DELL-1688-E3-P1,351.7

Sir Common experience tells us that when people earnestly desire any
thing , they are apt to fancy the success will be answerable to their
expectation ; which is the reason why the time of the Prince of Orange@
@'s coming has been so often positively determined ;
DELL-1688-E3-P1,351.8

but I can now certainly assure you that he arrived at S=t=. James's
about two a clock this afternoon ; tho' I will not pretend to describe
the Manner of his Entrance , it being as privately as with respect to
his attendance was possible : being met , out of Town , by the Sherifs
of London and Middlesex , who surrendered their white staves to his
Highness , which were immediately returned to them .
DELL-1688-E3-P1,351.9

It will be unnecessary to acquaint you that he was preceded and guarded
by a numerous company of his army , and accompanied by multitudes of all
ranks on horseback ; these being inseperable consequences of such
occurrences ; DELL-1688-E3-P1,351.10

and the excessive rain which fell this day , I may almost say , without
intermission , could not detain the generality within doors ,
notwithstanding the streets by reason of the extraordinary crowd
restrained them from an absolute liberty , so powerful is the
concupiscence of satisfying ones curiosity . DELL-1688-E3-P1,351.11

You may imagine it was no unsurprising spectacle to see <paren> if I may
so phrase it <$$paren> a <P_352> foreign enemy in an hostile manner
march through the metropolis of the Kingdom with no other diversion than
the repeated huzzas and loud acclamations of the inhabitants , who
shewed no other concern for the Revolution but what might express their
satisfaction and approbation . DELL-1688-E3-P1,352.12

In a word all things conspired to testify their joy on this occasion .
DELL-1688-E3-P1,352.13

The King being prevented <paren> as I formerly hinted <$$paren> from
withdrawing himself as he intended on Sunday evening , returned in his
Coach , preceded by several gentlemen bare_headed on horse-back , and
followed by some of his Guards sent by the Lords of the Council and
Peers for that purpose ; DELL-1688-E3-P1,352.14

came back to White Hall through the City , not without some
demonstration of rejoycing expressed by bonfires and shoutings ,
DELL-1688-E3-P1,352.15

and was yesterday publicly at Mass , solemnized in his Chapel by some of
the Spanish ambassadors priests , where there was an unexpected
confluence of Papists , insomuch that it was difficult to come near his
person ; of which the Prince having intelligence , sent the Lords
Macclesfield and Delamere with a very sharp Letter to his Majesty ,
signifying that he expected his immediate departure to Ham <paren> I
suppose in Essex <$$paren> ; DELL-1688-E3-P1,352.16

nor were the Peers wanting in expressing their resentment of that action
in so improper a conjuncture : DELL-1688-E3-P1,352.17

but the King desiring to know if he might not be permitted to retire
whither <P_353> he pleased , the Lords after some debate assented to his
liberty , whereupon this morning he went in his barge to Gravesend
attended , in boats , by about a_hundred of the Princes Foot :
two_hundred of his Horse being likewise sent to meet and convey him to
Rochester : all the Kings soldiers <paren> if they may be so accounted
<$$paren> being commanded to places assigned by the Prince , some
distance from the City . The Dutchmen mounting the guard at Whitehall
and the other usual places . DELL-1688-E3-P1,353.18

The Earl of Feversham who went from the King to Windsor yesterday , to
invite the Prince hither , was detained for High Treason .
DELL-1688-E3-P1,353.19

Amongst the many persons now in custody , Sir Roger le Strange is not of
the least eminency . DELL-1688-E3-P1,353.20

I could not write to you last Post as I promised ,
DELL-1688-E3-P1,353.21

and can now only add that I am Sir , Yours &c. DELL-1688-E3-P1,353.22

