<BEGIN_deloney-1597-e2-p1>

<P_5>

<heading>

The Most Pleasant and delectable Historie of Iohn Winchcombe , <font>
otherwise <$$font> called <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newberie :
<$$font> DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,5.4

and first of his <font> loue and pleasant life . <$$font>
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,5.5

CHAPTER I . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,5.6

<$$heading>

In the daies of King Henery the eight that most noble and victorious
Prince , in the beginning of his reigne , <font> Iohn Winchcomb ,
<$$font> a broad_cloth Weauer , dwelt in <font> Newberie , <$$font> a
towne in <font> Barkshire : <$$font> who for that he was a man of a
merry disposition , and honest conuersation , was wondrous wel-beloued
of Rich and Poore , especiallie because in euery place where hee came ,
hee would spend his money with the best , and was not at any time found
a churle of his purse . Wherefore beeing so good a companion , he was
called of old and young <font> Iack of Newbery : <$$font> a man so
generally well knowne in all his countrey for his good fellowship , that
hee could goe in no place but hee found acquaintance ; by meanes whereof
<font> Iack <$$font> could no sooner get a Crowne , but straight hee
found meanes to spend it : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,5.8

yet had hee euer this care , that hee would alwaies keepe himselfe in
comely and decent apparell , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,5.9

neither at any time would hee bee ouercome in drinke , but so discreetly
behaue himselfe with honest mirth , and pleasant conceits , that hee was
euery Gentlemans companion . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,5.10

After that <font> Iacke <$$font> had long led this pleasant life ,
beeing <paren> though hee were but poore <$$paren> in good estimation ;
it was his Masters chance to die , and his Dame to bee a Widow , who was
a very comely auncient Woman , and of reasonable Wealth . Wherefore she
hauing a good opinion of her man <font> Iohn , <$$font> committed vnto
his gouerment {COM:sic} the guiding of all hir Workefolkes , for the
space of three yeares together : In which time shee found him so
carefull and diligent , that all things came forward and prospered
wondrous well . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,5.11

No man could intice him from his businesse all the weeke , by all the
intreaty <P_6> they could vse : Insomuch that in the end some of the
wild youths of the Towne , began to deride and scoffe at him .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.12

Doubtlesse quoth one , I doubt some female spirit hath inchaunted <font>
Iack <$$font> to hir treadles , and coniured him within the compasse of
his Loome , that hee can stir no further . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.13

You say truth quoth <font> Iack , <$$font> DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.14

and if you haue the leisure to stay till the Charme bee done , the space
of sixe dayes and fiue nights , you shall find mee ready to put on my
holy_daie apparell , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.15

and on Sunday morning for your paines I will giue you a pot of Ale ouer
against the Maypole . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.16

Nay quoth another , I@ @le lay my life , that as the <font> Salamander
<$$font> can@ @not liue without the fire , so <font> Iack <$$font> can@
@not liue without the smel of his Dames smocke .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.17

And I maruell quoth <font> Iacke <$$font> , that you beeing of the
nature of the Herring <paren> which so soone as hee is taken out of the
Sea streight dyes <$$paren> can liue so long with your nose out of the
pot . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.18

Nay <font> Iacke <$$font> leaue thy testing quoth another ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.19

and goe along with vs , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.20

thou shalt not stay a iot . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.21

And because I will not stay , nor make you a lyer <paren> quoth <font>
Iacke <$$font> <$$paren> I@ @le keepe me here still :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.22

and so farewell . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.23

Thus then they departed , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.24

and after they had for halfe_a_score times tried him to this intent ,
and saw hee would not be led by their lure , they left him to his owne
will . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.25

Neuerthelesse , euery Sunday in the afternoone , and euery Holy_day ,
<font> Iacke <$$font> would keepe them companie , and bee as merrie as a
Pie , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.26

and hauing still good store of money in his purse one or other would
euer be borrowing of him , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.27

but neuer could hee get pennie of it againe : which when <font> Iack
<$$font> perceiued , he would neuer after carry aboue twelue pence at
once in his purse , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.28

and that being spent , hee would streight returne home merily , taking
his leaue of the company in this sort . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,6.29

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_7>

Thus was <font> Iacks <$$font> good gouernment and discretion noted of
the best and substantiallest men of the Towne , so that it wrought his
great commendations , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.32

and his dame thought herselfe not a little blest to haue such a seruant
, that was so obedient vnto her , and so carefull for her profit ;
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.33

for she had neuer a Prentise that yeelded her more obedience then hee
did , or was more dutifull : so that by his good example , he did as
much good as by his diligent labour and trauaile : which his singular
vertue beeing noted by the widow , shee began to cast very good
countenance to her man <font> Iohn , <$$font> and to use very much talk
with him in priuate : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.34

and first by way of communication , shee would tell vnto him what suters
shee had , and the great offers they made her , what gifts they sent her
, and the great affection they bare her , crauing his opinion in the
matter . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.35

When <font> Iacke <$$font> found the fauour to bee his dames Secretarie
, he thought it an extraordinary kindnesse : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.36

and ghessing by the yarne it would prooue a good Web , began to question
with his dame in this sort . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.37

Although it becommeth not mee your seruant to prie into your secrets ,
nor to bee busie about matters of your loue : yet for_so_much as it hath
pleased you to use conference with mee in those causes , I pray you let
me intreat you to know their names that bee your sutors , and of what
profession they bee . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.38

Marie <font> Iohn <$$font> saith she that you shall ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.39

and I pray thee take a cushion DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.40

and sit downe by mee . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.41

Dame quoth hee I thanke you , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.42

but there is no reason I should sit on a cushion till I haue deserued it
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.43

If thou hast not thou mightest haue done said shee :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.44

but faint souldiers neuer find fauour . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.45

Iohn replied , that makes mee indeed to want fauour :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.46

for I durst not trie Maydens because they seeme coy , nor Wiues for
feare of their Husbands , nor Widowes , doubting their disdainfullnesse
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.47

Tush <font> Iohn <$$font> <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> hee that feares
and doubts Womankind , can@ @not bee counted Mankind :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.48

and take this for a principle , all things are not as they seeme :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,7.49

but let vs leaue this and proceed to <P_8> our former matter .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.50

My first sutor dwels at <font> Wallingford , <$$font> by Trade a Tanner
, a man of good wealth DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.51

and his name is <font> Craftes , <$$font> of comely personage , and very
good behauiour , a Widower , well thought of amongst his neighbours :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.52

hee hath proper land , a faire house and well furnished , and neuer a
childe in the world , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.53

and hee loues me passing well . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.54

Why then Dame quoth <font> Iohn , <$$font> you were best to haue him .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.55

Is that your opinion quoth shee ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.56

now trust me , so it is not mine . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.57

For I finde two speciall reasons to the contrary :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.58

the one is , that hee being ouerworne in yeares makes mee ouerloth to
loue him : and the other , that I know one neerer hand .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.59

Beleeue me dame <paren> quoth <font> Iack <$$font> <$$paren> I perceiue
store is no sore , and profered ware is worse by ten in the hundred than
that which is sought : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.60

but I pray ye who is your second sutor ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.61

<font> Iohn <$$font> quoth shee , it may seeme immodesty in me to bewray
my loue secrets : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.62

yet seeing thy discretion , and being perswaded of thy secrecy , I will
shew thee : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.63

the other is a man of middle yeares , but yet a Batcheler , by
occupation a Taylor , dwelling at <font> Hungerford : <$$font> by report
a very good husband , such a one as hath crownes good store ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.64

and to mee he professes much good will , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.65

for his person he may please any woman . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.66

I dame quoth <font> Iohn <$$font> , because he pleaseth you .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.67

Not so said she , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.68

for my eies are vnpartiall Iudges in that case : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.69

and albeit my opinion may be contrary to others , if his Art deceiue not
my eye-sight , hee is worthie of a good wife , both for his person and
conditions . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.70

Then trust mee Dame <paren> quoth <font> Iohn <$$font> <$$paren>
for_so_much as you are without doubt of your selfe that you will proue a
good wife , and so well perswaded of him , I should thinke you could
make no better a choice . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.71

Truly <font> Iohn <$$font> <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> there be also
two reasons that mooue me not to like of him : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.72

the one , that being so long a ranger , he would at home be a stranger ;
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.73

and the other , that I like better of one nearer hand .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.74

Who is that , quoth <font> Iacke <$$font> ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.75

Saith shee , the third Suter is the Parson of <font> Spinhome-land ,
<$$font> who hath a proper liuing , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.76

hee is of holy conuersation and good estimation , whose affection to me
is great . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,8.77

<P_9>

No doubt Dame <paren> quoth <font> Iohn <$$font> <$$paren> you may doe
wondrous well with him , where you shall haue no care but to serue God
and to make ready his meats . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.79

O <font> Iohn <$$font> <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> the flesh and the
spirit agrees not ; DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.80

for hee will bee so bent to his books , that he will haue little minde
of his bed : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.81

for one moneths studying for a Sermon , will make him forget his wife a
whole yeer . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.82

Truely Dame <paren> quoth Iohn <$$paren> I must needes speake in his
behalfe , and the rather for that he is a man of the Church , and your
neere neighbour , to whom <paren> as I guesse <$$paren> you beare the
best affection : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.83

I doe not thinke that hee will bee so much bound to his booke , or
subiect to the spirit , but that he will remember a woman at home or
abroad . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.84

Well <font> Iohn <$$font> <paren> quoth she <$$paren> I wis my minde is
not that way , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.85

for I like better of one nearer hand . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.86

No maruell <paren> quoth <font> Iacke <$$font> <$$paren> you are so
peremptorie seeing you haue so much choice : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.87

but I pray ye Dame <paren> quoth he <$$paren> let me know this fortunate
man that is so highly placed in your fauour ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.88

<font> Iohn <$$font> <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> they are worthy to
knowe nothing , that can@ @not keepe something : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.89

that man <paren> I tell thee <$$paren> must goe namelesse :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.90

for he is Lord of my loue , and King of my desires :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.91

there is neither Tanner , Taylor , nor Parson may compare with him ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.92

his presence is a preseruatiue to my health , his sweete smiles my
hearts solace , and his words heauenly musike to my eares .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.93

Why then Dame <paren> quoth Iohn <$$paren> for your bodies health , your
hearts ioy , and your eares delight , delay not the time ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.94

but entertaine him with a kisse , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.95

make his bed next yours , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.96

and chop vp the match in the morning . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.97

Well , quoth shee , I perceiue thy consent is quickly got to anie ,
hauing no care how I am matcht so I bee matcht : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.98

I wis , I wis I could not let thee goe so lightly , beeing loath that
any one should haue thee , except I could loue her as well as my selfe .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.99

I thanke you for your kindnesse and good will good Dame quoth hee ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.100

but it is not wisedome for a young man that can scantly keepe himselfe ,
to take a wife : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.101

therefore I hould it the best way to leade a single life :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.102

for I haue heard say , that manie sorrowes followe mariage , especially
where want remaines : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.103

and beside , it is a hard matter to finde a constant woman :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.104

for as young maides are fickle , so are old women iealous :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.105

the one a griefe too common , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.106

the other a torment intolerable . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,9.107

<P_10>

What <font> Iohn <$$font> <paren> quoth she <$$paren> consider that
maidens ficklenesse proceedes of vaine fancies , but old womens
iealousie of superabounding loue , and therefore the more to bee borne
withall . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.109

But Dame , quoth hee , many are iealous without cause :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.110

for is it sufficient for their mistrusting natures to take exceptions at
a shadow , at a word , at a looke , at a smile , nay at the twinkle of
an eye , which neither man nor woman is able to expell ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.111

I knewe a woman that was readie to hang her selfe , for seeing but her
husbands shirt hang on a hedge with her maides smocke .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.112

I grant that this furie may haunt some , quoth shee ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.113

yet there be many other that complaine not without great cause .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.114

Why , is there any cause that should moue iealousie , quoth <font> Iohn
<$$font> ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.115

I by S. <font> Mary <$$font> is there quoth she :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.116

for would it not grieue a woman <paren> being one euery way able to
delight her husband <$$paren> to see him forsake her , despise and
contemne her , being neuer so merrie as when he is in other company ,
sporting abroad from morning till noone , from noone till night ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.117

and when he comes to bed , if hee turne to his wife , it is in such
solemnesse , and wearisome drowsie lamenesse , that it brings rather
lothsomnesse than any delight : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.118

can you then blame a woman in this case to bee angrie and displeased ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.119

I@ @le tell you what , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.120

among brute beasts it is a griefe intolerable :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.121

for I heard my Grandame tell that the Bel-weather of her flocke fancying
one of the Eawes aboue the rest , and seeing <font> Gratis <$$font> the
Shepheard abusing her , in abhominable sort <paren> subverting the lawe
of Nature <$$paren> could by no meanes beare that abuse ;
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.122

but watching opportunity for reuenge , on a time found the said
Shepheard sleeping in the field , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.123

and suddenly ranne against him in such violent sort , that by the force
of his wreathen hornes , hee beat the braines out of the Shepheards head
and slewe him . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.124

If then a Sheepe could not endure that iniurie , thinke not that women
are so sheepish to suffer it . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.125

Beleeue mee <paren> quoth <font> Iohn <$$font> <$$paren> if euery
horne-maker should be so plagued by a horned beast , there should bee
less hornes made in <font> Newberie <$$font> by many in a yeare .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.126

But Dame <paren> quoth hee <$$paren> to make an end of this prattle ,
because it is an argument too deepe to be discussed betweene you and I ,
you shal heare me sing an ould song , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.127

and so wee will depart to supper . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,10.128

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_11>

Well said Iohn <paren> quoth she <$$paren> DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,11.131

thy song is not so sure , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,11.132

but thy voice is as sweet : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,11.133

but seeing the time agrees with our stomackes , though loth yet will wee
giue ouer for this time , and betake our selues to our suppers .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,11.134

Then calling the rest of her seruants , they fell to their meate merrily
, DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,11.135

and after supper , the Goodwife went abroad for her recreation , to
walke awhile with one of her neighbours . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,11.136

And in the meane space <font> Iohn <$$font> got him vp into his chamber
, DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,11.137

and there began to meditate on this matter , bethinking with himselfe
what hee were best to doe : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,11.138

for well he perceiued that his Dames affection was great towarde him :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,11.139

knowing therefore the womans disposition , and withall that her estate
was reasonable good , and considering beside that he should finde a
house ready furnished , seruants readie taught , and all other things
for his trade necessarie , he thought it best not <P_12> to let slip
that good occasion , least hee should neuer come to the like .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.140

But againe , when hee considered her yeares to bee vnfitting to his
youth , and that she that sometime had beene his Dame , would <paren>
perhaps <$$paren> disdaine to be gouerned by him that had beene her
poore seruant , that it would proue but a badde bargaine , doubting many
inconueniences that might growe thereby , hee therefore resolued to be
silent rather than to proceed further : wherefore hee got him straight
to bed , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.141

and the next morning settled him selfe close to his businesse .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.142

His Dame comming home and hearing that her man was gone to bed , tooke
that night but small rest , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.143

and early in the morning hearing him vp at his worke merrily singing ,
shee by and by arose , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.144

and in seemely sort attyring her selfe , she came into the worke-shop ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.145

and sat her downe to make quills . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.146

Quoth <font> Iohn , <$$font> Good morow Dame , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.147

how do you to_day ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.148

God a mercie <font> Iohn <$$font> <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> euen as
well as I may : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.149

for I was sore troubled in my Dreames . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.150

Mee thought two Doues walked together in a corne field , the one <paren>
as it were <$$paren> in communication with the other , without regard of
pecking vp any thing to sustaine themselues : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.151

and after they had with many nods spent some time to their content ,
they both fell hard , with their pretie bils , to pecke vp the scattered
corne , left by the wearie Reapers hand . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.152

At length <paren> finding themselues satisfied <$$paren> it chaunced
another Pigion to light in that place , with whome one of the first
Pigions at length kept companie : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.153

and after , returning to the place where she left her first companion ,
perceiued he was not there , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.154

shee kindly searching vp and downe the high stubble to finde him ,
lighted at length on a hogge fast asleep , wherewith me thought the
poore Doue was so dismaid , that presently shee fell downe in a trance .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.155

I seeing her legges faile , and her wings quiuer , yeelding her selfe to
death , moued with pittie ranne vnto her , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.156

and thinking to take vp the Pigion , mee thought I had in my hands my
owne heart , wherein me thought an arrow stucke so deepe , that the
bloud trickled downe the shaft , and lay upon the feathers like the
siluer_pearled deawe on the greene grasse , which made me to weepe most
bitterly . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,12.157

But presently mee thought there came one to me crowned like a Queene ,
who tould mee my heart would die , except in time I got some of that
sleeping hogges grease to heale the wounds thereof . Whereupon I ranne
in all haste <P_13> to the Hog with my heart bleeding in my hand , who
<paren> mee thought <$$paren> grunted at mee in most churlish sort , and
vanisht out of my sight . Whereupon comming straite home , me thought I
found this Hog rustling among my Loomes , wherewith I presently awaked ,
sodainely after midnight , beeing all in a sweate and very ill :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.158

and I am sure you could not choose but heare mee groane .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.159

Trust mee Dame I heard you not <paren> quoth <font> Iohn <$$font>
<$$paren> I was so sound asleepe . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.160

And thus <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> a woman may die in the night
before you will haue the care to see what shee ailes , or aske what she
lackes . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.161

But truly Iohn <paren> quoth she <$$paren> all is one ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.162

for if thou shouldest haue come , thou couldest not haue got in ,
because my chamber door was lockt : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.163

but while I liue this shall teach mee wit , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.164

for henceforth I will haue no other lock but a latch , till I am married
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.165

Then Dame <paren> quoth he <$$paren> I perceiue though you bee curious
in your choise , yet at length you will marrie .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.166

I truly <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> so thou wilt not hinder me .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.167

Who I quoth <font> Iohn <$$font> ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.168

on my faith Dame not for a_hundred pounds , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.169

but rather will further you to the uttermost of my power .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.170

Indeede <paren> quoth she <$$paren> thou hast no reason to shew any
discurtesie to me in that matter , although some of our neighbours do
not stick to say , that I am sure to thee alreadie .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.171

If it were so <paren> quoth <font> Iohn <$$font> <$$paren> there is no
cause to denie it , or to bee ashamed thereof , knowing my selfe farre
vnworthie of so high a fauour . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.172

Well let this talke rest quoth shee , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.173

and take there thy quils , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.174

for it is time for me to goe to market . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.175

Thus the matter rested for two or three dayes , in which space she daily
deuised which way shee might obtaine her desire , which was to marrie
her man . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.176

Many things came in her head , and sundrie sleights in her minde ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.177

but none of them did fit her fancie , so that shee became wondrous sad ,
and as ciuill as the nine <font> Sibbels <$$font> ;
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,13.178

and in this melancholie humour she continued three weekes , or a moneth
, till at last it was her lucke upon a <font> Bartholmew <$$font> day
<paren> hauing a Fayre in the towne <$$paren> to spie her man <font>
Iohn <$$font> giue a paire of Gloues to a proper maide for a Fayring ,
which the maiden with a bashfull modestie kindly accepted , and requited
it with a kisse : which kindled <P_14> in her an inward iealousie :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.179

but notwithstanding very discreetly shee couered it ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.180

and closely past along vnspied of her man or the maid .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.181

Shee had not gone farre but shee met with one of her sutors namely the
Taylor , who was verie fine and briske in his apparell ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.182

and needes hee would bestow the wine upon the Widow :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.183

and after some faint deniall , meeting with a Gossip of hers , to the
Tauerne they went , which was more curtesie than the Taylor could euer
get of her before , shewing her selfe verie pleasant and merrie :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.184

and finding her in such a pleasing humour , the Tailor after a new quart
of wine renewed his old sute : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.185

the Widow with patience heard him , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.186

and gently answered , that in respect of his great good will long time
borne vnto her , as also in regard of his gentlenesse , cost and
curtesie , at that present bestowed , shee would not flatly denie him .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.187

Therefore <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> seeing this is not a place to
conclude of such matters ; if I may intreate you to come to my poore
house on Thursday next , you shall be heartily welcome , and be further
satisfied of my minde : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.188

and thus preferred to a touch of her lips , hee payed the shot
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.189

and departed . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.190

The Taylor was scant out of sight , when shee met with the Tanner : who
albeit hee was aged , yet lustily he saluted her ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.191

and to the wine she must , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.192

there was no nay . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.193

The Widow seeing his importunacie , calles her gossip ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.194

and along they walked together . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.195

The olde man called for wine plentie , and the best cheere in the house
: DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.196

and in hartie manner hee biddes the Widow welcome .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.197

They had not sitten long , but in comes a noyse of Musitions in tawnie
coates , who <paren> putting off their caps <$$paren> asked if they
would haue any Musicke . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.198

The Widow answered no , they were merrie enough .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.199

Tut quoth the oldeman , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.200

let vs heare good fellowes what you can doe , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.201

and play mee <font> The beginning of the World . <$$font>
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.202

Alas , quoth the widow , you had more need to harken to the ending of
the world . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.203

Why Widowe , quoth hee , I tell thee the beginning of the world was the
begetting of Children : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.204

and if you find mee faultie in that occupation , turne mee out of thy
bed for a bungler , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.205

and then send for the Sexton . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.206

Hee had no sooner spoke the word , but the Parson of Speen with his
corner cap , popt in at the doore , who seeing the widow sitting at the
table craued pardon and came in . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,14.207

<P_15>

Quoth shee , for want of the Sexton , heere is the Priest if you need
him . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.209

Mary <paren> quoth the Tanner <$$paren> in good time ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.210

for by this meanes wee need not goe farre to bee married .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.211

Sir quoth the Parson , I shall doe my best in conuenient place .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.212

Wherein , quoth the Tanner ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.213

To wed her my selfe quoth the Parson . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.214

Nay soft , sayde the Widow , one Swallow makes not a Sommer , nor one
meeting a marriage : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.215

as I lighted on you vnlookt_for , so came I hither vnprouided for the
purpose . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.216

I trust quoth the Tanner , you came not without your eyes to see , your
tongue to speake , your eares to heare , your hands to feele , nor your
legs to goe . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.217

I brought my eyes , quoth she , to discerne colours , my tongue to say
No to questions I like not , my hands to thrust from me the things that
I loue not , my eares to judge twixt flatterie and friendship , and my
feet to run from such as would wrong me . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.218

Why then quoth the Parson by your gentle abiding in this place , it is
euident that here are none but those you like and loue .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.219

God forbid I should hate my friends <paren> quoth the widow <$$paren>
whom I take all these in this place to bee . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.220

But , there be diuers sorts of loues , quoth the Parson .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.221

You say truth , quoth the Widow : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.222

I loue your selfe for your profession , and my friend the Tanner , for
his curtesie and kindnesse , and the rest for their good company .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.223

Yet <paren> quoth the Parson <$$paren> for the explaining of your loue ,
I pray you drinke to them you loue best in the company .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.224

Why <paren> quoth the Tanner <$$paren> haue you any hope in her loue ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.225

Beleeue me <paren> saith the Parson <$$paren> as much as another .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.226

Why then Parson sit downe , said the Tanner : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.227

for , you that are equall with mee in desire , shall surely be halfe
with mee in the shotte : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.228

and so Widow , on Gods name fulfill the Parsons request .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.229

Seeing <paren> quoth the widow <$$paren> you are so pleasantly bent , if
my courtesie might not breede contention betweene you , and that I may
haue your fauour to shewe my fancie , I will fulfill your request .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.230

Quoth the Parson , I am pleased howsoeuer it bee .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.231

And I , quoth the Tanner . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.232

Why then <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> with this cup of Claret wine and
Sugar , I heartily drinke to the Ministrels boy .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,15.233

<P_16>

Why , is it hee you loue best , quoth the Parson ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.235

I haue reason , sayd shee , to like and loue them best , that will bee
least offended with my doings . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.236

Nay Widow <paren> quoth they <$$paren> wee meant you should drinke to
him whom you loued best in the way of marriage .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.237

Quoth the Widow , you should haue sayd so at first :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.238

but , to tell you my opinion , it is small discretion for a woman to
disclose her secret affection in an open assembly :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.239

therefore , if to that purpose you spake , let mee intreat you both to
come home to my house on Thursday next , where you shall be heartily
welcome , and there be fully resolued of my mind :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.240

and so , with thankes at this time , I@ @le take my leaue .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.241

The shot being paid , and the Musitians pleased , they all departed ,
the Tanner to <font> Wallingford , <$$font> the Parson to <font> Speen ,
<$$font> and the widow to her own house : where in her wonted solemnes
shee settled her selfe to her businesse . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.242

Against Thursday shee drest her house fine and braue ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.243

and set her selfe in her best apparell : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.244

the Taylor nothing forgetting his promise sent to the Widowe a good fat
Pigge , and a Goose . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.245

The Parson beeing as mindfull as hee , sent to her house a couple of fat
Rabbets and a Capon : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.246

and the Tanner came himselfe DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.247

and brought a good shoulder of Mutton , and halfe_a_dozen Chickens ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.248

beside hee brought a good gallon of Sacke , and halfe a pound of the
best sugar . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.249

The Widowe receiuing this good meate , set her maide to dresse it
incontinent , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.250

and when dinner time drew neere , the Table was couered , and euery
other thing prouided in conuenient and comely sort .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.251

At length the guests being come , the Widow bad them al heartily welcome
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.252

The Priest and the Tanner seeing the Taylor , mused what hee made there
: DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.253

the Taylor on the other side , maruelled as much at their presence .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.254

Thus looking strangely one at another , at length the widow came out of
the kitchin , in a faire traine gowne stucke full of siluer pinnes , a
fine white cap on her head , with cuts of curious needle worke vnder the
same , and an apron before her as white as the driuen snowe :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.255

then verie modestly making curtsie to them all , shee requested them to
sit downe . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.256

But they straining curtesie the one with the other , the Widow with a
smiling countenance , tooke the Parson by the hand saying : Sir , as you
stand highest in the Church , so is it meet you should sit highest at
the Table : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.257

and therefore I pray you sit downe there on the bench side .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,16.258

And sir said shee <P_17> to the Tanner , as age is to bee honoured
before youth for their experience , so are they to sit aboue Batchelers
for their grauitie , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.259

and so she set him downe on this side the Table , ouer against the
Parson . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.260

Then comming to the Taylor shee sayd : Batchler , though your lot bee
the last , your welcome is equall with the first ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.261

and seeing your place points out it selfe , I pray you take a cushion
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.262

and sit downe . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.263

And now <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> to make the boord equall , and
because it hath beene an ould saying , that three things are to small
purpose , if the fourth be awaie : if so it may stand with your fauours
, I will call in a Gossip of mine to supplie this voide place .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.264

With a good will quoth they . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.265

With that shee brought in an olde woman with scant euer a good tooth in
her head , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.266

and placed her right against the Bachelor . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.267

Then was the meate brought to the boorde in due order by the Widowes
seruants , her man <font> Iohn <$$font> beeing chiefe seruitor .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.268

The Widow sate downe at the Tables end between the Parson and the Tanner
, who in very good sort carued meate for them all , her man <font> Iohn
<$$font> waiting on the table . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.269

After they had sitten a while , and wel refreshed themselues , the Widow
taking a Crystall glasse fild with claret Wine , drunke vnto the whole
companie , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.270

and bade them welcome . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.271

The Parson pledged her , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.272

and so did all the rest in due order ; DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.273

but still in their company the cup past ouer the poor olde Womans nose :
insomuch that at length the olde Woman <paren> in a merrie vaine
<$$paren> spake thus vnto the companie : I haue had much good meate
among you ; DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.274

but as for the drinke I can nothing commend it .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.275

Alas good Gossip <paren> quoth the Widow <$$paren> I perceiue no man
hath drunke to thee yet . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.276

No truly quoth the old Woman , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.277

for Churchmen haue so much minde of young Rabbets , old men such ioie in
young Chickens , and Bachelors in Pigs flesh take such delight , that an
old Sow , a tough Henne , or a gray Coney are not accepted :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.278

and so it is seene by mee , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.279

else I should haue beene better remembred . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.280

Well old woman quoth the Parson , take heere the leg of a Capon to stop
thy mouth . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.281

Now by S. <font> Anne <$$font> I dare not , quoth she .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.282

No ? wherefore said the Parson ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.283

Marie for feare least you should goe home with a Crutch , quoth shee .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.284

The Taylor said , then taste here a peece of Goose .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,17.285

<P_18>

Now God forbid , sayde the old Woman , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.287

let Goose goe to his kinde : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.288

you haue a young stomacke , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.289

eate it your selfe , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.290

and much good may it doo your hart sweet young man .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.291

The old woman lacks most of her teeth , quoth the Tanner ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.292

and therefore a peece of tender Chicke {CODE:sic} is fittest for her .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.293

If I did lacke as many of my teeth , quoth the olde woman , as you lacke
points of good husbandrie , I doubt I should starue before it were long
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.294

At this the Widow laught heartily , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.295

and the men were stricken into such a dumpe , that they had not a word
to say . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.296

Dinner being ended , the widow with the rest rose from the Table ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.297

and after they had sitten a pretie while merrily talking , the Widow
called her man <font> Iohn <$$font> to bring her a bowle of fresh ale ,
which he did . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.298

Then sayd the Widow : My masters , now for your curtesie and cost I
heartily thanke you all , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.299

and in requitall of all your fauour , loue and good-will , I drinke to
you , giuing you free libertie when you please to depart .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.300

At these wordes her sutors looked so sowrely one upon another , as if
they had beene newly champing of Crabs . Which when the Taylor heard ,
shaking vp himselfe in his new russet Ierkin , and setting his hat on
one side , hee began to speake thus . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.301

I trust sweete widow <paren> quoth hee <$$paren> you remember to what
ende my comming was hither to_day , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.302

I haue long time beene a sutor vnto you , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.303

and this day you promised to giue me a direct answer .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.304

T@ @is true , quoth shee , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.305

and so I haue : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.306

for your loue I giue you thankes , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.307

and when you please you may depart . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.308

Shall I not haue you said the Taylor ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.309

Alas <paren> quoth the Widow <$$paren> you come too late .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.310

Good friend <paren> quoth the Tanner <$$paren> it is manners for young
men to let their elders bee serued before them :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.311

to what end should I bee here if the widow should haue thee ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.312

a flat deniall is meete for a saucie sutor : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.313

but what saist thou to mee faire widow <paren> quoth the Tanner
<$$paren> ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.314

Sir said shee , because you are so sharp set , I would wish you as soon
as you can to wed . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.315

Appoint the time your self quoth the Tanner . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.316

Euen as@ @soone <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> as you can get a Wife ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.317

and hope not after mee , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.318

for I am alreadie promised . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,18.319

<P_19>

Now Tanner you may take your place with the Taylor , quoth the Parson ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.321

for indeede the widow is for no man but my selfe .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.322

Master Parson <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> many haue runne neere the
goale , and yet lost the game , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.323

and I can@ @not helpe it though your hope bee in vaine :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.324

besides , Parsons are but newly suffered to haue wiues ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.325

and for my part I will haue none of the first head .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.326

What <paren> quoth the Taylor <$$paren> is our merriment growne to this
reckoning ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.327

I neuer spent a Pig and a Goose to so bad purpose before :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.328

I promise you when I came in , I verilie thought that you were inuited
by the Widowe to make her and me sure together , and that the iolly
Tanner was brought to bee a witnesse to the contract , and the old Woman
fetcht in for the same purpose ; DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.329

else I would neuer haue put vp so many drie bobs at her hands .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.330

And surely quoth the Tanner , I knowing thee to bee a Taylor , did
assuredly think that thou wast appointed to come and take measure for
our wedding apparell . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.331

But now we are all deceiued quoth the Parson , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.332

and therefore as wee came fooles , so wee may depart hence like asses .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.333

That is as you interpret the matter , said the Widow :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.334

for I euer doubting that a concluding answer would breede a iarre in the
end among you euery one , I thought it better to bee done at one instant
, and in mine owne house , than at sundry times and in common Tauernes :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.335

and as for the meate you sent , as it was vnrequested of mee , so had
you your part thereof , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.336

and if you think good to take home the remainder , prepare your wallets
and you shall haue it . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.337

Nay Widow quoth they , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.338

although wee haue lost our labours , wee haue not altogether lost our
manners : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.339

that , which you haue keepe , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.340

and God send to vs better lucke , and to you your hearts desire ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.341

and with that they departed . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.342

The Widow being glad shee was thus rid of her guestes , when her man
<font> Iohn <$$font> with all the rest sate at supper , she sitting in a
chaire by , spake thus vnto them . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.343

Well my masters , you sawe that this day your poore Dame had her choise
of husbands , if shee had listed to marrie , and such as would haue
loued and maintained her like a woman . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.344

T@ @is true quoth <font> Iohn , <$$font> DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.345

and I pray God you haue not withstoode your best fortune .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,19.346

<P_20>

Trust me <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> I know not ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.348

but if I haue I may thank mine owne foolish fancie .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.349

Thus it past on from <font> Bartholomewtide , <$$font> till it was neere
Christmas , at what time the weather was so wonderfull cold , that all
the running Riuers round about the Towne were frozen very thicke .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.350

The Widowe beeing very loath any longer to lie without companie , in a
colde winters night made a great fire , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.351

and sent for her man <font> Iohn : <$$font> DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.352

hauing also prepared a chaire and a cushion , shee made him sit downe
therein , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.353

and sending for a pinte of good Sacke , they both went to supper .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.354

In the ende bed time comming on , shee caused her maide in a merriment
to plucke off his hose and shooes , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.355

and caused him to bee laide in his masters best bed , standing in the
best Chamber , hung round about with very faire curtaines .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.356

<font> Iohn <$$font> being thus preferred , thought himselfe a Gentleman
, DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.357

and lying soft , after his hard labour and a good supper , quickly fell
asleepe . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.358

About midnight , the Widow being cold on her feet , crept into her mans
bed to warme them . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.359

<font> Iohn <$$font> feeling one lift vp the cloathes , asked who was
there ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.360

O good <font> Iohn <$$font> it is I , quoth the widow ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.361

the night is so extreame colde , and my Chamber walles so thin , that I
am like to be starued in my bed : wherefore rather then I would any way
hazard my health , I thought it much better to come hither and trie your
curtesie , to haue a little roome beside you .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.362

<font> Iohn <$$font> being a kind young man would not say her nay ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.363

and so they spent the rest of the night both together in one bed .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.364

In the morning betime shee rose vp DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.365

and made her selfe ready , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.366

and willed her man <font> Iohn <$$font> to runne and fetch her a Link
with all speede : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.367

for quoth shee , I haue earnest businesse to do this morning .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.368

Her man did so . Which done shee made him to carrie the Linke before
her , vntill she came to Saint <font> Bartholomewes <$$font> Chappell ,
where Sir <font> Iohn <$$font> the Priest with his Clark and Sexton ,
stoode wayting for her . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.369

<font> Iohn <$$font> quoth shee , turne into the Chappell ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.370

for before I goe further , I will make my prayers to S. <font>
Bartholmew , <$$font> DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.371

so shall I speed the better in my businesse . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.372

When they were come in , the Priest according to his order came to her ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.373

and asked where the Bridegroome was ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.374

Quoth she , I thought he had beene here before me .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.375

Sir <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> I will sit downe and say ouer my beades
, DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.376

and by that time hee will come . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,20.377

<P_21>

<font> Iohn <$$font> mused at this matter , to see that his Dame should
so sodainly bee married , and hee hearing nothing thereof before .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.379

The Widowe rising from her prayers , the Priest toulde her that the
Bridegroome was not yet come . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.380

Is it true , quoth the widow ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.381

I promise you I will stay no longer for him if he were as good as <font>
George a Green : <$$font> DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.382

and therefore dispatch quoth shee , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.383

and marrie me to my man <font> Iohn . <$$font>
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.384

Why Dame <paren> quoth he <$$paren> you doe but iest I trowe .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.385

<font> Iohn <$$font> <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> I iest not :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.386

for so I meane it shall bee , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.387

and stand not strangely , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.388

but remember that you did promise mee on your faith not to hinder mee ,
when I came to the Church to bee married , but rather to set it forward
: DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.389

therfore set your link aside DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.390

and giue mee your hand , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.391

for none but you shall be my husband . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.392

<font> Iohn <$$font> seeing no remedy consented , because he sawe the
matter coulde not otherwise bee amended ; DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.393

and married they were presently . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.394

When they were come home , Iohn entertained his Dame with a kisse :
which the other seruants seeing , thought him somthing sawcie .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.395

The Widow caused the best cheere in the house to bee set on the Table ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.396

and to breakfast they went , causing her new husband to bee set in a
chaire at the Tables end , with a faire napkin laid on his trencher :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.397

then shee called out the rest of her seruants , willing them to sit
downe and take part of their good cheere . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.398

They wondring to see their fellow <font> Iohn <$$font> sit at the Tables
end in their old masters chaire , began heartily to smile , and openly
to laugh at the matter , especially because their Dame so kindly sate by
his side : which shee perceiuing , asked if that were all the manners
they could shew before their master : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.399

I tell you quoth shee , he is my husband , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.400

for this morning we were maried , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.401

and therefore hence forward looke you acknowledge your duty towardes him
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.402

The folkes looked one upon another , maruelling at this strange newes .
Which when <font> Iohn <$$font> perceiued , hee said : My masters muse
not at all : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.403

for although by Gods prouidence and your Dames fauour , I am preferred
from being your fellow to bee your Master , I am not thereby so much
puft vp in pride , that any way I will forget my former estate :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.404

Notwithstanding , seeing I am now to holde the place of a Master , it
shall bee wisedome in you to forget what I was , and to take mee as I am
; DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.405

and in dooing your diligence , you shall haue no cause to repent that
God made mee your master . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,21.406

<P_22>

The seruants hearing this , as also knowing his good gouernment before
time , past their yeares with him in dutifull manner .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.408

The next daie the report was ouer all the Towne , that <font> Iacke of
Newbery <$$font> had married his Dame : so that when the Woman walked
abroad , euery one bad God giue her ioy : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.409

some said that shee was matcht to her sorrow , saying , that so lustie a
young man as he , would neuer loue her being so auncient . Whereupon
the Woman made answer , that shee would take him downe in his wedding
shooes , and woulde trie his patience in the prime of his lustinesse :
whereunto many of her Gossips did likewise encourage her .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.410

Euery daie therefore for the space of a moneth after shee was married ,
it was her ordinarie custome , to goe forth in the morning among her
gossips and acquaintance to make merrie , and not to returne home till
night , without any regarde of her houshold . Of which , at her comming
home , her husband did very oftentimes admonish her in very gentle sort
, shewing what great inconuenience would grow thereby : the which
sometime shee would take in gentle part , and somtime in disdaine ,
saying : I am now in very good case , that hee which was my seruant but
the other day , will now bee my master : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.411

this it is for a Woman to make her foot her head .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.412

The day hath beene when I might haue gone forth when I would , and come
in againe when it had pleased me without controulement :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.413

and now I must bee subiect to euery Iackes checke .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.414

I am sure <paren> quoth she <$$paren> that by my gadding abroad , and
carelesse spending I waste no goods of thine .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.415

I pittying thy pouertie , made thee a man , and maister of the house ,
but not to the end I woulde become thy slaue .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.416

I scorne , I tel thee true , that such a youngling as thy selfe should
correct my conceit , and giue mee instructions , as if I were not able
to guide my selfe : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.417

but yfaith yfaith , you shall not use me like a babe , nor bridle me
like an asse : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.418

and seeing my going abroad greeues thee , where I haue gone forth one
day I will goe abroad three , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.419

and for one houre I will stay fiue . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.420

Well <paren> quoth her husband <$$paren> I trust you will be better
aduised : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.421

and with that hee went from her about his businesse , leauing her
swearing in her fustian furies . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.422

Thus the time past on , till on a certaine day shee had beene abroad in
her wonted manner , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.423

and staying forth very late he shut the dores DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.424

and went to bed . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,22.425

About midnight shee comes to the <P_23> doore DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.426

and knockes to come in : to whom he looking out of the window , answered
in this sort . What , is it you that keepes such a knocking ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.427

I pray you get hence DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.428

and request the Constable to prouide you a bed ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.429

for this night you shall haue no lodging heere .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.430

I hope quoth shee , you will not shut me out of doores like a dogge , or
let me lie in the streetes like a strumpet . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.431

Whether like a dogge or drab , quoth hee , all is one to mee , knowing
no reason but that as you haue stayed out all day for your delight , so
you may lie foorth all night for my pleasure .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.432

Both birds and beestes at the nights approach prepare to their rest ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.433

and obserue a conuenient time to returne to their habitation .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.434

Looke but upon the poore spider , the frogge , the flie , and euery
other silly worme , and you shell {COM:sic} see all these obserue time
to returne to their home : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.435

and if you beeing a woman will not doe the like , content your selfe to
beare the brunt of your owne folly , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.436

and so farewell . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.437

The Woman hearing this , made pitious moane , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.438

and in verie humble sort intreated him to let her in , and to pardon
this offence , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.439

and while shee liued vowed never to doe the like .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.440

Her husband at length beeing mooued with pittie towardes her , slipt on
his shooes DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.441

and came downe in his shirt : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.442

the doore being opened , in shee went quaking ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.443

and as hee was about to locke it againe , in very sorrowfull manner she
said : Alacke husband , what hap haue I ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.444

My wedding Ring was euen now in my hand , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.445

and I haue let it fall about the doore , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.446

good sweet <font> Iohn <$$font> come forth with the Candle
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.447

and help mee to seeke it . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.448

The man incontinent did so , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.449

and while hee sought for that which was not there to bee found , shee
whipt into the house , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.450

and quickly clapping to the doore , she lockt her husband out .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.451

He stood calling with the candle in his hand to come in ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.452

but shee made as if shee heard not . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.453

Anon shee went vp into her chamber , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.454

and carried the key with her : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.455

but when hee sawe she would not answere , he presently began to knock as
lowd as hee could at the doore . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.456

At last shee thrust her head out at the window , saying : who is there ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.457

T@ @is I quoth <font> Iohn , <$$font> DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.458

what meane you by this ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.459

I pray you come downe DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.460

and open the doore that I may come in . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,23.461

<P_24>

What sir , quoth shee , is it you ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.463

haue you nothing to doe but daunce about the streetes at this time of
night , and like a Spirit of the Butterie hunt after Crickets ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.464

are you so hot that the house can@ @not hold you ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.465

Nay I pray thee , sweet heart quoth he doe not gibe any longer ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.466

but let me in . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.467

O sir , remember quoth she , how you stood euen now at the window , like
a Iudge on the bench , and in taunting sort kept me out of my owne howse
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.468

How now <font> Iacke , <$$font> am I euen with you ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.469

What <font> Iohn <$$font> my man , were you so lustie to lock your Dame
out of doores ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.470

Sirra , remember you bad me goe to the Constable to get lodging :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.471

now you haue leisure to trie if his wife will preferre you to a bed .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.472

You sir Sawce , that made me stand in the colde till my feete did freeze
, and my teeth chatter , while you stood preaching of birds and beasts
telling mee a tale of spiders , flyes , and frogges : goe trie now if
any of them will be so friendly to let thee haue lodging .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.473

Why go you not man ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.474

feare not to speake with them , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.475

for I am sure you shall finde them at home : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.476

thinke not they are such ill husbands as you , to bee abroad at this
time of night . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.477

With this , <font> Iohns <$$font> patience was greatly moued , insomuch
that hee deepely swore that if shee woulde not let him in hee would
break downe the doore . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.478

Why <font> Iohn <$$font> quoth she , you neede not bee so hot ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.479

your clothing is not so warme : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.480

and because I thinke this will bee a warning vnto yee against another
time how you shut mee out of my house , catch ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.481

there is the key , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.482

come in at thy pleasure , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.483

and look you go to bed to your fellowes , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.484

for with mee thou shalt not lie to_night . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.485

With that shee clapt to the casement , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.486

and got her to bedde , locking the chamber doore fast .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.487

Her husband that knew it was in vaine to seeke to come into her Chamber
, and beeing no longer able to endure the colde , got him a place among
his Prentices , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.488

and there slept soundly . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.489

In the morning his wife rose betime , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.490

and merily made him a Cawdell , DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.491

and bringing it vp to his bed , asked him how he did .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.492

Quoth <font> Iohn , <$$font> troubled with a shrewe , who the longer she
liues the worse shee is : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.493

and as the people of <font> Ilyris <$$font> kill men with their lookes ,
so shee kills her husbands hart with vntoward conditions .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,24.494

<P_25> But trust mee wife , quoth hee , seeing I finde you of such
crooked qualities , that <paren> like the Spider <$$paren> ye turne the
sweete flowers of good counsell into venemous poyson , from henceforth I
will leaue you to your own wilfulnes , and neither vexe my minde nor
trouble my selfe to restraine you : the which if I had wisely done last
night , I had kept the house in quiet , and my selfe from cold .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,25.495

Husband <paren> quoth shee <$$paren> thinke that women are like
Starlings ; that will burst their gall before they will yeelde to the
Fowler : or like the fish <font> Scolopendra , <$$font> that can@ @not
be touched without danger . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,25.496

Notwithstanding , as the hard steele doth yeelde to the hammers stroke ,
being used to his kinde , so will women to their husbands , where they
are not too much crost . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,25.497

And seeing yee haue sworne to giue mee my will , I vowe likewise that my
wilfulnesse shall not offend you . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,25.498

I tell you husband , the noble nature of a woman is such , that for
their louing friends they will sticke <paren> like the Pellican
<$$paren> to pearce their owne hearts to doo them good .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,25.499

And therefore forgiuing each other all iniuries past , hauing also tried
one anothers patience , let vs quench these burning coales of contention
, with the sweete iuice of a faithfull kisse : and shaking hands ,
bequeath all our anger to the eating vp of this Cawdle .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,25.500

Her husband curteously consented : DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,25.501

and after this time , they liued long together , in most godly , louing
and kind sort , till , in the end she died , leauing her husband
wondrous wealthie . DELONEY-1597-E2-P1,25.502

