<BEGIN_drummond-1690-e3-p1>

<P_2.4,189>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCCLXXXIV_THE_EARL_OF_MELFORT_TO_FATHER_MAXWELL>

23=d= April , 1690 . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,189.4

God be thanked that the succours are safely arrived to you , and that
his holy hand appears for the King . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,189.5

I am glad of the success of the Copper Money .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,189.6

God alone was the sender of it , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,189.7

and nobody has reason to be vain of it . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,189.8

To his own name be the glory of it , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,189.9

for undeniably it has done good ; DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,189.10

but that it should go amongst the Rebels is a strange thing .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,189.11

<P_2.4,190>

I am doing all I can , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,190.13

and that to no great purpose ; DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,190.14

the hearts here are harder than marble , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,190.15

and there is not such a thing as fellow feeling <paren> the presbyterian
word <$$paren> . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,190.16

No man knows what it is to do more than {he_knows_to_do} just to his own
family , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,190.17

and it is a <font> tramontano <$$font> folly to give to any but for
interest , I mean temporal . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,190.18

I labour against all the oppositions imaginable ,
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,190.19

and yet gain ground , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,190.20

and am in no ill reputation with the men of the Country who are very
nice of esteeming strangers : DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,190.21

but God I hope will give success to the King here and every where else ,
and that he shall quickly put him in possession of his own .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,190.22

<P_2.4,200>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCCLXXXVII_THE_EARL_OF_MELFORT_TO_KING_JAMES_THE_SECOND_FROM_ROME>

5=th=. Sept. 1690 . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,200.25

May it please your Majesty , Your Majesty's Letter of the 30=th=. of
July from St. Germains I had not till Wednesday last , being the
30=th=. of August . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,200.26

I most humbly thank your Majesty for your goodness to me and mine .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,200.27

My services are due by many indispensable obligations ,
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,200.28

and I shall still endeavour by zeal to show the greatness of that most
humble affection I have to your royal person and interest .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,200.29

So soon as I had received the honour of your Letter and the other for
his Holiness I demanded audience , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,200.30

but Thursday being appointed for singing the <font> Te Deum <$$font> for
the taking of Napoli de Malvoisie , which the Pope was to perform in
person at S=ta=. Maria Major , I was put off till Friday at night .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,200.31

On Friday's night being admitted to audience of his Holiness , I
delivered him your Majesty's Letter , which he received most kindly ,
asking if your Majesty , the <P_2.4,201> Queen , and Prince were well .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,201.32

He said , ' O how much do I compassionate their condition : '
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,201.33

and having opened the Letter , he gave it to me to read for him , which
ended , he said he would answer it , and approve of all your Majesty had
done ; but that he saw it was left to me to enlarge on what it contained
. DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,201.34

I told him that the first thing I had order to inform him of , was , the
reason why your Majesty had quitted Ireland , which was the united
request of all the General Officers of your Army , who wisely considered
that in your royal person consisted all their present hopes ; and that
though Ireland might be lost the sooner , yet your Majesty would be more
in a condition to act for the whole , being in France , where it was
necessary to concert the whole matter ; DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,201.35

that they well considered that none could have so much interest with the
Most Christian King to procure them succours , or , by attacking England
, draw the forces which oppressed them another way .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,201.36

That these considerations had prevailed with your Majesty , and I hoped
his Holiness would approve of what your Majesty had done .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,201.37

He said that it was perfectly well , for {COM:sic} that your Majesty
being safe your re-establishment was certain ; and that he approved
extremely of your having come away , and would write so much to your
Majesty himself . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,201.38

I told his Holiness that now your Majesty was come to France to demand
succours from that King , the next thing I had commanded me was to beg
of his <P_2.4,202> Holiness what assistance it was possible for his
Holiness to give . That the enterprize was great , and that though
France should do all they could , yet that all would not be near what
was sufficient , and that therefore his Holiness of necessity must see
this most just cause perish , to the reproach of all the Catholics who
did not assist or help to support it . That there never was a time in
which the Holy See had so much honour to gain or lose , and that the
Eyes of all Europe was upon his Holiness to see if he would tamely
suffer a Catholic Kingdom to fall into the hands of Heretics ,
unconcerned to see so many hundreds of thousands of Catholics under the
grievousest persecution , and greatest temptation to lose their Religion
. That by a timely and suitable assistance his Holiness might have had
the glory in his Pontificate to have advanced the Catholic Religion in
England and Scotland , where it was not ; DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,202.39

and as that would have been much to his honour , I was assured he would
never give occasion to the contrary by suffering a Catholic Kingdom to
be dismembered from the Church in his time , without giving all the
assistance he could to such as were endeavouring its defence .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,202.40

That a timely supply might do much , and I was not sure but 12 or 15,000
stand of Arms might have prevented these mischiefs if sent in time since
your Majesty wanted not Men but Arms to have out-numbered your enemies .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,202.41

That that was neglected , but that for the future I hoped his Holiness
would <P_2.4,203> turn his thoughts more intently on a thing in which he
and the Church of God were so much concerned .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,203.42

His Holiness repeated all his former compliments of what he would do and
suffer for your Majesty , but that he could not act against all the
world , and he had not wherewithal to do as he would . That all the
world was in war . That war was come into Italy . That there was
scarcity at Rome . That the rents of the Ecclesiastic State were not
paid . That he was in thousands of straits and difficulties . That the
little he had given was borrowed : DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,203.43

he had in it given his Entrails , so difficult is it now to find money .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,203.44

I thanked his Holiness for what he had done ,
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,203.45

it was a mark of his sense of what he was obliged to do , and at the
same time one infallible proof of his Poverty being so very
disproportioned to what it was designed for , that I did not insist for
what was properly his Holiness's , but that some other fund might be
employed in so good , so pious , so necessary a work .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,203.46

That there were many sums employed for pious ends whereof his Holiness
might dispose by changing the intention : and that there were many other
ways of raising money if he had a mind : and that the assisting your
Majesty was a_hundred times a more pious work than building of Churches
, especially where there are already too many : that by this speedy
assistance he would not only do a work glorious for him , but absolutely
necessary <P_2.4,204> for his honour , and for the reputation if not
safety of the Holy See . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.47

He considered a little without saying any thing ;
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.48

he then asked if Orange was dead . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.49

I told him it was not yet certain ; DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.50

and he saw Letters from all parts bore contradictions ,
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.51

some say he was , others he was not . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.52

' It is doubtful , ' said he , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.53

' but however , I am fixed in myself that England will throw off that
Monster , and call back their own King . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.54

I pray for it every day , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.55

and would give my life to procure it . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.56

' He said he had thought of your Majesty's concerns and how to help you
, that he would consider of it , and all that ever he could he would do
; that , in the mean time , he would answer your Majesty's Letter .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.57

I humbly thanked him for the hopes he gave me ,
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.58

that I should inform your Majesties of his good intentions ,
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.59

and begged of him to consider how the season was advanced , and how
precious time is to us . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.60

And whilst he considered how to help , I begged of him to reflect on the
Triumph of the Heresy in Ireland , the altars overthrown , Churches
profaned , Catholics persecuted , the sacrileges committed on the
persons of the religious , priests , and bishops ;
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.61

and I persuaded myself this view would quickly determine his Holiness to
do something of importance . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,204.62

He repeated to me what he had said before ; that he would think , that
he <P_2.4,205> would consider , and do all that he could in the world
for your Majesty's assistance . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,205.63

This repetition was a sign that he intended to finish this audience ;
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,205.64

and so I shewed my desire to be licentiated , which his Holiness
perceiving , began to inform me of Napoli di Malvoisie , what importance
it was of to the Venetians , &c. DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,205.65

I congratulated his Holiness on that Conquest as a christian and a
catholic , and as a servant to your Majesty with whom the Venetians had
preserved their Alliances : DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,205.66

and this I did to show his Holiness the difference of the spirit which
actuates us , and that of the House of Austria .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,205.67

We were glad that Christianity gained , though from those that fought
against our enemies : whilst they sung the <font> Te Deum <$$font> for
the Church's having lost a Kingdom , and a Heretic's Victory .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,205.68

But I hoped that God , in his good time , would put a stop to these
Impieties . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,205.69

His Holiness asked me if it was possible that any Cathedral had sung the
Te Deum for Orange's Victory ; DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,205.70

I told him that I had their own printed News for it , at which his
Holiness seemed horribly scandalized . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,205.71

Thus ended this Audience , by which your Majesty will see how far the
warmth which appeared at the news of the Usurper's death is cooled now
they think he is alive . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,205.72

And the truth of the matter is , they have but little mind to do any
thing if they could handsomely shun it . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,205.73

And if any thing considerable be done , it will be when your Majesty has
almost certainty <P_2.4,206> on your side ,
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.74

for they would help up the last steps , and care not for being at the
expenses till they can say this helped immediately to set him on his
Throne . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.75

At a distance it is impossible to judge , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.76

and I have that to say I dare not commit to cypher ;
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.77

but , in general , there is no hope of any thing considerable till your
Majesty be just going for England , which I assert boldly you are ;
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.78

but the French posts coming only once in fifteen days , they always wait
for confirmations , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.79

and so I am delayed . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.80

We are now in more uncertainty than ever , not knowing if Orange be dead
or living , where the French fleet is , nor what may be their design ;
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.81

nor are we less ignorant of what is doing in England and Scotland ,
whether any of their designs so much talked of be like to take effect ,
or if those inclinations believed to be in the people still continue .
So that , as to that point , we are just as miserable as it is possible
for us to be : DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.82

God Almighty send us the comfort of some good news for your Majesty ,
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.83

and then we , like seasick travellers , soon forget our pains .
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.84

I wish it were possible to get the remains of your Majesty's army , or a
considerable part of them , brought from Ireland to England , so long as
the French are masters of the Sea , and might hinder the rebel army from
returning to England : DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,206.85

for I am confident never nothing will turn the tide in England , but
carrying the war thither . The fear of having a war within <P_2.4,207>
the Kingdom having infallibly been what made the defection of the people
so universal as it was : DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,207.86

but I hope all this comes too late , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,207.87

and therefore I shall not insist on it . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,207.88

As for myself , I entirely depend upon your Majesty to be employed as
you shall think best for your royal service , as I have ever done ,
DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,207.89

and having laid before your Majesty my humble thoughts I am secured on
the side of conscience , DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,207.90

and I know your Majesty's generosity , and if I may add justice , will
have care of my reputation . Which , with all else I am master of ,
shall ever be employed to prove that I am , more than I can tell , May
it please your Majesty , Your Majesty's most humble , most faithful ,
and most obedient servant , Melfort . DRUMMOND-1690-E3-P1,2.4,207.91

