<BEGIN_edmondes-1599-e2-p1>

<P_396>

<heading:edcomment:CLII>

It maie please yor honor . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,396.4

I sent yor honor heretofore a memoriall of diuers reformations p~pposed
here to haue ben put in execution after the publishing of the peace , in
the wch amonge other thinges it was mentioned to restraine the receiving
into the realme of forraine manufactures , to raise the better their
owne , EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,396.5

but it was then onlie meant to exclude the bringing in of silkes in
respect of being of farre greater expence , then of necessitie to the
realme , EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,396.6

but since som~e to vallue their enventions haue suggested that it wil@
@be as necessarie to interdict all forraine manufactures wch wil@ @be a
meanes to sett their people a wourke , and to hinder the dailie
transporting of their monie out of the realme ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,396.7

and if the K. should thincke fitte to graunte tollerations to p~ticuler
p~sons that by those lycenses he should raise a great p~fitt to himself
This was receiued for so plausible as an edict was p~pared to passe for
the same , uppon knoweledge whereof I addressed myself to the Kinge ,
and p~ticulerly to Monsr de Villeroy , Monsr de Bellieure , Monsr de
Rhosny , Monsr de Maisse , and Monsr d Incaruille whome the K: doth
spatiallie use in these affaires , and prayed them to consider duelie of
whatt importance the said matter is wch under a specius p~text tendeth
to the great offence of their neighbors , & allyes , and spetialie of
her matie , for excluding the <P_397> trade of her subiectes dyrectlie
against the antient treaties of Confederacie betweene the twoe Crownes ,
and that it is a veerie unthanckefull requytall of her maties benefittes
and good offices towardes them wch deserued rather imunities for her
subiectes then to p~iudice them at this tyme that her matie is
incommodated by the burthen of the warre of Spayne for others interest
as they knowe EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,397.8

That her matie can@ @nott but be verie sensible of such p~ceading wch
doth so deepelie concerne the Interest of her subiectes , and in them ,
declaring a manifest neglect of her against their faith often
reitterated both by publicke & privatt p~fessions , wch will therefore
force her matie to resort also to privatt Counsells & resolutions , wth
other p~ticularities whereof the recytall would be too troublesome to
yor honor . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,397.9

It was answeared me that in respect of the afflicted state of the people
of ffrance at this tyme , it imported the K: to seeke by all meanes to
p~cure their relief , and therefore among other thinges to restablishe
their manufacture wch ought not to be offensiue to us & others , for
that we exercise the like for the benefitt of our Countrie ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,397.10

and insisting that their necessitie & the great pouuertie of the people
ought to iustifie them for taking the said course yett it was sayd in
the end , that if anie thinge therein should be repugnant to their
treatie wth her matie , that there should be consideration had thereof ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,397.11

and I was requyred by Monsr de Villeroy to delyuer for that pourpose my
request , in wryting , to be communicated wth the Counsell .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,397.12

Because I found them to stand uppon stiff tearmes in p~sisting to
mainteyne their first resolution I was forced to make my declaration the
sharper , and the rather for that our marchantes at Roan make knowne
unto me , that they should be undonne , if the said order should take
place , EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,397.13

but when I delyuered my declaration to Monsr de Villeroy he tould me
uppon the p~using of the same , that it was wrytten in so sharpe tearmes
as he could not p~sent it in that manner , praying me therefore to
refourme it , for that it might otherwise breede offence , but that in
my speache I might enlarge myself as I should thincke good , as alreadie
I had begoune . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,397.14

Yor honor shall herewth receiue the Coppie of my said declaration
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,397.15

and the note wch I haue annexed thereunto sheweth the difference of that
wch I first p~sented . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,397.16

I dealt with them also about the tolleration geiuen to transport Corne
into Spayne wch themselfes did not p~mitt to their allyes before they
had made their peace , albeitt they nowe denye it .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,397.17

They lay the burthen of <P_398> all their faultes uppon their necessitie
, EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.18

and mainteyn that they will not be barred the libertie of that
trafficque , EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.19

and Complaine that the Ambassador doth not receiue satisfaction in
matters of iustice in England , and that it were as good for them to
lyue in warre wth us as to be subiectes . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.20

I tould them that their Ambr can@ @nott denye that her matie hath
appoynted spetiall p~sons to joyne wth him to examyne the Complaintes of
both sides , and that there is speedie order taken by her matie & her
Counsell to right the plaintifs , but for the compleintes of her maties
subiectes , wch are manie and great , that there is no other prouision ,
then to referre them to the most tedious , chargeable & Corrupt iustice
of their Parlementes , where after much losse of tyme & expence , they
loose more causes then they gayne , howesoeuer they be well grounded in
equytie . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.21

They answeared me that they desier nothing more then to come to a
reformation of these thynges , and to establishe a better iustice but
that it will not be hearkned unto in England .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.22

I understand that the leaue to transport Corne into Spayne receiued much
debating in Counsell before it was accorded EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.23

and it was alleaged that the p~hibition wch the K: should make would not
serue to hinder the same , but rather to p~cure a p~fitt to the
Gouuernors , who underhand would notw=th=standing geiue lycences for
monie , the which benefitt it were more fitt the K. should receiue ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.24

and thereupon it was concluded to geiue publicke p~mission , paying to
the Kinge three Crownes for euerie Tonne that is shipped ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.25

And I understand that Monsr Zametta and others that load great quantitie
of Corne are warranted that all englishemen's goodes shal@ @be arrested
for their recommpence , if their shippes be staied by her maties
subiectes . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.26

I haue ben delayed these six or seven daies uppon the answeare of the
memoriall wch I delyuered , EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.27

and Monsr de Villeroy hath declared to me <paren> hauing pressed him for
a resolution thereof <$$paren> that the King will take further tyme to
aduise of the said matter and in the mean season that we haue no cause
to complain , sithe there is nothing donne therein to our p~iudice .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.28

But other Counsellors haue tould me that it is resolued to haue a
Carefull regard to their treaties wth her matie and to Innovatt nothing
against the same EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,398.29

And it appeereth their drift is , fynding howe deepelie this matter doth
concerne her maties' subiectes , to keepe us in awe of the execution of
the said lawe against us , untill a better order be established for the
assurance of a quyett <P_399> intercourse of trafficque , being so
insensed by reason of the contynuall newe complaintes wch they p~tend
are made unto them , as I assure yor honor I know it is meant to p~ceade
to the staying of our marchantes goodes . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.30

Yor honor can consider therefore how necessarie it is to p~vent
speedelie these great inconveniences and for that pourpose that her
matie be pleased to send hither a mynister of greater aucthoritie , to
inforce effectuallie the interest of so important necessities .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.31

The Duke of Sauoye sent one latelie hither to the K. whereof I
understand that the coulorable occasion was to pray the K. to presse
the Pope to p~ceade to the determyning of the difference of the
Marquisatt , & to open himself , what composition he would be content to
take , or ells to geiue him leaue to make him offers .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.32

He p~pounded also a marriage betweene one of his sonnes and the Kinges
daughter , EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.33

and make great shewe of desier to come hither , saying that it ought to
be as well p~mitted to him as to the Duke of lorrayne .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.34

lastlie he complained against Monsr Dedignieres , for that his garrisons
doe still rauage his Countrie , EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.35

but the true cause was to discouer whether the K: doe make anie
p~parations to assayle him as the bruite runneth .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.36

The Swisse of the Canton of Berne wch are contrarewise pressed by the
duke to restore that wch heretofore they tooke from him ; And those of
Geneva also , haue both sent hither to praye the Kinge to stipulatt in
his peace , the comp~hending of their differences ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.37

but they doubt that these men , whatsoeuer p~mises they nowe make them ,
will in the ende only p~uide for their owne interest .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.38

It is aduertised out of Spayne that the Kinge is assembling the States
of Castile to p~cure him a Contribution of monie , whereof it is sayd
that there is a generall great scarcetie at this tyme in Spayne and that
it is thought he will not p~fourme the voyage of Barcellone .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.39

The Queene his wief and the Archeduke are at Myllan attending untill the
winter be past to embarque themselfes for Spayne .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.40

Since their being there , the Pallace where they lye hath ben thrice set
on fyer , and the Queen once in great payne howe to saue her self .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.41

The Prince of lorrayne is arryued here intending to p~ceade in his
marriage notw=th=standing the inhibition of the Pope , who can@ @not but
be much scandalized at so great a neglecting of his aucthoritie .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.42

It is appoynted to p~fourme the said marriage at ffountainebleau wthin
fifteine daies . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.43

The Counte Soissons is retourned to his house to be absent while this is
a doing . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,399.44

The Duke of lorraine hath geiuen the <P_400> K. aduertisement wthin
these twoe daies , that one wch heretofore serued his sonne as a lacquey
, and being since become a Capuchin hath ben practised as it should
seame by the Jesuittes to kill the Kinge , and hauing undertaken the
same , is come hither for the execution thereof , whereuppon there is
great search made here for the fynding of him out .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.45

The K: hath straightlie enjoyned the Parlement to passe the edict for
those of the relligion this weeke wthout further delaie ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.46

and it is one of the spetiall causes that doth hould him in the Towne to
see the same p~fourmed before his dep~ture . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.47

The gentallmen that is to come out of Spayne hath wrytten to the Postes
to haue fortie horses in a readiness for him , whereby there is an
expectacion that he wil@ @be shortlie here EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.48

Yor honor shall herewth receiue the names of the newe knightes of this
yeare EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.49

And so I most humblie take my leaue . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.50

ffrom Paris EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.51

the second of Januarie 1598 EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.52

yor honors most humble Tho Edmondes . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.53

{COM:endorsed}

1598 . 2 Jan . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.55

M=r= Edmondes to my M=r= . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.56

That w=ch= passed betweene some of the Kings counsell and him concerning
the manufacteures . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.57

Rc y=e= ix=th= at Whithall . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.58

To the right honorable S=r= Robrt Cecyll knight Principall Secretarie to
the Queenes Matie and Chancelor of the Duchie of Lancaster .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P1,400.59

