<BEGIN_edward-1551-e1-p1>

<P_273>

<heading>

JUNE EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,273.4

<$$heading>

3 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,273.6

The King came to Schein , wher was a mariag mad between the lord Lisle ,
th'@ @erle of Warwic@ @'s sone , and the ladi Anne , daughter to the
duke of Somerset , wich don and a faire diner made , and <P_274>
daunsing finished , the King and the ladies went into tow chambers mad
of bowis , wher first he saw six gentlemen of on side and six of another
rune the course of the field , twis over . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,274.7

Ther names hiere do folow : The lord Edward . Sir Jhon Aplebey .
{COM:the_rest_omitted} . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,274.8

And afterward cam three mascers of one side and tow of another , wich
rane fowre courses apece . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,274.9

Ther names be {COM:left_blank} . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,274.10

Last of al came the count of Ragonne , with 3 Italians , who <P_275> ran
with al the gentlemen fowre courses , and afterward fought at tornay .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,275.11

And so , after souper , he {COM:the_King} retorned to Whestmuster
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,275.12

4 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,275.13

Sir Robert Dudeley , third sonne to th'@ @erle of Warwic , maried sir
Jon Robsartes daughter , after wich mariage ther were certain gentlemen
that did strive who shuld first take away a gose's heade , wich was
hanged alive on tow crose postes . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,275.14

5 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,275.15

Ther was tilt and tornay on foot with as great staves as the {COM:sic}
run withal on horsbake . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,275.16

6 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,275.17

Removing to Grenwich . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,275.18

8 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,275.19

The gestis of my progres wer set fourth , wich were thes ; from Grenwich
to Westmuster , from Whestmuster to Hampton court , from Hampton
{COM:preceding_word_"Hampton"_emended} court
{COM:preceding_word_"court"_emended} to Windsore , from Windsor
{COM:preceding_word_"Windsor"_emended} to Guileford , from Guileford to
Otland , from Otland to Richemond , etc. EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,275.20

<P_276>

Also the vicedam made a great souper to the duke of Somerset and the
marquis of Northampton , with divers masques and other conceites .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,276.22

9 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,276.23

The duke of Somerset , marquis Northampton , lord tresorer Bedford , and
the secretary Petre , went to the bishope of Winchester , to know to
what he wold stike . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,276.24

He mad answer that he wold obey , and set furth al thinges set furth by
me and my parliement ; and if he were troubled in conscience he wold
revele it to the counsel , and not reason openly against it .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,276.25

The first payment of the French was laid up in the Towr , for al
chauncis . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,276.26

10 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,276.27

The bokis of my procedings was sent to the bishop of Winchester , to see
whether he wold set his hand to it , or promes to set it forth to the
peple . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,276.28

11 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,276.29

Order was gevin for fortifieng and vitailing Cales for 4 monthes ;
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,276.30

and also sir Hary Paulmer and sir Alee were sent to the frontieres of
Scoteland to take a veu of al the fortes there , and to report to the
councel where thei thought best to <P_277> fortifie .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,277.31

Ther was also sent to Aldernay Rogers and Atwod to make fortifications
there . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,277.32

12 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,277.33

The marquis de Means came from Scoteland , in post ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,277.34

and went his way into Fraunce . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,277.35

13 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,277.36

Commissions were signed to sir Wiliam Herbert and 30 other , to intreat
of certain matters in Wales , and also instructions to the same how to
behave himself in the presidentship . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,277.37

14 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,277.38

The surveiour of Cales was sent to Cales , first to rase the walls of
Risbank toward the sandhilles , and after to make the wall massy again ,
and the round boulwerk to chang to a pointed on , wich should rone 26
foot into the see to beat the sandhilles , and <P_278> to raise the
mount . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,278.39

Secondly , to Newmanbrig to make a hie bulwerk in the middest , with
flankers to beat throw al the straight , and also four sluses to make
Cales haven better . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,278.40

Afterward he was bid to goe to Guisnes , where first he shuld take away
the iiij-cornered bulwer_k , to mak the outward wall of the kepe , and
to fill the space betwen the keep and the said outward wall with the
foresaid bulwerk , and to raise the old kepe that it might beat
{COM:preceding_word_"beat"_emended} the town . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,278.41

Also he was bide to make Purton's bulwark wher it is now round without
flankers both pointed , and also with 6 flankers to bete hard to the
kepe . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,278.42

Atwood and Lambert were sent to take view of Aldernay , Syllay , Jernsey
, Gernsei , and th'@ @il of Gitto . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,278.43

The duke of Somerset , with 5 other of the counsel , went to the bishop
of Winchester , to whom he made this answere : -
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,278.44

" I , having deliberatly seen the book of common praier , although I
wold not have made it so my self , yet I find such thinges in it as
satisfieth my conscience , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,278.45

and therefor both I wil execut it myself , and also see other my
parishoners to doe it . " EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,278.46

This was subscribed by the foresaid counsailours , that they herd him
saing thies wordes . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,278.47

<P_279>

16 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.49

The lord marquis , mr. Herbert , the vicedam , Henadoy , and divers
other gentlemen went to th'@ @erle of Warwick@ @'s , wher thei wer
honorablie received , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.50

and the next day thei rane at the ring a great nomber of gentlemen .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.51

19 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.52

I went to Detford , being bidden to supper by the lord Clinton , where
before souper I saw certain stand upon th'@ @end of a bote without hold
of any thing , and rane one at another till one was cast into the water
. EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.53

At supper mons. vicedam and Henadoy supped with me .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.54

After supper was ther a fort made upon a great lighter on the Temps ,
wich had three walles and a watch towre in the middes , of wich mr.
Winter was captain , with forty or fifty other souldiours in yelow and
Blake . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.55

To the fort also apperteined a galey of yelow colour , with men and
munition in it , for defence of the castel . Wherefor ther cam 4
pinessis with their men in wight ansomely dressed , wich entending to
geve assault to the cartel , first drove away the yelow piness , and
after with cloddes , scuibes , canes of fire , dartes made for the nonce
, and bombardes , assaulted the castel ; and at lenght came with their
pices , and burst the utter walles of the castill , beating them of the
castil into the second ward , who after issued out and drove away the
pinessis , sinking one of them , out of wich al the men in it , being
more than twenty , leaped out , and swamme in the Temps .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.56

Then came th'@ @admiral of the navy with three other pinessis
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.57

and wanne the castil by assault , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.58

and burst the tope of it downe , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.59

and toke the captain and undercaptain . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.60

Then the admiral went forth to take the yelow ship ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.61

and at lenght clasped with her , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.62

toke her , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.63

and assautid also her toppe , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.64

and wane it by composition , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.65

and so returned home . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,279.66

<P_280>

20 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.68

The mair of London caused the watchis to be increased every night becaus
of the great frayes , and also one alderman to see good rule kept every
night . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.69

22 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.70

Ther was a privie serch made thorough al Sussex for al vagaboundes ,
egiptians , conspiratours , prophetes , il plaiers , and such like .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.71

24 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.72

Ther were certain in Essex about Romford went about a conspiracy , wich
were taken , and the matter staid . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.73

25 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.74

Removing to Grenwich . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.75

23 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.76

Sir Jhon Gatis , sherief of Essex , went downe with lettres to see the
bishop's of London injunctions performed , wich touched pluking downe of
superaltaries , altars , and such like ceremonies and abuses .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.77

29 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.78

It was apointed that the Germaines shuld have the Austin frieres for
ther churche to have ther service in , for avoyding of al sectes of
Anabaptistes and such like . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,280.79

<P_281>

17 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,281.81

The French quene was deliverid of a third sone , called mons.
d'Angoulesme . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,281.82

13 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,281.83

Th'@ @emperour departed from Argentin to Augusta .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,281.84

30 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,281.85

Jhon Poynet made bishop of Rochester , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,281.86

and receivid his othe . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,281.87

<heading>

JULIE EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,281.89

<$$heading>

5 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,281.91

There was mony provided to be sent into Irland for paiment of <P_282>
the souldiours there , and also ordre taken for the dispatch of the
straungers in London . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,282.92

7 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,282.93

The master of Erskin passed into Scoteland comming from Fraunce .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,282.94

Also the French embassadour did come before me , first , after showing
the birth of mons. d'Engoulesme , afterward declaring that , wheras the
French king had for my sake let goo the prisoners at Saint Andrew , who
befor thei were taken had shamfully murdered the cardinal , he desired
that al Scottes that were prisoners , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,282.95

it was answerid that al were delivered . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,282.96

Then he moved for one called th'@ @arbishop {COM:sic} of Glasco , who
since the peax came disguised without pasport , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,282.97

and so was taken ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,282.98

it was answerid that we had no <P_283> peax with Scoteland such that
thei might passe our countrie , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,283.99

and the master of Erskin affirmed the same . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,283.100

8 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,283.101

It was agreed that the tow_hundred that were with me , and 200 with mr.
Herbert , shuld be sent into Irland . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,283.102

Also that the mint shuld be set awork that it might wine 24,000 pounds a
yeare , and so beare all my chargis and Irland for this yere , and
tene_thousand pounds to my cofers . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,283.103

9 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,283.104

The erle of Warwick , the lord treasorer , sir Wiliam Herbert , and the
secretari Petre went to the bishop of Winchester with certain articles
signed by me and the counsel , conteining the confessing of his faut ,
the supremici , the establissing of holy dayes , the abolishing of sixe
articles , and divers other , wherof the copie is in <P_284> the counsel
chest , wherunto he put his hand , saving to the confession
{COM:preceding_word_"confession"_emended} . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,284.105

10 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,284.106

Sir Wiliam Herbert and the secretary Petre were sent unto him , to tell
him I marvailed that he wold not putt his hand to the confession : to
whom he made answere that he wold not put his hand to the confession
forbicaus he was innocent ; and also the confession was but the preface
of th'@ @articles . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,284.107

11 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,284.108

The bishop of London , the secretary Petre , mr. Cicel , and Goderik ,
wer commaundid to make certein articles according to the lawis , and put
them in the submission . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,284.109

12 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,284.110

It was apointed that under the shadow of preparing for the sea matiers
there should be sent 5,000 poundes to the protestauntes to get their
good will . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,284.111

14 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,284.112

The bishop of Winchestir did deny the articles that the bishop of London
and the other had made . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,284.113

13 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,284.114

Sir Jhon Gatis sent into Essex to stope the going away of the ladie
Marie , bicause it was credibly informed that Scipperus <P_285> shuld
stele her away to Antwerp , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.115

divers of her gentlemen were there , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.116

and Scipperus a litle befor came to see the landing placis .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.117

16 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.118

It was apointed that the tow_hundred with the duke of Somerset , and 200
with the lord prevy_seal , and 400 with mr. Sentleiger , shuld be sent
to the sea cost . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.119

17 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.120

It was agreed that on Wensday next we shuld goe in one day to Windsore ,
and dine at Sion . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.121

18 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.122

It was thought best that the lord Bowes should tary in his wardenship
still , and the erl of Warwic shuld tary here and be recompensed .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.123

19 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.124

The bishop of Winchester was sequestred from his frutes for 3 monthes .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.125

20 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.126

Houper was made bishop of Gloucestre . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,285.127

The marchauntes were commaundid to stay as much as thei could ther vent
into <P_286> Flaundres , bicaus th'@ @emperour had made many straight
lawes against them that professed the gospel .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,286.128

21 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,286.129

A muster was made of the Boulenois , who were holly paid for al past ,
and a month to come . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,286.130

Sir Jhon Wallop , Frauncis Hall , and doctor Coke were apointed
commissioners to apoint the limites betwene me and the French king .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,286.131

23 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,286.132

Removing to Windsore . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,286.133

22 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,286.134

The secretary Petre and lord chauncelour were apointed to goe to the
lady Mary to cause her to cume to Oking , or to the court .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,286.135

26 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,286.136

It was apointed that halfe the French kinges first payment shuld be
bestowed on paing 10,000 pound at Callais , 9,000 pound <P_287> in
Irland , 15,000 pound in the North , 2,000 in th'@ @amiralty , so that
every croune might goe for one of oure nobles .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,287.137

<P_288>

27 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,288.139

Because the rumour came so much of Scipperus comming , it was apointed
that thei of th'@ @amiralty shuld set my shippes in redines .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,288.140

26 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,288.141

The duke of Somerset went to set ordre in Oxfordshier , Sussex ,
Wiltshier , and Hampshier . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,288.142

28 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,288.143

The lady Mary after long communication was content to cume to Leis to
the lord chauncelour , and then to Hunsdon , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,288.144

but she utterly denied to come to the court or Oking at that time .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,288.145

31 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,288.146

Th'@ @erl of Southampton died . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,288.147

<P_289>

14 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.149

Andrew Dory toke the cyti of Africa from the pirat Draguntra ; who in
the meane season burnt the country of Genoa . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.150

8 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.151

Th'@ @emperour came to Auspurg . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.152

August EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.153

4 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.154

Mr. Setlienger was apointed by mi lettres patentes to be deputy there ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.155

and had his commission , instructions , and lettres to the nobles of
Irland for the same purpose . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.156

5 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.157

The same deputy departed from the castel of Windesore .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.158

6 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.159

The duke of Somerset departid to Reding to take an ordre there .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.160

7 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.161

It was apointed that of the mony delivered to me by the French king
there shuld be takin on_100,000 crounes , to pay 10,000 pound at Callais
, .,000 {COM:sic} in the Northe , and 2000 in th'@ @amiralty , and 8000
in Irland . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.162

8 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.163

Mons. Henadoy toke his leave to depart to Callais , and so upon the
paiment to be delivered home ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.164

and Tremouille , being sike , went in a horslitter to Dover .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,289.165

<P_290>

9 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,290.167

The French embassadour came to Windsore to sue for a pasport for the
douagier of Scotteland ; wich being graunted , so she came like a frend
, EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,290.168

he required 300 hors to passe , with 200 kepers , wich was not holly
graunted , but only 200 hors with 150 kepers in on companie , cumming
into this realme as shuld be apointed , shuld without let passe into
Fraunce , and not returne this way . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,290.169

11 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,290.170

The vidame of Chartres shewed his licence to tary hiere , and a lettre
written to the same purpose . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,290.171

10 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,290.172

The embassadour of France departid , not a litle contented with his
gentle answeris . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,290.173

12 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,290.174

Removing to Guileford . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,290.175

13 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,290.176

The parliement was prorogued to the 20 of February next folowing .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,290.177

Mr. Cok master of requestes and certain other <P_291> lawers were
apointed to make a short table of the lawis and actis that were not
holly unprofitable , and to present it to the bord .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,291.178

1 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,291.179

The lord chauncellour fell sore sike , with 40 more of his house , so
that the lady Mary came not thither at that time .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,291.180

14 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,291.181

There came divers advertisments from Chamberlain , embassadour with the
quene of Hungary , that there very intent was to take away the lady Mary
, and so to begin an outward warr , and an inward conspiracy ; insomuch
that the quene said Scipperus was but a coward , and , for feare of one
gentleman that came downe , durst not goe furth with his entreprice to
my lady Mary . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,291.182

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2_here}

<P_372>

These {TEXT:this} sate a degree under , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,372.185

and hard the matter debated . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,372.186

First , after the inditements rede , 6 in number , the lerned counceill
laid to my lord of Somerset Paulmer's confession . To wich he answerid
that he never minded to rayse the North , and declared al ill he could
devise of Paulmer ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,372.187

but he was aferd for brutes , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,372.188

and that moved him to send to sir William Harbert .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,372.189

Replied it was again that the wors Paulmer was the more he servid his
purpose . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,372.190

For the banket , first he sware it was untrue , and required more
witnessis ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,372.191

when Cran's confession was rede , he wold have had him cume face to face
. EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,372.192

For London , he ment nothing for hurte of any lord , but for his owne
defence . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,372.193

For the gend'armery it were but a made matter for him to enterprise ,
with his 100 against 900 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,372.194

For having men in his chaumbre at Grenwich , confessid by Partrege , it
seemid he ment no harme , bicause when he could have <P_373> done harme
, he did it not . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.195

My lord Straunges confession he sware it was untrue ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.196

and the lord Straung toke his othe it was true .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.197

Nidegat's , Hammon's , and Alexander Seymour's confessions he denied ,
bicause they were his men . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.198

The lawers rehersid how to raise men at his house for an ille entent ,
az to kill the duke of Northumberland , was treason by an Act 3=o= anno
of my raigne against unlaufull assemblis ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.199

for to devise the death of the lordis was felony ;
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.200

to mind resisting his attachment was felony ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.201

to raise London was treason ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.202

and to assault the lordis was felony . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.203

He answerid he did not entend to raise London ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.204

and that sware the witness {COM:sic} were not their .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.205

His assembling of men was but for his owne defence .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.206

He did not determin to kill the duke of Northumberland , the marquis ,
etc. EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.207

but spake of it EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.208

and determined after the contrary ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.209

and yet seamid to confess he went about there death .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.210

The lordis went togither . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.211

The duke of Northumberland wold not agree that any searching of his
death shuld bee treason . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.212

So the lordis acquited him of high treason , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.213

and condemned him of treason feloniouse , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.214

and so he was adjuged to be hangid . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.215

He gave thankis to the lordis for there open trial ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,373.216

and <P_374> cried mercy of the duke of Northumberland , the marquis of
Northampton , and th'@ @erle of Penbroke for his ill meaning against
them , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,374.217

and made suet for his life {COM:preceding_word_"life"_emended} , wife
and children , servauntes and dettes , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,374.218

and so departed without the ax of the Toure . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,374.219

The peple , knowing not the matter , shouted hauf_a_douzen times , so
loud that frome the halle dore it was hard at Chairing crosse plainly ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,374.220

and rumours went that he was quitte of all . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,374.221

2 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,374.222

The peax concluded by the lord marcus was ratified by me before th'@
@ambassadour , and delivered to him signed and sealed .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,374.223

3 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,374.224

The duke told certein lordes that were in the Towre that he <P_375> had
hired Barteville to kill them , wich thing Bartivill examined on
confessid , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,375.225

and so did Hammon , that he knew of itt . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,375.226

7 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,375.227

I saw the musters of the new band of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended}
men of armes , 100 of my lord treasaurour's , 100 of Northumberland ,
100 Northampton , 50 Huntington , 50 Rutland , 120 of Penbroke , 50
Darcy , 50 Cobham , 100 sir Thomas Cheiney , and 180 of the pensioners
and their bandes , with the old men of armis , al well armed men , some
with fethers , staves , and pensils of their colours , some with sleves
and hauf cotes , some with bardes and staves , etc.
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,375.228

The horses al feire and greate , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,375.229

<P_376>

the least wold not have bene given for less than 20 li.
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,376.231

Ther was none under 14 handfull , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,376.232

and 14 {COM:preceding_word_"14"_emended} and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} a hauf {SIC:a-hauf} the most part ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,376.233

and almost all horses . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,376.234

With their guidon going before them , the passed twis aboute saint
Jaymis fild , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,376.235

and compassed it round , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,376.236

and so departed . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,376.237

15 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,376.238

Their were certein devises for lawes delivered to my lerned counsaill to
penne , as by a scedule apperith . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,376.239

18 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,376.240

It was apointed I shuld have 6 chapelins ordinary , of wich tow ever to
be present , and foure alwayes absent in preaching ; <P_377> one yeare 2
in Wales , tow in Lancashier and Derby ; next yeare 2 in the marches of
Scotland , 2 in Yorkshier ; 3. yere 2 in Devonshier , 2 in Hamshere ;
4. yere 2 in Norfolk , Soutfolk , and Essex , and tow in Kent , Sussex
, etc. EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,377.241

Theis six to be Bil , Harle , Estcourt , Perne , Grindal , Bradford .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,377.242

<P_378>

20 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,378.244

The bishop of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} Duraslme was for
concealment of treason written to hime , and not disclosed at all til
the party did open him , committed to the Towre .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,378.245

21 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,378.246

Richard lord Rich , chauncellour of England , considering his sikenes ,
did deliver his seal to the lord treasaurour , the lord great <P_379>
master , and the lord chamberlaine , sent to him for that purpose ,
during the time of his siknes , and chefely of the parliement .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,379.247

<P_380>

5 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,380.249

The lord admirall came to the French king , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,380.250

and after was sent to the quene , and so conveyed to his chaumbre .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,380.251

6 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,380.252

The lord admirall christenid the French kinges child ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,380.253

and called him by the kinges commaundement Edward Alexander .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,380.254

Al that day there was musike , dauncing , and plaiing , with trioumph in
the court . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,380.255

But the lord admirall was sike of a duble quartaine .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,380.256

Yet he presentid Barnabe to the French king , who toke him to his
chaumber . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,380.257

7 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,380.258

The treaty was delivered to the lord admirall ;
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,380.259

and the French <P_381> king redd it in open audience at masse , with the
ratification of it . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.260

The lord admirall toke his leave of the French king ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.261

and retourned to Paris very sike . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.262

The same day the French king shewed the lord admirall lettres that came
from Parma , how the French men had gotten tow castels of th'@
@imperials , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.263

and in the defence of the one the prince of Macedony was slain on the
walls ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.264

and was buried with triomph at Parma . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.265

22 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.266

The great seale of England delivered to the bishop of Ely , to be keaper
thereof during the lord Rich@ @es siknes . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.267

The band of 100 men of armes wich my lord of Somerset late had ,
appointed to the duke of Southfolke . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.268

23 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.269

Removing to Grenwich . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.270

24 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.271

I began to kepe haule this Christmas , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.272

and continewed till Twelftyde . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,381.273

<P_382>

20 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,382.275

Sir Anthony Setleinger , for matters laid against him by the <P_383>
bishop of Dublin , was banished my chaumber till he had made aunswere ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,383.276

and hade the articles delivered him . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,383.277

28 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,383.278

The lord admiral came to Grenwich . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,383.279

30 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,383.280

Commission was made out to the bishop of Ely , the lord preivi-seale ,
sir Jhon Gates , sir Wiliam Petre , sir Robart Bowes , and sir Walter
Mildmay , for calling in my dettes . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,383.281

<P_384>

January EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,384.283

1 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,384.284

Orders was taken with the chandelours of London for selling there talow
candels , wich before some denied to doe ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,384.285

and some were punished with imprisonement . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,384.286

3 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,384.287

The chaleng that was made in the last month was fulfilled .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,384.288

The Chalengours were - The erle of Warwick . Sir Hary Nevel . Sir Hary
Sidney . Sir Hary Gates . Defendauntes . The lord Wiliam . Sir Wil.
Stafford . Mr. Knolls . The lord Fizwatre . Sir Jhon Parrat . The
lord Bray . The lord Ambros . Mr. Norice . Mr. Paston . The lord
Robart . Mr. Dygby . Mr. Cary . The lord Fizwarren . Mr. Warcop .
Sir Antony Brown . Sir G. Howard . Mr. Courtney . Mr. Drury .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,384.289

Thies , 18 in all , ranne six courses apece at tilt against the
chalengers , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,384.290

and accomplished ther courses right well , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,384.291

and so departed againe . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,384.292

<P_385>

5 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,385.294

There were sent to Guysnes sir Richard Cotton and mr. Bray , to take
view of Cales , Guysnes , and the merches , and with advice of the
capitaines and ingenours to devise some amendment , and thereupon to
make me certificate , and upon mine aunswere to go furder to the matter
. EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,385.295

4 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,385.296

It was apointed that if mr. Stanhop lost Hull , then that I shuld no
more be chargid therewith ; but that the towne shuld take it , and shuld
have 40 li. a yere for the repayring of the castell .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,385.297

<P_386>

2 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,386.299

I received lettres out of Irland wich appeare in the secretaryes hand .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,386.300

And thereupon th'@ @erldome of Thommound was by me geven from O'Brine's
heires , whos father was ded , and had it for terme of life , to Donnas
baron of Ebrecan , and his heires males . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,386.301

Also lettres <P_387> were written of thankes to th'@ @erls of Desmond
and Clanrikard , and to the baron of Dunganon .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,387.302

3 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,387.303

Th'@ @emperour's embassadour moved me severally that my sister Mary
might have masse , wich , with no litle reasoning with him , was denied
him . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,387.304

6 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,387.305

The forsaid chalengers came in to the turney , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,387.306

and the forsaid defendauntes entred in after with tow more with them ,
Mr. Terill and mr. Robart Hopton , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,387.307

and fought right wel , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,387.308

and so the chaleng was accomplished . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,387.309

The same night was first a play ; after a talk betwen one that was
called Riches , and th'@ @other {COM:that_was_called} Youth , wither of
<P_388> them was bettir . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.310

After some prety reasoning ther came in six champions of either side -
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.311

On Youth's side came - My lord Fizwater . Sir Wiliam Cobham . My lord
Ambros . Mr. Carie . Sir Antony Brown . Warcop . On Riches' side -
Milord Fizwarren . Digbi . Sir Robert Stafford . Hopton . Mr.
Courtney . Hungerforth . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.312

Al thes fought tow to tow at barrieres , in the hall .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.313

Then cam in tow apparelled like Almaines , th'@ @erle of Ormond and
Jaques Granado ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.314

and tow cam in like friers ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.315

but the Almaines wold not suffer them to pase til they had fought .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.316

The friers were mr. Drury and Thomas Cobham .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.317

After this folowed tow maskes , on of men , another of women . Then a
banket of 120 dishes . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.318

This was th'@ @end of Christmas . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.319

7 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.320

I went to Detford to dine there , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.321

and brake up the halle . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.322

8 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.323

Upon a certein contention betwen lord Willoughby and sir Andrew Dudley ,
capitain of Guysnes , for their jurisdiccion , the lord Willoughby was
sent for to cum over , to th'@ @intent the controversie might cease ,
and order might be taken . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,388.324

<P_389>

12 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,389.326

Ther was a commission graunted to th'@ @erle of Bedford , to mr.
vicechamberlain , and certein other , to call in my dettis that were
owing me , and {COM:sic} the dayes past , and also to cal in thos that
be past when the dayes be come . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,389.327

17 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,389.328

Ther was a match runne betwen six gentlemen of a side at tilt .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,389.329

Of one side . The erle of Warwike . The lord Robart . Mr. Sidney .
Mr. Nevel . Mr. Gatis . Antony Digby . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,389.330

Theis wane by 4 taintes . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,389.331

Of the other side . The lord Ambrose . The lord Fizwater . Sir
Fraunces Knolis . Sir Antony Browne . Sir Jhon Parrat . Mr. Courtney
. EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,389.332

18 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,389.333

The French embassadour moved that we should destroy the Scotishe part of
the debatable ground , as they had done ours .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,389.334

It was aunswered , first , the lord Coniers , that made the agreament ,
made it non otherwis but as it shuld stand with his superiour's pleasour
. Whereupon , the same agreement being misliked , bicause the Scotishe
part was much harder to overcome , word was sent to stay the matter :
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,389.335

nevertheles the lord Maxwell did upon malice to the English debatables
overrun them . Whereupon was <P_390> concluded that , if the Scottis
will agree it , the ground shal@ @be divided ; if not , then shal the
Scottis wast their debatablers {COM:sic} , and we ours , commaunding
them by proclamacion to depart . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,390.336

This day the stiliard put in their aunswere to a certein complaint that
they merchauntis adventurers laid against them .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,390.337

19 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,390.338

The bishop of Ely , <font> custos sigilli <$$font> , was made
chauncelour , bicause as <font> custos sigilli <$$font> he culd execut
nothing in the parliement that should be done , but only to seale
ordinary thinges . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,390.339

21 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,390.340

Removing to Westmister . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,390.341

22 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,390.342

The duke of Somerset had his head cut of apon Towre hill betwene eight
and nine a cloke in the morning . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,390.343

16 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,390.344

Sir Wiliam Pikering delivered a token to the lady Elizabeth , a faire
diamount . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,390.345

<P_391>

18 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,391.347

The duke of Northumberland , having under him 100 men of armis , and 100
light horse , gave up the keping of 50 men at armes to his sonne th'@
@erle of Warwike . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,391.348

23 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,391.349

The sessions of parliement began . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,391.350

24 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,391.351

Jhon Gresham was sent over into Flaundres to shew to the Fulkar , to
whom I ought mony , that I wold differ it , or , if I paid it , pay it
in Englishe , to make them kepe up their French crownes with wich I
minded to pay them . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,391.352

25 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,391.353

The aunswere of the stiliard was delivered to certein of my lerned
counsell to loke on and oversee . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,391.354

27 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,391.355

Sir Rafe Vanne was condemned of felony in treason , aunswering like a
ruffian . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,391.356

<P_392>

Paris arrived with horses , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,392.358

and showed how the French king had sent me 6 cortalles , tou Turkes , a
barbary , tou genettes , a sturring horse , and tow litle moyles ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,392.359

and shewd them to me . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,392.360

<P_393>

29 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,393.362

Sir Thomas Arrundel was likewise cast of felony in treason , <P_394>
after long controversie ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,394.363

for the matter was brought in trial bie seven of the cloke in the
morning 28. day ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,394.364

at none the quest went togither ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,394.365

they sate shut up togither in a house , without meat or drinke , bicause
they could not agree , al that day and all night ;
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,394.366

this 29. day in the morning they did cast him .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,394.367

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_3_here}

<P_434>

9 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.370

The French king came to the towne of Aveines in Henault , where after he
had veued the toune he left it , and besieged a pile called Tirloc ;
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.371

but the baily of the toune perceiving his departur , gave th'@ @onset on
his rierward , with 2000 footmen and 500 horsmen ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.372

and slew 500 Frenchmen . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.373

After this and the winning of certein holdes of litle force , the French
king returned into Fraunce , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.374

and divided his army into divers good townes to rest them ; because
divers ware sike of the flixe , and such other diseases , meaning
shortly to encrease his power , and so to go forward with his entreprice
. EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.375

12 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.376

Frederice duke of Saxe was released from his emprisonment , and sent by
th'@ @emperour into his owne countrie , to the great rejoicing of al the
Protestauntes . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.377

5 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.378

Th'@ @emperour declared that he wold none of thos articles to wich duke
Maurice agreed and the king of Romaines also .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.379

The copie of them remaineth with the secretary Cicel
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.380

Marquis Albert of Brandembourg did great harme in the countrie of
Franconie , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.381

burnt al tounes and villages about Norimberg , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.382

and compelled them to pay to the princes of his leage 200,000 dallers ,
10 of the fairest peces of ordenaunce , and 150 kintalles of pouder .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.383

After that he went to Frankfort , to distres certeine soudiars gathered
there for th'@ @emperour . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.384

15 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.385

Removing to Gildford . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,434.386

<P_435>

21 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,435.388

Removing to Petworth . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,435.389

23 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,435.390

Th'@ @aunsweare was made to th'@ @emperour's ambassadour , touching the
aide he required , by mr. Wotton and mr. Hobby , according to the
first article <font> supra <$$font> . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,435.391

24 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,435.392

Bicause the nombre of bandis that went with me this progresse made the
traine great , it was thought good they shuld be <P_436> sent home ,
save only 150 wich were pikt out of al the bandis .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,436.393

This was bicause the traine was thought to be nier 4000 horse , wich
ware inough to eat up the countrey ; EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,436.394

for ther was litle medow nor hay al the way as I went .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,436.395

25 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,436.396

Removing to Coudrey , sir Antony Broune's house .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,436.397

<P_437>

27 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,437.399

Removing to Halvenaker . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,437.400

<P_438>

30 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,438.402

Wheras it had ben before devised that the new fort of Barwike <P_439>
shuld be made with fowre bulwarkes , and for making of tow of them the
wall of the toune shuld be left open on th'@ @enemies side a great way
together , wich thing had ben both dangerouse and chargeable , it was
agreed the wall shuld stond , and tow slaughter houses to be made upon
to skowre the utter cutiners <paren> {ED:curtains} <$$paren> , a great
rampier to be made within the walle , a great diche within that ,
another walle within that , with tow other slaughter houses , and a
rampere within that again . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,439.403

26 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,439.404

The Flemminges entred in great nombers into the countrie <P_440> of
Terouenne , wherupon 600 men of armes arose of Frenchmen ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,440.405

and gave th'@ @onset on the Flemminges , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,440.406

overthrew them , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,440.407

and slew of them 1435 , wherof war 160 horsmen .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,440.408

31 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,440.409

It was appointed upon my lord of Northumberland@ @'s request , that he
shuld geve hauf his fee to the lord Wharton , and make him his deputy
warden there . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,440.410

August EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,440.411

2 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,440.412

Removing to Warblington . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,440.413

<P_441>

3 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,441.415

The duke of Guise was sent into Lorrein , to be the French kinges
lieutenant there . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,441.416

4 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,441.417

Removing to Waltham . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,441.418

<P_442>

8 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,442.420

Removing to Portesmouth . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,442.421

9 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,442.422

In the morning I went to Chaterton's bulwarke ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,442.423

and vewed also the toune . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,442.424

At afternoune went to see the storehouse , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,442.425

and ther <P_443> toke a bote , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,443.426

and went to the wodden toure , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,443.427

and so to Haselford . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,443.428

Upon viewing of wich thinges there was devised tow fortes to be made
upon the entry of the haven , one where Ridleis toure standeth , upon
the neke that makith the Camber , the other upon a like neke , standing
on the t@ @other side the haven , where stode an old bulwarke of wode .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,443.429

This was devised for the strenght of the haven .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,443.430

It was ment that that to toune side shuld be both stronger and larger .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,443.431

10 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,443.432

Hary Dudley , who lay at Portesmouth with a warlike company <P_444> of
140 good soudiars , was sent to Guisnes with his men , bicause the
Frenchmen assembled in thos frontiers in great nombers .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,444.433

Eod. Removing to Tichfeld , th'@ @erl of Southampton@ @'s house .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,444.434

14 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,444.435

Removing to Southampton . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,444.436

<P_445>

16 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.438

The French embassadour came to declare how the French king ment to send
on that was his lieutenant in the civil law at Paris , to declare wich
of our merchauntes matters have been {COM:preceding_word_"been"_emended}
adjuged on there side , and wich against them , and for what
consideration . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.439

16 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.440

Removing to Beuleu . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.441

The French embassadour brought newes how the cite of Siena had ben taken
by the French side , on St. James' day , by on that was called the
conte Perigliano , and other Italian soudiers , by treason of some
within the toune , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.442

and al the garrison of the toune , being Spaniardes , ware either taken
or slain . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.443

Allso how the mareschal Brisac had recovered Saluzzo , and taken Verucca
. EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.444

Also how Villebone had taken Turnaham and Moutreville in the Low
countrie {COM:sic} . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.445

18 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.446

Removing to Christchurche . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.447

21 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.448

Removing to Wodlands . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,445.449

<P_446>

In this monthe , after long busines , duke Maurice and th'@ @emperour
agreed on a peax . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,446.451

But marquis Albert of Brandenburg wold not consent therto ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,446.452

but went away with his army to Spires , and Wormes , Colaine and Treves
, taking large sommes of many of al cite's wich he past , but chiefly of
the clargie . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,446.453

Duke Maurice's soudiars parceiving marquis Albert wold entre into noo
peaxe , went almost al to the marquise's servises , among wich were
principal the counte of Mansfelt , baron Haideke , and a coronel of 3000
footmen and a_1000 horsmen called Reiffernberg . So that of 7000 wich
shuld be sent into Hungrie against the Turces there remained not 3000 .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,446.454

Also the duke of Wirtenberg did secretly let goe 2500 of the best
soudiars in Germany to the service of marquis Albert . So that his
powre was now very great . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,446.455

Also in this monthe th'@ @emperour departing from Villacha came to
Isbruke , and so to Monaco and to Augusta , accompanied with 8000
Spaniardes and Italians , and a litle band of a few ragged Almains .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,446.456

Also in this month did the Turkes wine the cite of Tamesino in
Transilvany , and give a battail to the Christians , in <P_447> wiche
was slaine coonte Pallavicino and 7000 Italians and Spaniardes .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,447.457

Also in this monthe did the Turkes navie take the cardinal's of Trent
tow brothrene and seaven galleres EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,447.458

and had in chase 39 other . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,447.459

Also in this month did the Turkes navie land at Terracina in the
kingdome of Naples , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,447.460

and the prince of Salerno set forward with 4000 Gascoins and 6000
Italians , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,447.461

and the conte Perigliano brought to his aide 5000 men of those that were
at th'@ @enterprise of Sierra . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,447.462

Also the mareschal Brisac wane a toune in Piemont called Bussac .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,447.463

24 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,447.464

Removing to Salisbury . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,447.465

<P_448>

26 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,448.467

Upon my lord of Northumberland@ @'s returne out of the Northe , it was
appointed for the better strenghthening of the marches , that no one man
shuld have tow offices , and therfore
{COM:preceding_word_"therfore"_emended} mr. Sturley capitaine of
Barwilie shuld leave the wardenship of th'@ @Est marches to the lord
Euers . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,448.468

And upon the lord Coniers' resignatione the capitainship of the castel
of Carlil was appointed to Gray , and the wardenship of the West marches
to sir Richard Musgrave . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,448.469

27 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,448.470

Sir Richard Cotton made controller of the houshold .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,448.471

<P_449>

28 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,449.473

Removing to Wilton . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,449.474

30 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,449.475

Sir Antony Auchar was pointed to be marshal of Callais , and sir Edward
Grimston controller of Callais . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,449.476

22 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,449.477

Th'@ @emperour , being at Augusta , did banish tow preachars ,
Protestauntes , out of Augusta , under pretence that they preached
<P_450> seditiously , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,450.478

and left Mecardus the chief precher and six other Protestaunt preachars
in the toune , giveng the magistrates leave to chose other in their
place that ware banished . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,450.479

29 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,450.480

Th'@ @emperour caused 8 Protestant citesens of the towne to be banished
of them that went to the faire at Lintz , under pretence that they ,
taking marques Albert's part , wold not abide his presence .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,450.481

September EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,450.482

2 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,450.483

Removing to Motisfunt , my lord Sandes house .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,450.484

5 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,450.485

Removing to Winchester . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,450.486

<P_451>

<P_452>

7 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,452.489

from thens to Basing , my lord treasaurour's house .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,452.490

<P_453>

10 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,453.492

And so to Donnington castel , besides the toune of Neubery .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,453.493

12 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,453.494

And so to Reding . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,453.495

<P_454>

15 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,454.497

And so to Windsor . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,454.498

<P_455>

<heading>

8=A= CHARTA , MED' SEPTEMBRIS , A=O= D'NI 1552 , A=O= REGNI R=S= E.
6=I= 6=O= EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,455.501

<$$heading>

16 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,455.503

Stuckley being latly arrived out of Fraunce , declared how that the
French king , being holly perswaded that he wold never retorne againe
into Englaund , bicause he came away without leave , uppon th'@
@apprehension of the duke of Somerset his old master , declared to him
his entent , that apon a peax made with th'@ @emperour <P_456> he ment
to besieg Cales , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,456.504

and thought surely to winne it by the way of Sandhilles , for having
Ricebank , both to famish the toune and also to beat the market place ;
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,456.505

and asked Stucleis opinion . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,456.506

When Stukley had aunswered he thought it impossible , then he told him
that he ment to land in Englaund in an angle therof about Falmouth ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,456.507

and said the bulwarkes might easly be won , and the peple war papistical
; also that monsieur de Guise at the same time shuld entre into England
by Scotland side , with th'@ @aide of the Scottis .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,456.508

19 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,456.509

After long reasoning it was determined , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,456.510

and a lettar was sent in all hast to mr. Morison , willing him to
declare to th'@ @emperoure , <P_457> that I , having pitee , as al othir
Christian princes shuld have , on the envasion of Christendome by the
Turke , wold willingly joine with th'@ @emperour and other states of
th'@ @empire , if th'@ @emperour could bring it to passe , in some leage
against the Turke and his confederates , but not to be aknowen of the
French king ; only to say that he hath no more commission , but if th'@
@emperour wold send a man into Englaund , he shuld know more .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,457.511

This was done on entente to get some frendes .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,457.512

The reasonings be in my deske . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,457.513

21 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,457.514

A lettre was sent , only to trie Stuckleis truth , to mr. Pikering , to
know wither Stucley did declare any pece of this matter to him .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,457.515

Barnabe was sent for home . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,457.516

23 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,457.517

The lord Gray was chosen deputy of Cales in the lord Willoughby's place
, who was thought unmet for it . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,457.518

24 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,457.519

Sir Nicolas Wentworth was discharged of the portership of Calles ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,457.520

and one Cotton was put into it . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,457.521

In consideracion <P_458> of his age the said sir Nicholas Wentworth had
a_hundred pound pencion . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,458.522

26 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,458.523

Lettres ware sent for the discharge of the men of armis at Michelmas
next folowing . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,458.524

27 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,458.525

The yong lordes' table was taken away , and the masters' of request ,
and the sergeauntes of armes' , and divers other extraordinary
allowances . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,458.526

26 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,458.527

The duke of Northomberland , the marques of Northampton , the lord
chaumberlain , mr. secretary Petre , and mr. secretary Cicel , endid a
matter at Eton college between the master and the fellowes ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,458.528

<P_459>

and also toke ordre for the amendment of ceirtein superstitiouse
statutes . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,459.530

28 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,459.531

Removing to Hampton Court . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,459.532

29 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,459.533

Tow lawers came from the French king to declare what thinges had passed
with th'@ @Englishmen in the kinges prevy counsel , what and whie
against them , and what was now in doing , and with what diligence .
Wich when they had eloquently declared , they ware referrid to London ,
wheir their shuld speake with them mr. secretary Petre , mr. Wotton ,
and mr. Thomas Smith . Whear by them was declared the greifes of oure
marchauntis , wich came to the summe of fifty_thousand pounds and
upwardes ; to wich they gave litle aunsweare , but that they wold make
reaport when they cam home , bicause they had yet no commission , but
only to declare us {TEXT:use} the causes of things done .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,459.534

The first day of this month th'@ @emperour departed from Augusta toward
Ulmes , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,459.535

and thanking the citesins for thier stedfast stiking to him in theis
parellous times , he passed by them to Strasboug , accompanied only with
4,000 Spaniards , 5,000 Italians , 12,000 Almains , and 2,000 horsmen ,
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,459.536

and thanking also them of Strasborg for their goodwill they bore him ,
that they wold not let the French king come into their towne , he went
to Weysumberg and so to Spires , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,459.537

and came thether the 23. of this month . Of wich thing the French king
advertised summoned an army at Metz , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,459.538

and went thitherward himself , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,459.539

sent a pay of three monthes to marques Albert and the ringrave and his
band , also willing him to stop th'@ @emperour's passage into thies Low
countries , and to fight with him . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,459.540

<P_460>

27 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,460.542

The matter of the Debatable was agreed upon according to the last
instructions . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,460.543

6 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,460.544

Duke Maurice , with 4,000 footmen and 1,000 horsmen , arrived at Vienna
, against the Turkes . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,460.545

21 . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,460.546

Marques Hans of Brandenburg cam with an army of 13,000 footmen and 1,000
horsmen to th'@ @emperour's army , EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,460.547

and many Almaine soudiars encreased his army wonderfully .
EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,460.548

For he refused none . EDWARD-1551-E1-P1,460.549

