<BEGIN_eliz-1585-e2-p1>

<P_3.4,45>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCCCXVII_QUEEN_ELIZABETH'S_LETTER_OF_LICENCE_FOR_TRANSPORTING_ONE_THOUSAND_POUNDS_WEIGHT_OF_BULLION_INTO_RUSSIA>

By the Queene Elizabeth R. ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,3.4,45.4

Wheras our Merchaunts Adventurers trading into the countrees of Moscovia
, have , at this present , almoost in a redines eight good shippes ,
fraighted with clothes and other Englishe commodities , to make saile
from our port of London toward Sainct Nicholas and other portes of
Russia , We lett you witt that for certen consideraco~ns us speciallye
moving , We have licenced , and by these presents doe licence the
bearers hereof in the name of the sayd marchaunts to cary and transport
with them out of this our realme towards the said Sainct Nicholas , and
other ports of Russia , the quantetye of one_thowsand pound waight in
bullion . Wherefore we will and commaund you to suffer the sayd bearer
of theis our lettres quietlie to passe by you with the sayd one_thousand
pound waight of bullion for the purpos aforesayd without any your staie
, lett , or molestaco~n , as ye tender our pleasure and will aunswere
for the contrarye at your perils . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,3.4,45.5

<P_3.4,46>

And theas our lettres shal@ @be your sufficient warraunt and discharge
in this behalfe . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,3.4,46.7

Given under our signet , at our manour of Grenewich , the twentieth daie
of May , 1582 , in the fower_and_twentieth yeare of our raigne .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,3.4,46.8

To all Maiours , Sherifs , Bailiffs , Constables , Customers ,
Comptrollers , Searchers , and all other our Officers , Ministers , and
Subjects to whom it shall appertayne in this case and to everye of them
. {COM:sic} L. S. ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,3.4,46.9

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCCCXVIII_QUEEN_ELIZABETH'S_LETTER_OF_RECALL_FOR_THOSE_WHO_HAD_GONE_ABROAD_WITHOUT_HER_LEAVE>

<P_3.4,47>

By the Quene . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,3.4,47.12

We greete you well . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,3.4,47.13

Forasmuch as you ar of late departed out of this our realme in a very
contemptuous sort , without either our licence , or making us or any of
our Counsell priuey therunto , We let you , therfor witt , that our
pleas=r= and express will is , that upon the allegeance and duety you
owe unto us , you do furthwith , upon the receipt herof , make yowr
repair back again into this our realm , and present your self either
unto us or our Privey Counsel to declare the causes that moved you in
this straunge sort to withdrawe yourself . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,3.4,47.14

Letting you further to understand , that if you shall refuse thus to do
, we will not faile to procede against you , according to our lawes in
that behalf provided . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,3.4,47.15

Geven under our signet , at our Palace of Westm=r= , the ... day of
<P_3.4,48> ... 1583 , in the six_and_twentieth yere of our reign .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,3.4,48.16

{COM:endorsed}

" A Lre~ from hir Ma=tie= to returne into England , beynge without leave
departed to foraine parts , disloyally , without leave . "
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,3.4,48.18

<P_1.2,294>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCXV_QUEEN_ELIZABETH_TO_KING_JAMES_THE_SIXTH_OF_SCOTLAND,_AUG._7=TH=_1583;_UPBRAIDING_HIM_WITH_BREAKING_HIS_WORD>

Amonge your manie studies my deare Brother and Coson , I would Isocrates
noble lesson weare not forgotten , that wills the Emperor his suvorain
to make his words of more accompt then other men theare othes , as
metest enseignes to showe the truest bage of a Princes armes .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,294.21

It moveth me much to move you , whan I behold how diversely sondrie
wicked pathes , and , like all evill illusions , wrapped under the cloke
of your best safety , endanger your state and best good .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,294.22

How maie yt be that yow can suppose an honorabele awneswere maie be made
me when all your doings gainesaie your former vowes .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,294.23

You deale not with one whose experience can take drosse for good
paiments , nor one that esily will be beguiled .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,294.24

No , No , I mind to sett to schoole your craftiest counsiler .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,294.25

I am sorie to se you bent to wrong youre selfe in thinking to wronge
others ; yea thos which if thay had not even than taken opertunitie to
lett a ruin that was newly begon , that plott would have perilled you
more than a_thowsand of such mene lives be worth , that perswade you to
vouche such deades to deserve a sawles pardon .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,294.26

Why <P_1.2,295> doe you forgett what you write to myselfe with your owne
hand , shewing howe dangerous a course the Duke was entred in , thougth
yow excused him sellf to thinke noe harm therin ,
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,295.27

and yet thay that with your safetie preserved yow from it , yow must
seme to give them reproche of gilty folke . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,295.28

I hope you more esteme your honor than to give yt such a staine , since
you have protested so often to have taken these Lordes for your most
affectionate subjects , and to have done all for your best .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,295.29

To conclude , I besech you passe no further in this cause till you
receve an expres messinger , a trusty servant of mine , by whome you
shall see plainley yow may receive honor and contentment with more
suretie to your rest and state , than all thes dissembling counselors
will or can bringe yowe . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,295.30

As knoweth the Lord to whose most safe keping I doe committ yow , with
my many commendations to your person . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,295.31

7 August 1583 . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.2,295.32

<P_1.3,22>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCXXV_QUEEN_ELIZABETH_TO_KING_JAMES_THE_SIXTH,_DISAVOWING_HER_HAVING_CAUSED_THE_EXECUTION_OF_THE_QUEEN_OF_SCOTS>

My deare Brother , I would you knewe <paren> though not felt <$$paren>
the extreme dolor that overwhelms my mind , for that miserable accident
which <paren> far contrary to my meaninge <$$paren> hath befalen .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,22.35

I have now sent this kinsman <P_1.3,23> of mine whom ere now yt hath
pleased yow to favor , to instruct yow trewly of that which ys to
yerksom for my penne to tell yow . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.36

I beseche yow that as God and many moe knowe , how innocent I am in this
case : ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.37

so you will believe me , that yf I had bid ought I owld {COM:sic} have
bid by yt . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.38

I am not so bace_minded that feare of any livinge creature or prince
should make me afrayde to do that were just , or don to denye the same .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.39

I am not of so base a linage , ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.40

nor cary so vile a minde . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.41

But , as not to disguise , fits not a Kinge , so will I never dissemble
my actions , but cawse them shewe even as I ment them .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.42

Thus assuringe yourself of me , that as I knowe this was deserved , yet
yf I had ment yt I would never laye yt on others shoulders ; no more
will I not damnifie my selfe , that thought yt not .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.43

The circumstance yt may please yow to have of this bearer .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.44

And for your part , thincke yow have not in the World a more lovinge
kinswoman , nor a more deare frend then my self ; nor any that will
watch more carefully to preserve yow and your estate .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.45

And who shall otherwise perswade yow , judge them more partiall to
others then yow . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.46

And thus in hast I leave to troble yow : besechinge God to send yow a
longe Reign . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.47

The 14=th= of Feb. 1586 . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.48

Your most assured lovinge sister and cosin Elizab. R.
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,1.3,23.49

<P_2.3,137>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCXXXI_THE_QUEEN_TO_THE_MARQUIS_OF_WINCHESTER_AND_THE_EARL_OF_SUSSEX,_LIEUTENANTS_OF_THE_COUNTY_OF_SOUTHAMPTON,_TO_PREPARE_AGAINST_INVASION>

By the Queene . Elizabeth R. ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,2.3,137.52

Right trustie , and righte welbelovid cousines wee greete you well .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,2.3,137.53

Whereas heertofore upon the advertismentes , from time to time and from
sondrie <P_2.3,138> places , of the great preparations of foren forces ,
made with a full intente to invade this our Realme and other our
dominions , wee gave our direccions unto you for the preparinge of our
Subjectes within your Lievetennauncies to be in readines for defence
againste any attempte , that mighte be made againste us and our Realme ,
whiche our directions we finde so well performed , that we can@ @not but
receave great contentemente therbie , bothe in respecte of your careful
procedinges therin , and allso of the greate willingenes of our people
in generall , to the accomplishement of that wherunto they weare
requiered . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,2.3,138.54

Shewinge therbie their great love , and loyalltie towardes us , which as
wee accept most thanckfullie at their handes , acknowledging
{SIC:acknowledge} ourselves infinitlie bounde to Almightie God , in that
hit hathe pleased him to blesse us with so lovinge and dewtifull
Subjectes : so wolde wee have you make hit knowen unto them on our
behalfe , forasmuche as we finde the same intention not onlie of
invadinge , but of makinge a conquest allso of this our Realme , nowe
constantlie more and more detected , and confirmide as a matter fullie
resolved on <paren> an Armie beinge alreadie put to the Seas for that
purposse which we doubte not but by godes goodnes , shall prove
frustrate <$$paren> , wee have theerfore thoughte meete , to will , and
requier you forthewith , with as muche convenient speede as you maie ,
to call togeather at some conveniente place or places the best sorte of
gentelmen <P_2.3,139> under your Lievetennancie , and to declare unto
them that consideringe these great preparacions and arrogante
threatninges nowe burst owte in action upon the Seas , tendinge to a
conquest , whearin everie mans particular state is in the hiest degree
to be towched , in respecte of Countrie , Libertie , Wiffe , Childeren ,
landes , life , and that which speciallie to be regarded , for the
profession of the trewe and sincere Religion , of Christe ; and layinge
before them the infinite and unspeakeable miseries , that followe upon
any suche accidente and change <paren> which miseries ar evidentlie
scene by the fruites of the harde and crewell governmente that is holden
in Countries not farre distante , wheare suche chaunge dothe happen ,
whatsoever pretence is otherwise geven forthe for the cause of Religion
<$$paren> wee doe looke that the most parte of them shoulde have , upon
this instante extraordinarie occasion a larger proportion of furniture ,
bothe for horsemen and footemen <paren> but especiallie horsemen
<$$paren> then hathe bine certified , therbie to be in ther best
strenghte against any attempte whate soever , and to be imployed bothe
abowte our owne parson and otherwise , as they shall have knowledge
geven unto them , the nomber of which larger proportion as sone as you
shall knowe , wee requier you to signifie to our privie Counsell ,
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,2.3,139.55

heerunto as wee doubte not but by your good indevoures , they wil@ @be
the rather conformable , So allso wee assure ourselves , that Almightie
God will so blesse their loyall <P_2.3,140> hartes boren towardes us
their lovinge Soveraigne and their naturall Countrie , that all the
attemptes of any ennymies whatesoever shal@ @be made voied and frustrate
, to their confusion , your comfortes , and to Godes highe glorie .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,2.3,140.56

Geven under our signet at our mannor of Greenewiche the xviijth. daie
of June 1588 , in the xxxth. yeere of our Raigne .
ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,2.3,140.57

Winchester . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,2.3,140.58

To our right trustye and right welbeloved Cousins the Marques of
Winchestre and the Earle of Sussex , Lieutenants of our Countie of
South=t= . ELIZ-1585-E2-P1,2.3,140.59

