<BEGIN_elyot-1531-e1-p1>

<P_29>

And nat without a necessary cause princis were in their childhode so
instructed : ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,29.3

for it serued them afterwarde for deuysynge of engynes for the warre :
or for making them better that be all_redy deuysed .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,29.4

For , as Vitruuius <paren> which writeth of buyldynge to the emperour
Augustus <$$paren> sayth , All turmentes of warre , whiche we cal
ordinance , were first inuented by kinges or gouernours of hostes ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,29.5

or if they were deuised by other , they were by them made moche better .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,29.6

Also , by the feate of portraiture or payntyng , a capitaine may
discriue the countray of his aduersary , wherby he shall eschue the
daungerous passages with his hoste or nauie : also perceyue the placis
of aduauntage , the forme of embataylynge of his ennemies : the
situation of his campe , for his mooste suertie : the strength or
weakenes of the towne or fortresse whiche he intendeth to assaulte .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,29.7

And that whiche is moost specially to be considered , in visiting his
owne dominions , he shal sette them out in figure , in suche wise that
at his eie shal appere to hym where he shall employ his study and
treasure , as well for the saulfgarde of his countray , as for the
commodite and honour therof , hauyng at al tymes in his sight the
suertie and feblenes , aduauncement and hyndrance , of the same .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,29.8

And what pleasure and also utilite is it to a man whiche intendeth to
edifie , hymselfe to expresse the figure of the warke that he purposeth
, accordyng as he hath conceyued it in his owne fantasie ? wherin , by
often amendyng and correctyng , he finally shall so perfecte the warke
unto his purpose , that there shall neither ensue any repentance , nor
in the employment of his money he shall be by other deceiued .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,29.9

More_ouer the feate of portraiture shall be an allectiue to euery other
studie or exercise . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,29.10

For the witte therto disposed shall alway {COM:sic} couaite congruent
mater , wherin it may be occupied . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,29.11

And whan he happeneth to rede or here any fable or historie , forthwith
he apprehendeth it more desirously , and retaineth it better , than any
<P_30> other that lacketh the sayd feate : by reason that he hath founde
mater apte to his fantasie . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,30.12

Finally , euery thinge that portraiture may comprehende will be to him
delectable to rede or here . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,30.13

And where the liuely spirite , and that whiche is called the grace of
the thyng , is perfectly expressed , that thinge more persuadeth and
stereth the beholder , and soner istructeth {COM:sic} hym , than the
declaration in writynge or speakynge doth the reder or hearer .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,30.14

Experience we haue therof in lernynge of geometry , astronomie , and
cosmogrophie , called in englisshe the discription of the worlde . In
which studies I dare affirme a man shal more profite , in one wike , by
figures and chartis , well and perfectly made , than he shall by the
only reding or heryng the rules of that science by the space of halfe a
yere at the lest ; wherfore the late writers deserue no small
commendation whiche added to the autors of those sciences apt and propre
figures . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,30.15

And he that is perfectly instructed in portrayture , and hapneth to rede
any noble and excellent historie , wherby his courage is inflamed to the
imitation of vertue , he forth_with taketh his penne or pensill ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,30.16

and with a graue and substanciall studie , gatherynge to him all the
partes of imagination , endeuoureth him selfe to expresse liuely , and
<paren> as I mought say <$$paren> actually , in portrayture , nat only
the faict or affaire , but also the sondry affections of euery personage
in the historie recited , whiche mought in any wise appiere or be
perceiued in their visage , countenance or gesture : with like diligence
as Lysippus made in metall kynge Alexander , fightynge and struggling
with a terrible Lyon of incomparable magnitude and fiersenesse , whom ,
after longe and difficulte bataile , with wonderfull strength and clene
might , at the last he ouerthrewe and vainquisshed ; wherin he so
expressed the similitude of Alexander and of his lordes standyng about
him that they all semed to lyue . Amonge whom the prowes of Alexander
appiered , excelling all other : ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,30.17

the residue of his lordes after the value and estimation of their
courage , euery man set out in suche forwardnes , <P_31> as they than
semed more prompt to the helpyng of their maister , that is to say , one
lasse a_ferde than an other . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,31.18

Phidias the Atheniense , whom all writers do commende , made of yuory
the simulachre or image of Jupiter , honoured by the gentiles on the
high hille of Olympus : whiche was done so excellently that Pandenus , a
counnyng painter , therat admaruailinge , required the craftis_man to
shewe him where he had the example or paterne of so noble a warke .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,31.19

Then Phidias answered that he had taken it out of thre verses of Homere
the poet : the sentence wherof ensueth , as well as my poure witte can
expresse it in englisshe : {COM:verse_omitted} where it is to be noted ,
that immediately before Thetis the mother of Achilles desired Jupiter
importunately to inclyne his fauour to the parte of the Troyanes .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,31.20

Nowe <paren> as I haue before sayde <$$paren> I intende nat , by these
examples , to make of a prince or noble mannes sonne , a commune painter
or keruer , whiche shall present him selfe openly stained or embrued
with sondry colours , or poudered with the duste of stones that he
cutteth , or perfumed with tedious sauours of the metalles by him yoten
{COM:sic} . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,31.21

But verily myne intente and meaninge is only , that a noble childe , by
his owne naturall disposition , and nat by coercion , may be induced to
receiue perfect instruction in these sciences . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,31.22

But all_though , for purposis before expressed , they shall be necessary
, yet shall they nat be by him exercised , but as a secrete pastime , or
recreation of the wittes , late occupied in serious studies , like as
dyd the noble princis before named . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,31.23

Al_though they , ones beinge attayned , be neuer moche exercised , after
that the tyme cometh concerning businesse of greatter importaunce .
Ne_the_lesse the exquisite knowlege and understanding that he hath in
these sciences , hath impressed in his eares and eies an exacte and
perfecte <P_32> iugement , as well in desernyng the excellencie of them
, which either in musike , or in statuary , or paynters crafte ,
professeth any counnynge , as also adaptinge their said knowlege to the
adminiculation {COM:sic} of other serious studies and businesse , as I
haue before rehersed : whiche , I doubt nat , shall be well approued by
them that either haue redde and understande olde autors , or aduisedly
wyll examine my considerations . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,32.24

The swete writer , Lactantius , saythe in his first booke to the
emperour Constantine agayne the gentiles : ' Of conninge commeth vertue
, ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,32.25

and of vertue perfect felicite is onely ingendred . '
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,32.26

And for that cause the gentiles supposed those princis , whiche in
vertue and honour surmounted other men , to be goddes .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,32.27

And the Romanes in lyke wise dyd consecrate their emperours , which
excelled in vertuous example , in preseruyng or augmentinge the publike
weale , and ampliatinge of the empire , calling them <font> Diui ,
<$$font> which worde representeth a signification of diuinitie , they
thinkynge that it was excedynge mannes nature to be bothe in fortune and
goodnes of suche perfection . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,32.28

<heading>

IX . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,32.30

What exacte diligence shulde be in chosinge maisters .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,32.31

<$$heading>

After that the childe hathe ben pleasantly trained , and induced to
knowe the partes of speche , and can seperate one of them from an other
, in his owne langage , it shall than be time that his tutor or
gouernour do make diligent serche for such a maister as is excellently
lerned both in greke and latine , and therwithall is of sobre and
vertuous disposition , specially chast of liuyng , and of moche
affabilitie and patience : leste by any uncleane example the tender
mynde of the childe may be infected , harde afterwarde to be recouered .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,32.33

For the natures of children be nat so moche or sone aduaunced by thinges
well done or spoken , as they be hindred and corrupted by that whiche in
actis or wordes is wantonly <P_33> expressed . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.34

Also by a cruell and irous maister the wittes of children be dulled ;
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.35

and that thinge for the whiche children be often tymes beaten is to them
euer after fastidious : wherof we nede not better autor for witnes than
daily experience . Wherfore the moste necessary thinges to be obserued
by a master in his disciples or scholers <paren> as Licon the noble
grammarien saide <$$paren> is shamfastnes and praise .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.36

By shamfastnes , as it were with a bridell , they rule as well theyr
dedes as their appetites . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.37

And desire of prayse addeth to a sharpe spurre to their disposition
towarde lernyng and vertue . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.38

Accordyng there unto Quintiliian , instructyng an oratour , desireth
suche a childe to be giuen unto hym , whom commendation feruently
stereth , glorie prouoketh , and beinge vainquisshed wepeth .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.39

That childe <paren> saithe he <$$paren> is to be fedde with ambition ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.40

hym a litle chiding sore biteth , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.41

in hym no parte of slouthe is to be feared . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.42

And if nature disposeth nat the childes witte to receiue lernynge , but
rather other wise , it is to be applied with more diligence , and also
policie , as chesing some boke , wherof the argument or matter
approcheth moste nighe to the childes inclination or fantasie , so that
it be nat extremely vicious , and therwith by litle and litle , as it
were with a pleasant sauce , prouoke him to haue good appetite to studie
. ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.43

And surely that childe , what so euer he be , is well blessed and
fortunate , that findeth a good instructour or maister : whiche was
considered by noble kynge Philip , father to the great king Alexander ,
who immediately after that his sonne was borne wrote a letter to
Aristotle , the prince of philosphers , the tenour wherof ensueth .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.44

Aristotle , we grete you well . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.45

Lettinge you weete that we haue a sonne borne , for the whiche we gyue
due thankes unto god , nat for that he is borne onely , but also for as
moche as it happeneth hym to be borne , you lyuinge .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.46

Trusting that it shall happen that he , by you taught and instructed ,
shall be herafter worthye to be named our sonne , and to enioy the
honour and substance that we nowe haue prouided .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.47

Thus fare ye well . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,33.48

<P_34>

The same Alexander was wont to say openly , that he ought to gyue as
great thankes to Aristotle his mayster as to kynge Philip his father ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,34.50

for of hym he toke the occasion to lyue , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,34.51

of the other he receiued the reason and waye to lyue well .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,34.52

And what maner a prince Alexander was made by the doctrine of Aristotle
, hit shall appere in diuers places of this boke : where his example to
princes shall be declared . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,34.53

The incomparable benefite of maisters haue ben well remembred of dyuers
princes . In so moche as Marcus Antoninus , whiche amonge the emperours
was commended for his vertue and sapience , hadde his mayster Proculus
<paren> who taught hym grammer <$$paren> so moche in fauour , that he
aduanced hym to be proconsul : whiche was one of the highest dignites
amonge the Romanes . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,34.54

Alexander the emperour caused his maister Julius Fronto to be consul :
whiche was the highest office , and in astate nexte the emperour :
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,34.55

and also optayned of the senate that the statue or image of Fronto was
sette up amonge the noble princes . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,34.56

What caused Traiane to be so good a prince , in so moche that of late
dayes whan an emperour receyued his crowne at Rome , the people with a
commune crye desired of god that he mought be as good as was Traiane ,
but that he hapned to haue Plutarche , the noble philosopher , to be his
instructour ? ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,34.57

I agre me that some be good of natural inclination to goodnes but where
good instruction and example is there to added , the naturall goodnes
must there with nedes be amended and be more excellent .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,34.58

<heading>

X . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,34.60

What ordre shulde be in lernynge and whiche autours shulde be fyrst
redde . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,34.61

<$$heading>

Nowe lette us retourne to the ordre of lernyng apt for a gentyll man .
Wherein I am of the opinion of Quintilian that I wolde haue hym lerne
greke and latine autors <P_35> both at one time : or@ @els to begyn with
greke , for as moche as that it is hardest to come by : by reason of the
diuersite of tonges , which be fyue in nombre : ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.63

and all must be knowen , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.64

or elles uneth any poet can be well understande .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.65

And if a childe do begyn therin at seuen yeres of age , he may
continually lerne greke autours thre yeres , and in the meane tyme use
the Latin tonge as a familiar langage : whiche in a noble mannes sonne
may well come to passe , hauynge none other persons to serue him or
kepyng hym company , but suche as can speake latine elegantly .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.66

And what doubt is there but so may he as sone speake good Latin , as he
maye do pure frenche , whiche nowe is broughte in to as many rules and
figures , and as longe a grammer as is latine or greke .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.67

I wyll nat contende who , amonge them that do write grammers of greke ,
<paren> whiche nowe all_most be innumerable , <$$paren> is the beste :
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.68

but that I referre to the discretion of a wyse mayster .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.69

Alway I wolde aduyse hym nat to detayne the childe to longe in that
tedious labours , eyther in the greke or latyne grammer .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.70

For a gentyll wytte is there with sone fatigate .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.71

Grammer beinge but an introduction to the understanding of autors , if
it be made to longe or exquisite to the lerner , hit in a maner
mortifieth his corage : ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.72

And by that time he cometh to the most swete and pleasant redinge of
olde autours , the sparkes of feruent desire of lernynge is extincte
with the burdone of grammer , lyke as a lyttel fyre is sone quenched
with a great heape of small stickes : so that it can neuer come to the
principall logges where it shuld longe bourne in a great pleasaunt fire
. ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.73

Nowe to folowe my purpose : ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.74

after a fewe and quicke rules of grammer , immediately , or interlasynge
hit therwith , wolde be redde to the childe Esopes fables in greke : in
whiche argument children moche do delite . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,35.75

And surely it is a moche pleasant lesson and also profitable , as well
for that it is elegant and brefe , <paren> and nat_withstanding it hath
moche varietie in wordes , and therwith moche helpeth to the
understandinge of greke <$$paren> <P_36> as also in those fables is
included moche morall and politike wisedome . Wherfore , in the
teachinge of them , the maister diligently must gader to_gyther those
fables , whiche may be most accommodate to the aduauncement of some
vertue , wherto he perceiueth the childe inclined or to the rebuke of
some vice , wherto he findeth his nature disposed .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,36.76

And therin the master ought to exercise his witte , as wel to make the
childe plainly to understande the fable , as also declarynge the
signification therof compendiously and to the purpose , fore_sene alwaye
, that , as well this lesson , as all other autours whiche the childe
shall lerne , either greke or latine , verse or prose , be perfectly had
without the boke wherby he shall nat only attaine plentie of the tonges
called Copie , but also encrease and nourisshe remembrance wonderfully .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,36.77

The nexte lesson wolde be some quicke and mery dialoges , elect out of
Luciane , whiche be without ribawdry , or to moche skorning ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,36.78

for either of them is exactly to be eschewed , specially for a noble man
, the one anoyeng the soule , the other his estimation concerning his
grauitie . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,36.79

The comedies of Aristophanes may be in the place of Luciane ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,36.80

and by reason that they be in metre they be the sooner lerned by harte .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,36.81

I dare make none other comparison betwene them for offendinge the
frendes of them both : ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,36.82

but thus moche dare I say , that it were better that a childe shuld
neuer rede any parte of Luciane than all Luciane .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,36.83

I coulde reherce diuers other poetis whiche for mater and eloquence be
very necessary , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,36.84

but I feare me to be to longe from noble Homere : from whom as from a
fountaine proceded all eloquence and lernyng . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,36.85

For in his bokes be contained , and moste perfectly expressed , nat only
the documentes marciall and discipline of armes , but also incomparable
wisedomes , and instructions for politike gouernaunce of people : with
the worthy commendation and laude of noble princis : where with the
reders shall be so all inflamed , that they most feruently shall desire
and coueite , by the imitation of their venues , to <P_37> acquire
semblable glorie . For the whiche occasion , Aristotel , moost
sharpest_witted and excellent lerned Philosopher , as sone as he had
receiued Alexander from kynge Philip his father , he before any other
thynge taught hym the moost noble warkes of Homere : wherin Alexander
founde suche swetenes and frute , that euer after he had Homere nat
onely with hym in all his iournayes , but also laide hym under his
pillowe whan he went to reste : ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,37.86

and often tymes wolde purposely wake some houres of the nyght , to take
as it were his passe_tyme with that mooste noble poete .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,37.87

For by the redinge of his warke called <font> Iliados <$$font> , where
the assembly of the most noble grekes agayne Troy is recited with theyr
affaires , he gathered courage and strength agayne his ennemies ,
wysdome , and eloquence , for consultations , and persuations to his
people and army . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,37.88

And by the other warke called <font> Odissea , <$$font> whiche
recounteth the sondry aduentures of the wise Ulisses , he , by the
example of Ulisses , apprehended many noble vertues ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,37.89

and also lerned to eskape the fraude and deceitfull imaginations of
sondry and subtile crafty wittes . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,37.90

Also there shall he lerne to enserche and perceiue the maners and
conditions of them that be his familiars , siftinge out <paren> as I
mought say <$$paren> the best from the warst , wherby he may surely
committe his affaires , and truste to euery persone after his vertues .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,37.91

Therfore I nowe conclude that there is no lesson for a yonge gentil man
to be compared with Homere , if he be playnly and substancially expouned
and declared by the mayster . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,37.92

{COM:insert_helsinki_2_here}

<P_155>

Lorde god , what a notable historie is this , and worthy to be grauen in
tables of golde ; considerynge the vertue and power of beneuolence
therin expressed . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,155.95

For the beneuolente mynde of a gouernour nat onely byndeth the hartes of
the people unto hym with the chayne of loue , more stronger than any
materiall bondes , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,155.96

but also gardeth more saulfely his persone than any toure or garison .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,155.97

The eloquent Tulli , saithe in his officis , A liberall harte is cause
of beneuolence , al_though perchance that powar some tyme lackethe .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,155.98

Contrary wise he saith , They that desire to be feared , nedes must they
drede them , of whom they be feared . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,155.99

Also Plini the yonger saith , He that is nat enuironed with charite , in
vaine is he garded with terrour ; sens armure with armure is stored .
Whiche is ratified by the mooste graue philosopher Seneke , in his boke
of mercye that he wrate to Nero , where he saith , He is <P_156> moche
deceiued that thinketh a man to be suer , where nothynge from hym can be
saulfe . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,156.100

For with mutuall assuraunce suertie is optained .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,156.101

Antoninus Pius , emperour of Rome , so moche tendred the beneuolence of
his people , that whan a greatte nombre had conspired treason againe him
, the Senate being therwith greuousely meued , endeuoured them to
punisshe the said conspiratours ; ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,156.102

but the emperour caused the examination to cesse , sayinge , that it
shulde nat nede to seeke to busily for them that intended suche
mischiefe , leste , if they founde many , he shulde knowe that many him
hated . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,156.103

Also whan the people <paren> for as moch as on a time they lacked corne
in their graynardes <$$paren> wolde haue slaine him with stones , rather
than he wolde haue the sedicious persones to be punisshed , he in his
owne persone declared to them the occasion of the scarsitie , wherwith
they beinge pacified euery man helde him contented .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,156.104

I had almost forgoten a notable and worthy remembraunce of kynge Philip
, father to great kynge Alexander . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,156.105

It was on a tyme to him reported that one of his capitaines had menacing
wordes towards him , wherby it semed he intended some domage towarde his
persone . Wherfore his counsaile aduised hym to haue good awayte of the
saide capitaine , and that he were put under warde ; to whom the kynge
answered , If any parte of my body were sicke or els sore , whether
shuld I therfore cutte it from the residue , and cast it from me , or
els endeuour my selfe that it moughte be healed ?
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,156.106

And than he called for the saide capitaine , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,156.107

and so entretayned hym with familiaritie and bounteous rewardes , that
euer after he had hym more assured and loyall than euer he was .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,156.108

Agesilaus kynge of Lacedemonia , to hym that demaunded howe a kyng
mought most suerly gouerne his realme without souldiours or a garde to
his persone , answered , If he reigned ouer his people , as a father
doth ouer his children . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,156.109

The citie of Athenes <paren> from whens issued al excellent <P_157>
doctrine and wisedom <$$paren> during the time that it was gouerned by
those persons unto whom the people mought haue a familiare accesse , and
boldly expound their grefes and damages , prospered merualously ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.110

and during a longe season raigned in honour and weale .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.111

Afterwarde the Lacedemons , by the mutabilite of fortune , vanquisshed
them in bataile ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.112

and committed the citie of Athenes to the kepyng of xxx of their owne
capitaines , which were for their pride and auarice called tyrantes .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.113

But nowe se how litle suerte is in great nombre or strength , wher
lacketh beneuolence . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.114

These xxx tyrantes were continuelly enuironed with sondry garisons of
armed men , which was a terrible visage to people that before liued
under the obedience of their lawes only . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.115

Finally the Atheniensis , by fere being put from their accustomed
accesse to their gouernours to require iustice , and there with being
fatigate as men oppressed with continual iniurie , toke to them a
desperate corage , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.116

and in conclusion expelled out of the citie all the said tyrantes ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.117

and reduced it unto his pristinate gouernance .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.118

What misery was in the life of Dionyse the tyrant of Cicile ? Who
knowing that his people desired his distruction , for his rauine and
crueltie , wold nat be of any man shauen , but first caused his owne
doughters to clippe his berde , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.119

and afterwarde he also mistrusted them , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.120

and than he him selfe with a brenning cole seared the heres of his berde
, ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.121

and yet finally was he destroyed . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.122

In like wretchednesse was one Alexander , prince of a citie called
Pherea , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.123

for he , hawing an excellent faire wyfe , nat only excluded all men from
her company , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.124

but also , as often as he wold lie with her , certaine persones shulde
go before him with torchis , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.125

and he folowing with his swerde redy drawen wolde therwith enserche the
bedde , cofers , and all other places of his chambre , leste any man
shulde be there hidde , to th@ @entent to sle him .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.126

And that nat_withstanding by the procurement of his said wife <paren>
who at the last , fatigate with his most folisshe ialousy , conuerted
her loue in to haterede <$$paren> he was slaine by his owne subiects .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,157.127

Nowe dothe it appere that this reuerende <P_158> virtue beneuolence is
of all men , most specially of gouernors and men of honour ,
incomparably before other to be embraced . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.128

Kyng Philip , whan he herd that his sonne Alexander used a meruailous
liberalite amonge the people , he sent to him a lettre , wherin he wrate
in this wise : ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.129

Alexander , what peruerse opinion hath put the in suche hope , that thou
thinkest to make them loyall unto the , whom thou with money corruptest
, consideryng that the receiuour therof is therby appaired , beinge
trained by thy prodigalitie to loke and gape alway for a semblable
custome ? ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.130

And therfore the treasure of a gentle countenance , swete answeres ,
ayde in aduersitie , nat with money onely but also with studie and
diligent endeuour , can neuer be wasted , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.131

ne the loue of good people , therby acquired , can be from their hartes
in any wise seperate . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.132

And here I make an ende to speke any more at this tyme of beneuolence .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.133

<heading>

X . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.135

Of beneficence and liberalitie . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.136

<$$heading>

All_thoughe philosophers in the description of vertues haue deuised to
set them as it were in degrees , hauing respecte to the qualitie and
condition of the persone whiche is with them adourned ; as applyinge
Magnificence to the substaunce and astate of princes , and to priuate
persones Beneficence and Liberalitie , yet be nat these in any parte
defalcate of their condigne praises . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.138

For if vertue be an election annexed unto our nature , and consisteth in
a meane , which is determined by reason , and that meane is the verye
myddes of two thynges viciouse , the one in surplusage , the other in
lacke , than nedes must beneficence and liberalitie be capitall vertues
. ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.139

And magnificence procedeth from them , approchinge to the extreme partes
; ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.140

and may be tourned in to vice if he lacke the bridle of reason .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.141

But beneficence can by no menes be vicious and retaine still his name .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,158.142

Semblably liberalitie <paren> as Aristotle saith <$$paren> is a measure
as well in <P_159> gyuing as in takyng of money and goodes .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.143

And he is only liberall , whiche distributeth accordyng to his substance
, and where it is expedient . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.144

Therfore he ought to consider to whom he shulde gyue , howe moche , and
whan . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.145

For liberalitie takethe his name of the substance of the persone from
whom it procedeth ; ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.146

for it resteth nat in the quantite or qualitie of thinges that be gyuen
, but in the naturall disposition of the gyuer .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.147

The great Alexander on a tyme , after that he had vainquisshed Darius in
bataile , one of his souldiours broughte unto hym the hede of an enemie
that he had slayne , whiche the kynge thankefully and with sweete
countenance receiued , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.148

and takyng a cuppe of golde filled with good wine , saide unto the
souldiour , In olde tyme a cuppe of golde was the rewarde of suche
vertue as thou hast nowe shewed , whiche semblably thou shalte receiue .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.149

But whan the souldiour for shamefastnes refused the cup , Alexander
added unto it these wordes ; The custome was to gyue the cuppe emptie ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.150

but Alexander giueth it to the full of wyne with good handsell . Where
with he expressed his liberall harte , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.151

and as moche comforted the souldiour as if he had gyuen to hym a great
citie . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.152

More_ouer he that is liberall neglecteth nat his substance or goodes ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.153

ne gyueth it to all men , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.154

but useth it so as he may continuelly helpe therwith other ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.155

and gyueth whan and where , and on whom it ought to be employed .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.156

Therfore it maye be saide that he usethe euery thynge best that
exerciseth the vertue whiche is to the thinge most appropred .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.157

For riches is of the nombre of thinges that may be either good or iuell
, whiche is in the arbitrement of the gyuer . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.158

And for that cause liberalitie and beneficence be of suche affinitie ,
that the one may neuer from the other be seperate .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.159

For the employment of money is nat liberalitie if it be nat for a good
end or purpose . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,159.160

The noble emperours Antonine and Alexander Seuerus gaue of the reuenues
of the empire innumerable substaunce , to the reedifieng of cities and
commune houses <P_160> decayed for age , or by erthe quaues {COM:sic}
subuerted , wherin they practised liberalitie and also beneficence .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,160.161

But Tiberius , Nero , Caligula , Heliogabalus and other semblable
monsters , whiche exhausted and consumed infinite treasures in bordell
houses , and places where abominacions were used , also in enriching
slaues , concubines and baudes , were nat therfore named liberall ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,160.162

but suffreth therfore parpetuall reproche of writars , beinge called
deuourers and wasters of treasure . Wherfore in as moche as liberalite
holy resteth in the geuynge of money , it somtyme coloureth a vice .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,160.163

But beneficence is neuer taken but in the better parte ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,160.164

and <paren> as Tulli saieth <$$paren> is taken out of vertue , where
liberalite commeth out of the cofer . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,160.165

Also where a man distributeth his substaunce to many parsones , the
lasse liberalitie shall he use to other ; ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,160.166

so with bounteousnes bountie is minisshed . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,160.167

Onely they that be called beneficiall , and do use the vertue of
beneficence , whiche consisteth in counsaylinge and helpinge other with
any assistence in tyme of nede , shall alway finde coadiutours and
supportours of their gentyll courage . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,160.168

And doughtlas that maner of gentilnesse that consisteth in labour ,
studie , and diligence , is more commendable , and extendeth further ,
and also may more profite parsones , than that whiche resteth in
rewardes and expences . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,160.169

But to retourne to liberalitie . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,160.170

What greater foly may be , than that thinge that a man most gladly dothe
, to endeuour him with all studie that it may no lenger be done ?
Wherfore Tulli calleth them prodigall , that in inordinate feastes and
bankettes , vayne playes , and huntinges , do spende al their substaunce
, and in those thinges wherof they shall leaue but a shorte or no
remembraunce . Wherfore to resorte to the counsaile of Aristotle before
expressed . Natwithstandinge that liberalitie , in a noble man
specially , is commended , all_though it somwhat do excede the termes of
measure ; yet if it be well and duely emploied , it acquireth parpetuall
honour to the giuer , and moche frute and singuler commoditie therby
encreaseth . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,160.171

For <P_161> where honeste and virtuous parsonages be aduaunced , and
well rewarded , it sterith the courages of men , whiche haue any sparke
of vertue , to encrease therein , with all their force and endeuour .
Wherfore nexte to the helpinge and relieuinge of a communaltie , the
great part of liberalitie is to be emploied on men of vertue and good
qualities . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,161.172

Wherein is required to be a good election and iugement , that , for hope
of rewarde or fauour , under the cloke of vertue be nat hidde the moste
mortall poisone of flaterie . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,161.173

<heading>

XI . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,161.175

The true discription of amitie or frendship . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,161.176

<$$heading>

I haue all_redy treated of beneuolence and beneficence generally .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,161.178

But for als moche as frendship , called in latine <font> Amicitia ,
<$$font> comprehendeth bothe those vertues more specially and in an
higher degree , and is nowe so infrequent or straunge amonge mortall men
, by the tyrannie of couetise and ambition , whiche haue longe reigned ,
and yet do , that amitie may nowe unethe be knowen or founden throughout
the worlde , by them that seeke for her as diligently , as a mayden
wolde seeke for a small siluer pinne in a great chamber strawed with
white russhes , I will therfore borowe so moche of the gentle redar
thoughe he be nigh wery of this longe mater , barrayne of eloquence and
pleasaunt sentence , and declare some what by the way of very and true
frendship . Whiche perchaunce may be an allectife to good men to seeke
for their semblable , on whom they may practise amitie .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,161.179

For as Tulli saieth , Nothinge is more to be loued or to be ioyned
to_gether , than similitude of good maners or vertues ; where in be the
same or semblable studies , the same willes or desires ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,161.180

in them it hapneth that one in an other as moche deliteth as in him
selfe . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,161.181

But nowe let us enserche what frendship or amitie is .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,161.182

Aristotle saieth that frendship is a vertue , or ioyneth <P_162> with
vertue ; whiche is affirmed by Tulli , sayenge , that frendship can nat
be without vertue , ne but in good men onely . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,162.183

Who be good men , he after declareth to be those parsones , whiche so do
beare them selfes and in such wyse do lyue , that their faithe , suertie
, equalitie and liberalitie be sufficiently proued . Ne that there is
in them any couetise , wilfulnes , or foole_hardinesse , and that in
them is great stabilitie or constaunce ; ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,162.184

them suppose I <paren> as they be taken <$$paren> to be called good men
, which do folowe <paren> as moche as men may <$$paren> nature , the
chiefe capitayne or guide of mannes lyfe . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,162.185

Moreouer the same Tulli defineth frendship in this maner , sayenge ,
That it is none other thinge , but a parfecte consent of all thinges
appertayninge as well to god as to man , with beneuolence and charitie ;
and that he knoweth nothing giuen of god <paren> except sapience
<$$paren> to man more commodius . Which definition is excellent and
very true . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,162.186

For in god , and all thinge that commeth of god , nothing is of more
greatter estimation than loue , called in latin <font> Amor , <$$font>
whereof <font> Amicitia <$$font> commeth , named in englisshe
frendshippe or amitie ; the whiche taken a_way from the lyfe of man , no
house shall abide standinge , no felde shall be in culture .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,162.187

And that is lightly parceiued , if a man do remember what commeth of
dissention and discorde . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,162.188

Finally he semeth to take the sonne from the worlde , that taketh
frendshippe from mannes life . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,162.189

Sens frendshippe can nat be but in good men , ne may nat be without
vertue , we may be assured that therof none iuell may procede , or
therewith any iuell thinge may participate . Wherfore in as moche as it
may be but in a fewe parsones <paren> good men being in a small nomber
<$$paren> , and also it is rare and seldome <paren> as all vertues be
communely <$$paren> , I will declare after the opinion of Philosophers ,
and partly by commune experience , who amonge good men be of nature
moste apte to frendshippe . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,162.190

Betwene all men that be good can nat all_way be amitie ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,162.191

but it also requireth that they be of semblable or moche like maners .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,162.192

For grauitie and affabilitie be <P_163> euery of them laudable qualities
, ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,163.193

so be seueritie and placabilitie , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,163.194

also magnificence and liberalitie be noble vertues ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,163.195

and yet frugalitie , which is a sobrenesse or moderation in liuinge is ,
and that for good cause of al wise men extolled .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,163.196

Yet where these vertues and qualities be seperately in sondry parsones
assembled , may well be parfecte concorde , ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,163.197

but frendshippe is there seldome or neuer ; ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,163.198

for that , whiche the one for a vertue embraceth , the other contemneth
, or at the leste neglecteth . Wherfore it semeth that wherein the one
deliteth , it is to the other repugnaunt unto his nature ;
ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,163.199

and where is any repugnaunce , may be none amitie , sense frendshippe is
an entier consent of willes and desires . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,163.200

Therfore it is seldome sene that frendship is betwene these parsones , a
man sturdie , of oppinion inflexible , and of soure countenaunce and
speche , with him that is tractable , and with reason persuaded , and of
swete contenaunce and entretaynement . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,163.201

Also betwene him which is eleuate in autoritie and a nother of a very
base astate or degree . ELYOT-1531-E1-P1,163.202

