<BEGIN_essex-1600-e2-p1>

<P_1>

<heading>

<font> The Arraignment of the Earles of Essex and Southampton in
Westminster hall on Thursdaye ye <$$font> xix. <font> of Februarie
<$$font> 1600 . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,1.4

<$$heading>

The place was <paren> as abovesaid <$$paren> in Westminster hall in a
Courte made of purpose , square and spacious , the heade towarde the
Kinge's Bench : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,1.6

vppon the sides of the Square , were made seates for the Lordes the
Tryers to sitt above , and a lower seate for the judges ;
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,1.7

at the upper ende of the Square was onely one seate , w=ch= was a Chayre
, and a footestoole under a cloth of Estate , and noe Seate nearer it
then the upper ende of the twoe sides of the Square : In w=ch= Chaire
sat the Lo. Tresurer Lo. Stewarde for y=t= tyme : who came into the
Hall w=th= 7 Seargeantes at Armes , the kinge of herraldes bearinge
before him a longe white rodd w=ch= I observed sometymes to be held by a
kinge of herraldes and sometyme by a gentleman vsher .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,1.8

There attended y=t= day 4 gentlemen Vsshers in ye Courte at the foote of
the Lo. Steward : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,1.9

there was cutt into the table a place for the Clearke of the Crowne to
sitt in , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,1.10

And at the lower ende of the Square towardes the hall doore satt on lowe
seates the Queene's Counsel ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,1.11

and directlie at theire backe , a place of a conveniente bignes for the
2 Earles rayled in to save them from the thronge .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,1.12

The Lo. and judges beinge sett , about 9 of the clocke the Prisoners
came , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,1.13

ffirst the Earle of Essex , led by the Lo. Constable of the Towre , the
Lo. Tho. Howard , attended {COM:preceding_word_"attended"_emended} by
divers gentlemen of quality and the Axe borne before them by the gent
Porter of the Towre , w=th= the edge from him , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,1.14

and after him came the Earle <P_2> of South~ton led by the Leiftenente
of the Towre Sr Jo. Peighton and others w=th= him ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.15

and p~sentlye p~clamacon was made by a Sergeante at Armes to keepe
silence and heare the Queene's Commission redd : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.16

then the Clearke of the Crowne redd the Comission :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.17

and in that tyme the Earle of Essex spake softlie twice or thrice to the
E. of South~ton . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.18

The writt beinge returned , the Lo. Constable was called to bringe
forth the Prisoners , Robte E. of Essex & Henrye E. of South~ton ,
w=ch= done the Lo. Constable tooke his place amonge the Barons as a
tryer . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.19

Then proclamacon was made to retorne the names of the Peeres sumoned
upon the triall , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.20

then the peeres were called in order as followeth :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.21

ffirst Th'@ @erles of Oxenford , of Shrewsebury , of Darbye , of
Cumberland , of Worcester , of Sussex , of Hertford , of Lincolne and of
Nottingham : The Lo. Vicount Bindon , the Lo. de La Ware , Lo. Money
, Lo. Cobham , Lo. Stafford , Lo. Graye , Lo. Lumley , Lo. Hunsdon
, Lo. Riche , Lo. Darcie of Chick : Lo. Chandoss , Lo. Windsore ,
Lo. S=ct= John of Bletsoe , Lo. Burleigh , Lo. Compton and Lo.
Howard of Wallden . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.22

A Question was moved to the judge by the E. of Essex , whether <paren>
as in lyke cases as it was allowed by men of private condicon <$$paren>
they might challenge any of there Peeres , affirminge yt though for his
p~te he were verie indifferent , yet p~haps the E. that stoode by him ,
might make iuste challenge to some of them . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.23

The judges said directlie y=t= the lawe did allowe them noe challenge of
their Peeres . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.24

The judges that satt were the Lo. Cheife Justice of England , the
Cheife Justice of the Com~on Plees , the Lo. cheife Barron , Justice
Gawdye , Justice Ffenner , Justice Walmysley , Baron Clearke and Justice
Kyngesmyle : Allso 2 Sergeantes , M=r= Heale and M=r= Harris .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.25

The Queene's Counsell were M=r= Sergeant Yelverton , M=r= Cooke ,
Attorney generall , M=r= fflemynge sollicitor and M=r= Bacon :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.26

Then said the Clerke of the Crowne , Robte E. of Essex , hold vp thy
hande , w=ch= he did of a greate heighte , sayinge he had done it to
better p=r~=pose : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.27

likewise the E. of South~ton held vp his <paren> so did they <$$paren>
both times , beinge joyntlie indighted by 2 severall Endightmt=es= :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,2.28

The cheife pointes <P_3> were the rebellinge in Essex house , the
sekinge to deprive her ma=tie= of lyfe and gou~ment , to sett the Crowne
vppon his owne heade , the Consultacon and resolucon to goe to White
hall to surprize {COM:preceding_word_"surprize"_emended} her ma=tie= ;
the imprisoninge the Lo. of the Counsell and others sent from her
Ma=tie= to disswade theire traytore purposs , the p~swadinge the
Londoners to ioyne w=th= them and the killinge the Queene's subiectes .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.29

Beinge demaunded guyltie or not guilty they both answered not guyltie
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.30

and for tryall put themselves upon god and there peeres :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.31

I have <paren> quoth the E. of Essex <$$paren> a true harte to her
Ma=tie= and my countrye ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.32

and have done nothinge but that w=ch= by the Lawe of nature and the
necessitie of my case I was inforced unto ; ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.33

Then the Lo. Steward gave the prisoners to vnderstand that howsoever
theire offences were notorious , yet her ma=tie= was contented to allow
them a lawfull and an honorable tryall : and libertie to speake for
themselves . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.34

Th'@ @earle of Essex while the Enditem=tes= were readinge smiled often
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.35

and lifted his eyes to heavne {COM:sic}

and after they were redd p~tested him selfe a trew_harted subiect to her
ma=tie= ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.37

and called god to witnes before Whome <paren> he said <$$paren> he
looked shortelie to appeare . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.38

Then M=r= Seriant Yellverton began to the Lo. Steward <paren> givinge
him the tytle of his grace <$$paren> to open the matter , makinge firste
repeticon of the substance of th'@ @enditem=tes= : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.39

Then urged the pointes of imprisoninge the Lordes at Essex house in
w=ch= doinge yt appeared they neither respected the Clemencie of her
ma=tie= that sente them , the p~sonns of those that came , nor theire
Errand , w=ch= was to vnderstand theire greifes and to make sinceare
report of them to her ma=tie= and to admonishe the dissolvinge of the
vnrulye companye there Congregated : All w=ch= notwithstandinge they
{COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} persisted in theire Rebellious
purposes And went into London , leavinge the Lo. in the custodye of
S=r= John Davies , ffraunces Tresham & Owen Sallisburie , w=th= charge
that if either any shold offer to enlarge them or that the E. of Essex
shold miscarrie in the Cittye then to kyll them . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.40

When they came into the Cittye theye there soughte helpe to attempte the
Courte ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,3.41

and failinge there retorned againe to Essex house , there fortifyinge
againste <P_4> her ma=te's= knowne officers of her Armye , wherein he
affirmed they comitted manifeste treason : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.42

ffor <paren> sayth he <$$paren> yf a man intend the deathe of a kinge
beinge the heade of the comon welthe w=t=hout w=ch= the members can@
@not live , it is Treason : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.43

they not onlye intended but allso acted so far forthe as was in there
powre vz : By assemblinge a powre and encitinge the Subiectes to Rebell
, ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.44

he compared this facte of the E. of Essex to that of Cataline in Roome
. ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.45

Cataline tooke the most sedicous , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.46

the Earle tooke Atheist , Papiste , men reconcyled to the Pope , men
discontented and of dissolute behavior : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.47

the difference was onelye this that Catalyne was followed of the
Romaines , but noe Londoners followed the Earle : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.48

Then he obiected to the Earle the Queene's favor towardes him ;
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.49

noe man advanced younger to place in Counsell nor to more dignities ,
all w=ch= the Earle abused , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.50

and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} did
{COM:preceding_word_"did"_emended} make his cheife companions of sword
men , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.51

and affectinge popularitie declared the insacietie of Ambition , w=ch=
never cesseth till it attayne as highe as it can see , Comparinge it to
the Crocodyle that is said to growe as longe as he liveth :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.52

And these treasons beinge apparent and knowne to manie of the Peeres ,
havinge bene sume of them her Ma=te's= Ministers for suppressinge the
Rebellion , he wondred that the Earles wold pleade not guiltie .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.53

Besides theire treasons howsoever sodenlye attempted , were not so
soddainly contrived , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.54

But were of a more auncient date as shold be p~ved :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.55

Then M=r= Attornye began to this effect , That for the better informacon
of the Lordes , he wold deliver unto them Fitzherbarte's reporte , w=ch=
was that the verie thoughte was Treason , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.56

but bicause the thoughtes were onely knowne to god , therefore it is not
p~mitted to be adiuged , till they appeare by sume discourse either by
word , wrytinge or acte , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.57

And further declared that whosoever goeth aboute into open Rebellion ,
is <paren> in the construction of the Lawe <$$paren> guyltie of
determing {COM:sic} the deathe and destruction of the Prince .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.58

Th'@ @earle <paren> sayth he <$$paren> hathe done both ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.59

for he hath raised a power in a setled goverment w=ch= the lawe intendes
to be a purpose to destroye the kinge , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.60

for he y=t= abusethe the gou'm=t= hates the Governor .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,4.61

The contynuinge <P_5> of his power assembled at Essex house being
comaunded to disperse them , is playne Treason . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.62

Agayne <paren> saith M=r= Attorney <$$paren> to rayse force to take a
Towne , forte or place of defence is Treason : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.63

the E. of Essex raised a force not to take a small Towne but the verie
Cittye of London : not a slend=er= fforte but y=e= Towre , nor there to
rest , but to attempt the sacred Pallace of the Prince , killinge her
subiectes after a most disloyall mane=r= . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.64

What should I say more , <font> Res ipsa loquitur <$$font> .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.65

But what answeres my Lo. of Essex ? ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.66

that the Lawe of nature comaunndes and he was bound to his owne defence
. ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.67

But I will shewe that he transgressed the Lawes both of God & Nature and
of reacon's . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.68

Consider first the Quallitie of the offence , 2 the manner 3 the p~sons
by whome 4 the p~sons against whome it was comitted , and they shall be
lefte w=t=hout excuse . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.69

And ffirst let me tell them , that Treason for satisfacon of a passion
in Nature is noe excuse to Treason . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.70

All offences gainst God and nature , are peccata clemantia peccata
Sanguinis : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.71

Rebellion worst of all confoundes all Nature , God and reacons .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.72

This Treason is for y=e= quallitie p~meditate and aymed at the heade ,
even of her Ma=tie= : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.73

ffor the manno=r= howe soddaine soev=er= yet it is high Treason :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.74

ffor soddaine Treason is not les daungero=s= then y=t= w=ch= is of
longer growth . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.75

But my Lo. yo=r= offence was past an imaginerie offence ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.76

it was Armata iniquitas ; ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.77

neither was it of that soddaines as yo=u= wold have it beleeved ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.78

ffor yo=u= wore a black bag about yo=r= necke conteininge a Catalogue of
the names of such as were mene of yo=r= number : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.79

a black bagg was meetest for such a black cause : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.80

But my Lo. there lyes a greate burthen vppon yo=r= Lo=p= for drawinge
so many worthye gent. into so desp~ate and detestable a busines .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.81

ffor the p~sons by whome thes Treasons were comitted , they received
there first breath vnd=er= her mat=ie's= gou~nm=t= :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.82

Th'@ @earldome of Essex given to his father by her ma=tie= ;
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.83

how she hath loaden this man w=th= hono=ers= , office and dignities ,
the world can testifie <paren> there he recyted all his offices
<$$paren> ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.84

above all her ma=tie's= favo=res= made him greate ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.85

neither was it fruitles to his estate : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,5.86

for I am able to p~ve and make good accompte that her ma=te's= guiftes
to him <P_6> amounted to 300_thousand poundes . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.87

Allso the Earle of South: received divers favo=res= from her ma=tie= ,
thoughe for his misdemeanores it pleaseth her to thinke worse of him .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.88

The p~son against whome thes treasons were intended was against her
sacred ma=tie= , against the Relligion w=ch= her highenes sincerely
p~fesseth at home and p~tecteth in other provinces : and her exercise of
Justice comixed wth admirable mercy , w=ch= is aparant in this , that in
the examinacon of all the p~sons imp~soned for this facte , none were
rackte nor offer of fortune made unto them . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.89

And an other thinge materiall to be noted comes into my mynde ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.90

no two of the examinantes spake togither ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.91

& yet they all agree in ye substance of theire tales .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.92

Then he declared the lenitye of the first p~ceedinge vz : that the
Lo=es= of the Counsell put unto them 2 Counsello=res= of State to summon
him ; ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.93

the reason because there was a Roytous company assembled ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.94

The intent to admonish him , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.95

he came {COM:preceding_word_"came"_emended} not , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.96

was forborne till the next day y=t= a guilty conscience counselled him
to put himselfe into strengthe : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.97

ffor there were forces expected from Wales , y=e= discou'ie whereof th'@
@earle nowe doubted ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.98

& Consultacon was had amongst them 3 monthes before whether was best ,
first to surprize the Tower and Court , or to p~ve there freindes in
London . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.99

Allso at Drewrie house , it was resolved vppon 4 daies before theie
brake owte into open rebellion y=t= to goe to ye Courte was ye best :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.100

then was allotted to eurie one his severall place of charge ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.101

S=r= Christopher Blunt , a reconcyled Papist , to haue charge of the
utter gate , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.102

S=r= John Davies the Hall , a Papist likewise ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.103

& S=r= Charles Davers the presence , a secret Papist <paren> as is
confessed <$$paren> , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.104

Th'@ @erle of Essex the privye Chamber : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.105

Should the Court have bene thus guarded , oh <paren> saith <$$paren> Sr
Christopher Blunt , what fearefull humo=er= shall we fynde them in at
Courte when we surprize them . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.106

Well what shold be the end of ye surprize ? ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.107

forsoothe to call a p~liament . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.108

A bloody parliam=t= wold that haue bene when yo=r= Lo=p= that nowe
standeth all in black , shold haue worne a bloody Robe .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.109

But my hope is y=t= he shal@ @be Robte the laste Earle of his house that
wold have bene Robte the first Kinge of this land :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.110

Well what did he ? ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,6.111

he <P_7> assembles a greate number of Barons , Earles and gent. of
Quallitie : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.112

yet her ma=tie= held gracous ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.113

and sent unto him favor vz. the Lo. Keep: th'@ @earle of Worcester ,
the Comptroller and the Lo. Cheife Justice , two of them of his owne
blood , th'@ @other , men that never malliced him , as himselfe will
<paren> I thinke <$$paren> confess . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.114

Thes charged him vpon his alledgiaunce , to lay downe his Armes and to
disolve his troupe . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.115

Nowe marke the fury of a rebellious company , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.116

They cried owte kill them , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.117

kill them , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.118

we shall have the less to doe , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.119

they but abuse and goe aboute to betraye yo=u= : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.120

here you see Treason in the house : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.121

before he went owte he was a Trayto=r= ; ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.122

when he came into the Citty whatt did he ? ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.123

even followed the rules of Treason : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.124

Treason durst never looke directlye vppon a Prince ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.125

for the Ma=tie= of godes annoynted doth ever call forth such beames as
daunteth the eye of disloyaltie ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.126

and therefore he p~tendes a cause of stirringe the State ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.127

Or <paren> saith he <$$paren> at firste entraunce I shold haue bene
murthered by my Lo. Cobham and S=r= Walter Raleighe
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.128

but when he was gott w=t=hin them & began to speake nearer to them ,
then an other cause was invented , vz. y=t= the Kingdome of England
sholde be soulde to the Infanta of Spayne : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.129

In the end fyndinge in London truer hartes then he expected , he
resolved vppon his retorne , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.130

what to doe ? ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.131

to burne some pap'r least they shold hurte his freindes :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.132

Then M=r= Atto=r=ney besoughte the Lo. Howard y=t= certaine deposicons
might be redd for proofe of thes matters . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.133

Th'@ @earle replied y=t= there was oddes betweene the memorie and
Oratorie of the Queene's con~sell and theires that were prisoners , and
that it belonged to the Q. counsell to lay all possible as~p~sions
vppon those at that Barr . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.134

And desired the Peeres to consider of theire woordes accordinglie .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.135

Then was p~duced the examinacon of one Witherington a borderer of Wales
, that the Saterdaie before he tould th'@ @erle of Rutland that he
wondred at the Course he held w=th= y=e= State . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.136

Th'@ @erle of Essex tooke some excepcon to him in respecte he was not
p~sent , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.137

but <paren> as he said <$$paren> p~tested the sinceritye of his
Relligion : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,7.138

And for the threates vsed to the Lordes , he never hard them , the house
beinge so full of noyse that one could not <P_8> heare an other speake :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.139

some cryed one thinge and some another , as everie p~ticular humour ledd
them . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.140

But for his owne p~te he never ment any thinge towarde them , but y=t=
w=ch= was loyall , shuitable and affectionate : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.141

ffor S=r= John Davyes he p~tested deeply he never knewe him not to be a
papist , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.142

he came orderly to prayers in his house , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.143

neither observed he in him any difference of his dress .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.144

The charge of his house when he wente owte he lefte wth S=r= Gellie
Marwick , who had once beene his Steward and nowe was his ffreind
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.145

& that w=ch= he did he was forced unto in his owne iuste defence ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.146

for he understoode , not by a naked surmise but by sound adu~tisem=t=
that his private Enemyes had levied force and ment to surprize him in
his house : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.147

he allso p~tested deeplie the sincerity of his harte towarde her Ma=tie=
and his Countrye ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.148

and wished that all disloyall hartes mighte haue the reward dew unto
them . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.149

Then the Lo. Admirall desired the Lo. Cheife Justice to declare his
knowledge of what passed in Essex house at his beinge there w=th= the
rest : whereuppon he was sworne and then spake to this effecte , That
they were sent to them to drawe them to a better course and to informe
trulye at Courte , the matters whereat they tooke offence .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.150

They required of th'@ @erle of Essex to know his greifes , wth p~mise to
reporte them sincearlie . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.151

My Lo. <paren> sayth he <$$paren> began to tell us that one was
touchinge th'@ @erle of South: in whiche instant one at my back , cryed
owte kyll them , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.152

kill them : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.153

he said he knewe him not yf he sawe him agayne , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.154

but he was suer he had on a white Sattin doblett .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.155

That they desired private conference , where to th'@ @erle answered that
he wold come to them anon . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.156

But at the dore were set Musketeres to guarde the place ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.157

and none was suffered to goe owte from them to reporte in what plight
they were . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,8.158

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_here}

<P_23>

The Earle answered , that if he had purposed any thinge againste any
other then those his private enemyes , he wold not have stirred wth so
slender a Company . Whereto M=r= Bacon answered in this sorte ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.161

it was not the company yo=u= carryed w=th= yo=u= that yo=u= trusted vnto
but the assistance w=ch= you hoped for in the Cittye .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.162

The Guise thurste himselfe into Paris against the Kinge , with onelye a
gent. , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.163

and found that helpe there w=ch= yo=u= <paren> thanckes be to God
<$$paren> fayled of here . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.164

And what followed ? ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.165

The Kinge was put to his Pillgrime's habitt , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.166

and in that disguise was forced to escape the furye of the Guise :
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.167

yo=u= came w=th= fayer pr~tence , w=th= all hayle and a kisse , to the
Cittye , ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.168

but the ende was treason . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.169

And that hath bene sufficiently p~ved . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.170

The Earles spake agayne in effect <paren> as before <$$paren> for theire
owne defence , willinge a p~formaunce of the p~mise made them by the Lo.
Admyrall , to have an honorable tryall : and civill vsage , in the meane
tyme , all w=ch= they thanckfully acknowledged to have bene p~formed .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.171

Then the Lo. Steward had the Earles to goe togither ,
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.172

and Comaunded the Leivetennte of the Tower to w=t=hdrawe his prisoners
from the Barr . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.173

The Peeres went out , into a place p~vided for them , fayre hanged w=th=
Tapistrye , in the place where the Courte of Chauncerie was keepte .
ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.174

And after some half hower's consultacon havinge allso called the judges
into them , to resolve them the poyntes of Lawe , they came forth againe
, ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,23.175

and tooke there places <P_24> as before . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,24.176

Then were they all called . ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,24.177

And then the Lo. Steward demaunded of the youngest Lo. first , w=ch=
was the Lo. Howard of Wallden : how say yo=u= my Lo. is my Lo. of
Essex : ESSEX-1600-E2-P1,24.178

{COM:Rest_of_the_page_blank_and_other_five_pages_following}

