<BEGIN_essexstate-1600-e2-p1>

<P_198>

<font> Serjeant <$$font> Yelverton <font> 's Speech <$$font> .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.3

First he began to open the Evidence , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.4

and shewed the Effect of the Indictment , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.5

and held it in his Hand , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.6

and said as followeth : May it please your Grace <paren> speaking to the
High Steward <$$paren> , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.7

about the 8th of <font> February <$$font> last , my lord of <font> Essex
<$$font> <paren> there Prisoner at the Bar <$$paren> went about with
armed Men very rebelliously to disinherit the Queen of her Crown and
Dignity ; which when it came to her Majesty's Ear , she of her abounding
Mercy sent to see if it were possible to stop Rebellion :
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.8

and who did she send ? ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.9

She sent <paren> my Lord <$$paren> no worse Persons than my Lord Keeper
, my Lord Chief Justice of <font> England <$$font> , the Earl of <font>
Worcester <$$font> , and Sir <font> William Knowles <$$font> ; all which
went in her Majesty's Name , and commanded the Earls and their Adherents
very strictly to dissolve their Assemblies , and to lay down their Arms
. ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.10

But he knowing it , very treacherously imprisoned the said Lords and
Counsellors by her Majesty so sent , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.11

and altogether refused her Majesty's Authority :
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.12

and divers of the Confederates cry'd out , Kill them , kill them !
Thereby putting her Majesty's Council in fear of their Lives ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.13

and withal , left them with Sir <font> Jo. Davis <$$font> to keep safe
, lest they themselves should miscarry in the City .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.14

But , my Lord , I must tell you this by the way , that my Lord of <font>
Essex <$$font> can no way excuse nor shadow this his rebellious Purpose
, nor turn his Actions to any other intent :
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.15

for the sending of <font> Temple <$$font> his Secretary into <font>
London <$$font> the night before , manifesteth his determination ,
without Scruple or Question ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.16

for by that means he was in hopes to have had the help of the Citizens ,
her Majesty's most loyal and loving Subjects :
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.17

and he used not only his best endeavours to strengthen himself abroad ,
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.18

but also fortified his House at home with strong Defence and Ammunition
; all which were Tokens of his Inclinations to a sudden and unexpected
Rebellion , and were confirmed in the opinion of all the World , when he
withstood divers of her Majesty's Subjects standing in her Highness's
Right , and Defence of her Peace , against him and his Confederates .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.19

Good my Lord , I beseech your Grace , and you my Lords that are the
Peers , to understand , That if any Man do but intend the Death of the
King , it is Death by the Law : ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.20

for he is the Head of the Commonwealth , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.21

and all his Subjects as Members ought to obey and stand with him .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.22

But as for this rebellion , being duly considered , it contains in it
many Branches of Treason , which are and will be directly proved : which
being found to be so , my Lords , who are their Peers , are to find them
Guilty . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.23

Hereof need {COM:sic} to be made no doubt , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.24

for it is more manifest than the Sedition of <font> Catiline <$$font> to
the City of <font> Rome <$$font> , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.25

and consequently <font> England <$$font> is in no less danger ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.26

for as <font> Catiline <$$font> entertained the most seditious persons
about all <font> Rome <$$font> to join with him in his Conspiracy , so
the Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> had none but Papists , Recusants , and
Atheists for his Adjutors and Abettors in their capital Rebellion
against the whole Estate of <font> England . <$$font>
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.27

My Lord , I much wonder that his Heart could forget all the Princely
Advancements given him by her Majesty , and be so suddenly beflinted ,
as to turn them all to rebellious Ends ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.28

but it seems this overweighing a Man's own Conceit , and an aspiring
Mind to wish {SIC:wished} Honour , is like the Crocodile , which is ever
growing as long as he liveth . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.29

Your Lordships know in what sort they went into the City , with Armour
and Weapons , and how they returned to <font> Essex-House <$$font> again
, as you my Lord Admiral , and my Lord of <font> Cumberland <$$font> ,
with others of their honourable Peers do know ; which makes me wonder
they do not blush to be so forward to stand upon their Trials without
Confession , when their intended Treasons are in all Men's Judgments
palpable . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.30

For my part , my Lord , I can conjecture nothing hereby ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.31

and it will not easily out of my own conceit , but that there is some
further Matter in it than as yet appears ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,198.32

<P_199>

but my hope is , that God of his Mercy , that hath revealed their
Treasons , will not suffer the rest of his or any others to the hurt of
the State , or prejudice to her Majesty's most Royal Person , whom I
pray God long to preserve from the hands of her Enemies .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.34

<font> Amen <$$font> , cry'd the Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> and the
Earl of <font> Southampton <$$font> , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.35

and God confound their Souls that ever wished otherwise to her sacred
Person . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.36

<font> Attorney Gen. <$$font> May it please your Grace , the Lords
Chief Judges , which are the Fathers of the Law , do know that the
Thought of Treason to the Prince , by the Law is Death ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.37

and he that is guilty of Rebellion , is guilty of an Intent <paren> by
the Laws of the Land <$$paren> to seek the Destruction of the Prince ,
and so adjudged Treason : ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.38

and I will prove this unto your Lordships by two several Cases .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.39

First , he raiseth Power and Strength in a settled Government ,
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.40

the Law will not suffer it , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.41

but it is construed as in case of High-Treason ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.42

he that doth usurp upon it , the Law doth intend that he hath purposed
the Destruction of the Prince ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.43

he that doth assemble Power , if the King doth command him upon his
Allegiance to dissolve his Company , and he continue it , without any
question it is High-Treason : ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.44

he that doth levy Forces to take any Town in the Prince's Dominions , it
is so likewise . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.45

But my Lord of <font> Essex <$$font> hath levied Power to take the Tower
of <font> London <$$font> , and to surprize the Queen's own Court ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.46

then this must needs be higher than the highest ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.47

and he that doth fortify himself against the Prince's Power , must needs
be within the compass of Treason . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.48

And by your favour , my Lord of <font> Essex <$$font> , I will now speak
a word unto you , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.49

for I know you can speak as well as any Man ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.50

That whereas you say the Law of Nature compelled you to do this , which
in judgment you have , tho' most treacherously attempted , I will in a
word disprove your own Judgment , admitting you must make that freely
your Argument . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.51

First , I will open the Quality of your Rebellion ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.52

Secondly , the Manner of it ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.53

Thirdly , I will touch the Circumstances ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.54

and Lastly , I will observe the Person . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.55

The Quality hath High-Treason ; for which I think I shall not need to
say any more . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.56

For the Manner of it , I hold it an unnatural Act for a natural Subject
to commit Treason against his natural Sovereign ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.57

and me@ @thinks it can@ @not be by any probability denied , but that
this High-Treason is , and must be , both against the Law of God ,
Nature , and Reason . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.58

And under your Grace's favour , my Lord , the manner of it being of so
high a Nature as it is , must needs be High-Treason , which was not only
carried in their Hearts , but , for a continual Remembrance , kept in a
black Purse , which my Lord of <font> Essex <$$font> wore on his Breast
next to his Skin . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.59

Let me note unto you , my good Lord , that they being both born under
the Government of this Princess , and so highly advanced by her
Majesty's Favour , should have trembled once to think of such a
Rebellion as they have enterprized . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.60

Doth not my Lord of <font> Essex <$$font> now enjoy his Earldom of
<font> Essex <$$font> by the Gift of <font> Henry <$$font> VIII. to his
Father ? ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.61

Was not he made Master of her Majesty's Horse at twenty-two Years of Age
? ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.62

One of her Majesty's Council ? ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.63

To be Earl Marshal of <font> England ? <$$font>
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.64

General of her Majesty's Forces in <font> Ireland <$$font> ?
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.65

And lastly , hath he not received divers Gifts and Sums of Money , to
his own use , of her Majesty's Gracious and Princely Bounty , to the
value of thirty_thousand Pounds ? ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.66

Yet all these were as cleverly forgotten , as if they had never been .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.67

Now shall I shew you the Person whom this concerns , even her Majesty's
sacred Person , against whom their Attempts have been , only for the
undertaking of God's Cause , and exercising of Justice with admirable
Mercy ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.68

and tho' I can@ @not speak without reverent Commendations of her
Majesty's most honourable Justice , yet I think her overmuch Clemency to
some , turneth to overmuch Cruelty for herself :
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.69

for tho' the rebellious Attempts were so exceeding heinous , yet out of
her Princely Mercy , no Man was racked , tortured , or pressed to speak
any thing farther , than of their own accord , and willing minds , for
Discharge of their Consciences they uttered ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.70

and then , to see the Mercy of God that will have the Truth known , it
is admirable beyond the Conceit of Man's Capacity :
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.71

for they being severally examined , notwithstanding , all agreed
directly , without varying . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.72

But when her Majesty sent a Counsellor of State to have the Earl come
before her , when she heard of his Rebellion , for no other end or
purpose but for his Admonishment , he refused to come ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.73

and having a guilty Conscience , and suspecting his Treasons were laid
open , took consultation to surprize the Court and the Tower of <font>
London <$$font> , all at one instant : ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.74

and for this purpose , had appointed <font> Blunt <$$font> the Custody
of the Gates , Sir <font> Jo. Davis <$$font> of the Hall , Sir <font>
Charles Davers <$$font> of the Presence , and himself of her Majesty's
Person . Whereupon <font> Blunt <$$font> said , Ah ! What Humour shall
we find them in at the Court ? ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.75

This was not all ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.76

for the Earl he must call a Parliament , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.77

and he would decide matters , not making for his purpose :
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.78

but now in God's most just Judgment , he of his Earldom shall be <font>
Robert <$$font> the last , that of a Kingdom thought to be <font> Robert
<$$font> the first . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.79

And my Lord did not any whit amuse himself to give order , that if he
and his Complices should miscarry in <font> London <$$font> , then the
Counsellors which he caused to be imprisoned in his House , should be
slain . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.80

It was plain Treason in him to stand out , being by them charged to
dissolve his Company upon his Allegiance . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.81

What shall I need to stand upon further Proofs ?
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.82

It is so evident , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.83

and my Lord himself will not deny , but that he had a Schedule ,
containing in it divers of his Friends Names ; which , as I conjecture ,
must needs contain some other matter , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.84

for he durst not let it come to light , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.85

but burnt it : ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.86

and as for <font> Owen <$$font> , <font> Salisbury <$$font> , <font>
Davis <$$font> and <font> Tresham <$$font> , they must have the guard of
the Lords of the Council , to use them at their pleasure .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.87

<font> Essex . <$$font> Will your Lordships give us our turns to speak
, ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.88

for he playeth the Orator , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.89

and abuseth your Lordships Ears and us with Slanders ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.90

but they are but fashions of Orators in corrupt States .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.91

Considering some Privileges which we might challenge , equal Answers and
equal Hearing were indifferent ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.92

for unless it will please your Lordships that we might answer to every
particular , we shall soon confound our own Memories , and give Liberty
and Advantage to our Enemies whereupon to lay hold , for lack of precise
Answer to each particular Objection . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.93

And seeing now , my Lord , you have undertaken the place of a Judge , I
beseech you , as you prove against us , we for our selves may answer
what may fall out to be fit . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.94

Here the Lord of <font> Essex <$$font> was interrupted , and not allowed
to speak , until <font> Henry Witherington <$$font> 's Examination was
read , which imported thus much : ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,199.95

<P_200>

Witherington's <font> Examination <$$font> .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.97

That upon the Sunday morning he was sent for to <font> Essex-House
<$$font> , where he found the place guarded with many Gentlemen in Arms
, who told his Uncle that came in his Company , that he feared they were
come into an ill Action ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.98

my Lord of <font> Essex <$$font> bad them very welcome ,
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.99

and intreated him to go with him , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.100

for he feared hurt of some private Enemies .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.101

And when Mr. <font> Witherington <$$font> perceived the Council were
stayed , he feared danger to them ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.102

for he heard some bid , <font> Stab them <$$font> ; and others , <font>
Let us make an end of them , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.103

we shall have the fewer to deal withal . <$$font>
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.104

And he proves further , that order was left , That if the Earl should
miscarry in <font> London <$$font> , then the Lord Keeper and the Lord
Chief Justice should be killed , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.105

and also when the Council had commanded him , upon his Allegiance , to
dissolve his Forces , he answered nothing :
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.106

he likewise saw my Lord of <font> Bedford <$$font> brought in that
morning ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.107

and Mr. <font> Witherington <$$font> , fearing he might be drawn on to
his Destruction , prayed him only to follow him ,
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.108

for when opportunity served in <font> London <$$font> , they would leave
the Troop ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.109

and that they followed the Earl into <font> London <$$font> , and on a
sudden lost him . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.110

<font> Essex . <$$font> I will not <paren> I protest to God <$$paren>
speak to save my Life ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.111

for those that prosecute it against me , shall do me a good turn to rid
me of my Misery , and themselves out of Fear .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.112

As for Mr. <font> Witherington <$$font> , he does much disparage
himself if he saith so , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.113

for I protest to God upon my Salvation , I never heard such Words as
<font> Kill him <$$font> , <font> kill him : <$$font>
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.114

and Mr. <font> Witherington <$$font> came voluntarily to my House ,
unsent for , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.115

and in the forenoon did come into our Company ,
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.116

and took to heart as much as we did whatever we went about :
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.117

and these are but Reports , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.118

for he that is the Witness , is now sent into the Country about some
Employments . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.119

But if it had been a Secret , Mr. <font> Witherington <$$font> being
privy thereto , might have been a good Witness ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.120

but being so openly spoken , <paren> as you say <$$paren> a_hundred more
might have testified it , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.121

yet none spoke it besides . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.122

And as for locking up the Council , I protest to God it was done in
Charity , and without Disloyalty , but intending only to save them ,
lest they should take hurt ; considering the People abroad in the
Streets , with a great and sudden Outcry , said , <font> We shall be
slain . <$$font> At which time we thought our Enemies had been come to
beset the House , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.123

for my intent was no otherwise than Loyal to her Majesty and them .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.124

The Lord Keeper , the Earl of <font> Worcester <$$font> and the Lord
Chief Justice <font> Popham <$$font> , proved in Court upon their
Honours , that they heard the words <font> Kill them <$$font> , <font>
kill them <$$font> ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.125

but they would not charge my Lord of <font> Essex <$$font> that they
were spoken either by his Privity or Command .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.126

<font> The Declaration of the <$$font> Lord Keeper , <font> the Earl of
<$$font> Worcester , <font> and the Lord <$$font> Chief Justice <font>
of <$$font> England . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.127

Upon Sunday , being the 8th of <font> February <$$font> last past ,
about ten of the Clock in the forenoon , the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal , the Earl of <font> Worcester <$$font> , Sir <font> William
Knollis <$$font> Comptroller of her Majesty's Houshold , and the Lord
Chief Justice of <font> England <$$font> , being commanded by direction
from the Queen's Majesty , did repair to the late Earl of <font> Essex
<$$font> 's House ; ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.128

and finding the Gate shut against them , after a little stay they were
let in at the Wicket . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.129

And as soon as they were within the Gate , the Wicket was shut upon them
, and all their Servants kept out . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.130

At their coming thither , they found the Court full of Men assembled
together in a very tumultuous sort : The Earls of <font> Essex <$$font>
, <font> Rutland <$$font> and <font> Southampton <$$font> , and the Lord
<font> Sandys <$$font> ; Master <font> Parker <$$font> , commonly called
Lord <font> Mounteagle <$$font> , Sir <font> Christopher Blunt <$$font>
, Sir <font> Charles Davers <$$font> , and many other Knights and
Gentlemen , and other Persons unknown , which flock'd together about the
Lord Keeper , <font> &c. <$$font> ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.131

And thereupon the Lord Keeper told the Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> ,
that they were sent from her Majesty , to understand the cause of this
their Assembly , and to let them know , That if they had any particular
cause of grief against any persons whatsoever , it should be heard , and
they should have Justice . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.132

Hereupon the Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> with a very loud Voice
declared , That his Life was sought , and that he should have been
murdered in his Bed ; that he had been perfidiously dealt with ; that
his Hand had been counterfeited , and Letters written in his name ; and
that therefore they were assembled there together to defend their Lives
: with much other Speech to like effect . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.133

Hereupon the Lord Chief Justice said unto the Earl , That if they had
any such matter of grief , or if any such matter were attempted or
purposed against him , he willed the Earl to declare it ; assuring him
that it should be truly related to her Majesty , and that it should be
indifferently heard , and Justice should be done , whomsoever it
concerned . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.134

To this the Earl of <font> Southampton <$$font> objected the Assault
made upon him by the Lord <font> Gray <$$font> . Whereunto the Lord
Chief Justice said , that in his case , Justice had been done , and the
Party imprisoned for it . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.135

And hereupon the Lord Keeper did eftsoons will the Earl of <font> Essex
<$$font> , that whatsoever private Matter or Offence he had against any
Person whatsoever , if he would deliver it unto them , they would
faithfully and honestly deliver it to the Queen's Majesty , and doubted
not to procure him honourable and equal Justice , whomsoever it
concerned : requiring him , that if he would not declare it openly ,
that he would impart it unto them privately , and doubted not but they
would satisfy him in it . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.136

Upon this there was a great Clamour raised among the multitude , crying
, <font> Away , my Lord <$$font> , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.137

<font> they abuse you <$$font> , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.138

<font> they betray you <$$font> , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.139

<font> they undo you <$$font> , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.140

<font> you lose time <$$font> . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.141

Whereupon the Lord Keeper put on his Hat , and said with a loud Voice ,
My Lord , let us speak with you privately , and understand your griefs :
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.142

and I command you all upon your Allegiance , to lay down your weapons ,
and to depart , which you ought all to do , being thus commanded , if
you be good Subjects , and owe that duty to the Queen's Majesty which
you profess . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.143

Whereupon they all brake out into an exceeding loud shout and cry ,
crying , <font> All <$$font> , <font> all <$$font> , <font> all <$$font>
. ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.144

And whilst the Lord Keeper was speaking , and commanding them upon their
Allegiance , as is before declared , the Earl of <font> Essex <$$font>
and the most part of that company did put on their Hats ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.145

and so the Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> went into the House ,
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.146

and the Lord Keeper , <font> &c. <$$font> followed him , thinking that
his purpose had been to speak with them privately , as they had required
. ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.147

And as they were going , some of that disordered Company cried , <font>
Kill them <$$font> . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.148

And as they were going into the great Chamber , some cried , <font> Cast
the Great Seal out of the Window <$$font> .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.149

Some other cried there , <font> Kill them <$$font> ;
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.150

and some other said , <font> Nay , let us chop {TEXT:shop} them up
<$$font> . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,200.151

<P_201>

The Lord Keeper did often call to the Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> to
speak with them privately , thinking still that his meaning had been so
, until the Earl brought them into his back Chamber , and there gave
order to have the farther door of that Chamber shut fast .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,201.153

And at his going forth out of that Chamber , the Lord Keeper pressing
again to have spoken with the Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> , the Earl
said , <font> My Lords , be patient a while ,
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,201.154

and stay here , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,201.155

and I will go into <$$font> London , <font> and take order with the
Mayor and Sheriffs of that City <$$font> , ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,201.156

<font> and will be here again within this half hour <$$font> .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,201.157

And so departed from the Lord Keeper , <font> &c. <$$font> leaving the
Lord Keeper <font> &c. <$$font> and divers of the Gentlemen Pensioners
in that Chamber , guarded by Sir <font> John Davis <$$font> , <font>
Francis Tresham <$$font> , and <font> Owen Salisbury <$$font> , with
musket-shot , where they continued until Sir <font> Ferdinando Gorges
<$$font> came and delivered them , about four of the Clock in the
afternoon . ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,201.158

In the mean time we did often require Sir <font> John Davis <$$font> ,
and <font> Francis Tresham <$$font> , to suffer us to depart , or , at
the least , to suffer some one of us to go to the Queen's Majesty , to
inform her where and in what sort we were kept .
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,201.159

But they answered , <font> That my Lord <$$font> <paren> meaning the
Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> <$$paren> <font> had commanded that we
should not depart before his return , which <$$font> <paren> they said
<$$paren> <font> would be very shortly . <$$font>
ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,201.160

<font> Thomas Egerton , C. S. Edward Worcester . John Popham .
<$$font> ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,201.161

All which the Lord Chief Justice <font> Popham <$$font> attested ,
<font> viva voce . <$$font> ESSEXSTATE-1600-E2-P1,201.162

