<BEGIN_evelyn-1689-e3-p1>

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2}

<P_905>

11 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,905.4

I saw the procession both to , & from the Abby church of <P_906>
Westminster , with the greate feast in Westminster Hall &c: at the
Coronation of the new K William & Q. Mary : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.5

That which was different from former Coronations , was , something
altered in the Coronation Oath , concerning maintaining the Prot:
Religion: &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.6

Dr. Burnet <paren> now made L. B. of <font> Sarum <$$font> <$$paren>
preached on {COM:lacuna_in_edition} with infinite applause :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.7

The parliament men had Scaffolds & places which tooke up one whole side
of the Hall : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.8

& when the K & Q. had din'd . The Ceremonie of the Champion , & other
services upon Tenures : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.9

The Parliament men were also feasted in the Exchequer Chamber :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.10

and had each of them a Medaile of Gold given them worth five_&_fourty
shill: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.11

the K. & Q. effigies inclining one to another , on one side ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.12

the Reverse Jupiter throwing a bolt at Phaeton ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.13

the Word {COM:lacuna_in_edition} which was but dull seing they might
have had out of the poet something as apposite EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.14

The sculpture also very meane : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.15

Much of the splendor of the proceeding was abated , by the absence of
divers who should have made it up : There being but as yet 5 Bish: 4.
Judges , <paren> no more at present , it seemes <bracket> as yet
<$$bracket> sworn <$$paren> & severall noblemen & greate Ladys wanting :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.16

But indeede the Feast was magnificent : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.17

The next day , went the H of Commons EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.18

& kissed their new Majesties hands in the Banqueting house :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.19

12 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.20

I went the next day afternoone <bracket> with the B: of St. Asaph
<$$bracket> to visite my L. of Canterbery at Lambeth , who had excused
himselfe from officiating at the Coronation , <paren> which the Bishop
of Lond: performed assisted by the A.B: of Yorke <$$paren>
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.21

we had much private & free discourse with his Grace , concerning
severall things , relating to the Church , there being now a Bill of
Comprehension to be brought to the Commons from the Lords :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,906.22

I urg'd , that when they went about to reforme some particulars in the
Liturgie , Church discipline , Canons &c: The Baptising in private
Houses , without necessity , might be reformd : as likewise the Burying
dead bodies so frequently in the Churches : The one proceeding meerely
from the pride of the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} Women ,
bringing that into Custome , which was onely indulged in case of iminent
danger : & out of necessity , during the Rebellion and persecution of
the Cleargy , in our late Civil Warres &c: The other from the Avarice of
the Minister , who made in some opulent parishes , almost as much of
permissions to bury in the chancels & churches , as of their livings ,
and were paid with considerable <P_907> advantage & gifts , for
baptising in Chambers : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.23

To this the two Bishops , heartily assented : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.24

and promised their indeavors to get it reformed : utterly disliking both
practices {COM:preceding_word_"practices"_emended} , as novel , &
undecent : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.25

We discoursed likewise concerning the greate disturbance & prejudice it
might cause should the new oath <paren> now upon the anvile <$$paren> be
imposed upon any , save such as were in new
{COM:preceding_word_"new"_emended} office ; without any retrospect to
such as either had no office ; or had ben long in office , who likely
had some scrupules about taking a new othe , having already Sworn
fidelity to the Government , as established by Law :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.26

and this we all knew to be the case of my L. Arch_Bishop & some other
worthy persons , who were not so fully satisfied with the Conventions
abdicating the late K James , To whom they had sworn alegiance &c.
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.27

So I went back to Whit_hall , & thence home : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.28

K. James now certainly in Ireland ; with the Marshall d'Aveaux , whom
he made a Pr: Counselor , who immediatly caused the King to remove the
protestant Counselors {COM:preceding_word_"Counselors"_emended} <paren>
some wheroff it seemes had continued to sit <$$paren> telling him that
his Master the K of France would never assist him , if he did not
immediatly do it : by which t@ @is apparent how this poore Prince is
menag'd by the French : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.29

Scotland declare for K. William & Q: Mary , with the Reasons of their
laying K James aside <bracket> not as Abdicating but forfaiting his
right by maladministration
{COM:preceding_word_"maladministration"_emended} , the particulars
mentioned <$$bracket> which being published , I repeate not :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.30

proceeding with much more caution & prudence than we did ; who
precipitated all things to the great reproch of the Nation ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.31

but all that was plainly menaged by some crafty , ill_principled men :
The new Pr: Council having a Republican Spirit , & manifestly
undermining all future Succession of the Crown , and prosperity of the
Church of England : which yet , I hope , they will not be able to
accomplish so soone as they hope : though they get into all places of
Trust and profit : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.32

14 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.33

Our Viccar on 22. Matt: 29. 30 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.34

The Curate in the Afternoone on 13. Romans 12 :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.35

This was a more Seasonable Spring , than any we have had since the
Restauration of K. Char. IId : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.36

21 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.37

The Viccar proceeded on his former Text & sub: as also did the curate :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,907.38

This was one of the most seasonable Springs , free from the usual
<P_908> sharp Eastern winds : that I have observ'd since the yeare 1660
; at the Restauration of K. C. II : which was much such another :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.39

24 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.40

I went to Lond: about buisinesse : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.41

25 {COM:preceding_word_"25"_emended}

Next day dined at the Countesse of Bristoll@ @s .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.43

26 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.44

I heard the Lawyers plead before the Lords , the Writ of Error , in the
Judgment of <font> Oates <$$font> , as to his charge of Perjurie , which
they after debate referred to the Answer of Holloway &c: who were his
Judges : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.45

Then went with the B: of St. Asaph to Lambeth to visie {COM:sic} the
A_Bishop : where they both entred into a discourse concerning the final
destruction of Antichrist : both of them concluding , that the 3 Trumpet
& Vial was now powering out ; and my L. S. Asaph attributing the
Killing of the two Witnesses {COM:preceding_word_"Witnesses"_emended} ,
to the utter destruction of the Cevenes Protestants , by the French &
Duke of Savoy , & the other , the Waldenses & Pyrennean Christians
<paren> who by all appearances from good history had kept the Primitive
faith from the very Apostles times till now <$$paren> :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.46

The doubt his Grace suggested , was whether it could be made evident
{COM:preceding_word_"evident"_emended} , that the present persecution
had made so greate an havock of those faithfull people as of the other ,
& whether as yet , there were not some among them in being who met
together : it being expedient from the Text : 11: Apoc: that they should
be both slaine together : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.47

They {COM:preceding_word_"They"_emended} both much approved of Mr.
Meads way of Interpretation , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.48

and that he onely failed in resolving too hastily , upon the King of
Sweden@ @s successes , <paren> Gustavus Adolphus <$$paren> , in Germany
: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.49

That It were good to employ some intelligent French Minister , to
travell even as far as the Pyrennes , to understand the present state of
the Churches there : It being a country , where no body almost traverses
. EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.50

There now came certaine newes of K: James's being not onely landed in
Ireland , but that by surprizing London_Derry , he was become absolute
Master of all that Kingdome : to the greate shame of our new King &
Assembly at Westminster , who had ben so often solicited to provide
against it , by timely succors , & which so easily they might have don :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.51

This is a terrible beginning of more troubles , especialy should an
Armie come thence into Scotland ; People being so generaly dissafected
here & every where else ; so as scarse would sea , or Landmen serve
without compulsion : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,908.52

<P_909>

A new Oath was now fabricating , for all the Cleargy to take , of
obedience to the present Goverment {COM:sic} , in abrogation of the
former Oathes of Alegeance : which it is forseene , many Bishops , &
others of the Cleargy will not take , the penalty being the losse of
their dignitie {COM:preceding_word_"dignitie"_emended} & spiritual
preferment : so as this is thought to have ben driven
{COM:preceding_word_"driven"_emended} on by the Presbyters & Comm:_welth
party , who were now in much credite with our new Governors :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.54

God in mercy , send us help , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.55

& direct the Counsel to his glory , & good of his Church :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.56

I returned this evening home , finding my sick servant recovered :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.57

28 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.58

Our Viccar on 6: Matt: 14 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.59

The Curate on 9. Dan 9 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.60

May : 1 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.61

Being the Anniversary of the Feffees , for the poores Rents proceeding
from the Charity of divers persons , our Viccar preached on: 11: Matt:
30 : shewing the Ease of Christs Yoake : &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.62

5 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.63

Our Viccar proceeded on his former Text 6: Matt: 14 :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.64

The H: Sacrament followed , at which I received , The Lord be praised :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.65

Being indisposed in my health , I went not this afternoone from home :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.66

19 {COM:preceding_word_"19"_emended}

nor was I in condition to go to church 'til Whitsonday , when , though
very weake , I got thither , the Viccar preaching a sermon apposite for
the Day : on 2: Act: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. verses :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.68

The H: Sacrament followed of which I received : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.69

The Lord make me thankfull : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.70

Matters publique went very ill in Ireland , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.71

Confusion & dissention amongst ourselves , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.72

stupidity , unconstancy , emulation , in the Governours , employing
unskillfull men in greatest offices : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.73

No person of publique spirit , & ability appearing &c: threaten us with
a very sad prospect EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.74

what may be the conclusion : without Gods Infinite mercy :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.75

A fight by Admiral Herbert with the French , imprudently setting on them
in a Creeke as they were landing men &c in Ireland : by which we came
off with greate slaughter , & little honor : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.76

so strangely negligent , & remisse in preparing a timely & sufficient
fleete . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.77

The Scots {COM:preceding_word_"Scots"_emended} Commissioners offer the
Crowne &c to the new King , & Queene , upon Condition .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.78

<bracket> Act of Pole mony came forth sparing none : <$$bracket>
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.79

Trinity Sunday , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.80

our Viccar on 2. Acts , proper for the day : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.81

the holy Comm: followed , which I received : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.82

June 2 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.83

Our Viccar on 6: Heb: Last 3 verses : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,909.84

I received the holy <P_910> Sacrament : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.85

Went in the afternoone to Greenewich to visite some French Gent:
refugies : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.86

Now came forth the Act of Indulgence for the disscenters , but not
exempting them from paying dues to the Ch: of Eng: Cleargy , or serving
in offices &c: according to law , with severall other Clauses ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.87

A most splendid Ambassy from Holland to congratulate the Kings accession
to the Crowne . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.88

4 . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.89

I went to Lond: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.90

<bracket> in my way Visited L: Arran , L. Peterboro , Preston in the
Toure &c <$$bracket> EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.91

the solemn Fast for Successe of the Fleete &c: was on {COM:5} the next
day carried on by the Bishop of Salisbury at Westminster Abby , before
the Lords , and at St. Margarites before the Convention or Parliament
by Dr. Tenison in the morning on {COM:lacuna_in_edition} In which he
did incomparably shew the sinn of selfe love ; and how it was
prejudicial to all brave and heroick actions &c:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.92

In the Afternoone by Mr. Wake on {COM:lacuna_in_edition} shewing with
greate Eloquence & Zeale EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.93

6 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.94

I din'd with the L. Bish: of St. Asaph . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.95

Monsieur Capellus , the Learned son of the most learned Ludovicus ,
presented to him his Fathers workes , not til now published :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.96

7 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.97

I visited my L. A_Bish: of Canterbery , to recommend Mr. Stringfellow
to him , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.98

staied with him til about 7: a clock : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.99

he read to me , the Popes Excommunication of the French King &c:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.100

8 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.101

I din'd with Mr. Pepys . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.102

9 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.103

Went to Covent Gard: Church , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.104

an Irish deane preached on 28. Pro: 13 . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.105

Dind at my L: Gorges : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.106

10 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.107

at Mr. Povys , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.108

11 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.109

At my Sons , now at his new house : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.110

Visited Dr. Burnet Now B. of Salisbery , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.111

got him to let Mr. Kneller draw his picture .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.112

12? {COM:preceding_word_"12?"_emended}

I went with my Lady Sunderland , & Sir W: Godolphin to Cranburne in
Windsor forest ; to visite Mrs. Boscawen &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.114

returned to Lond {COM:sic} , that Evening : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.115

and 13 {COM:preceding_word_"13"_emended} the next day home .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.116

16 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.117

Our Viccar proceeded on his former Text : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.118

Afternoone , the Curate of Greenewich on 1. John: 16. K:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.119

James's declaration was now dispersed , offring pardon to all if upon
his landing or 20 days after , they should returne to their obedience :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.120

Our Fleete , not yet at sea , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,910.121

& thro some prodigious sloth , & mens <P_911> minding only their present
Interest : The French riding master at Sea , taking many greate prises ,
to our wonderfull Reproch : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.122

No certaine newes from Ireland , various reports of Scotland ,
discontents at home : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.123

The K. of Denmark at last joyning with the Confederates :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.124

<bracket> & the two Northern Princes reconciled <$$bracket> :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.125

The E._India Company like to be disolv'd by the Parliament for many
arbitrarie actions : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.126

Oates acquitted of perjurie to all honest mens admiration .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.127

20 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.128

Dined with me the Countesses of Bristoll & Sunderland , Sir W: Godolphin
, Dr. Tenison & Mrs. Penelope Godolphin : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.129

Brought newes of a plot discovered , upon which divers were sent to
Tower & secured : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.130

T@ @was now also reported that Col: Kirke had gotten into Lond:_Derry
with supplies : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.131

<bracket> but this proved false . <$$bracket> EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.132

23 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.133

Mr. Stringfellow preach'd an excellent ser: on 16 Luke 13 :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.134

Pomeridiano a Young Ship Chaplaine <paren> I suppose <$$paren> on 24:
<font> Pro: <$$font> 21. Against mens being given to change , to the
disturbers of Government ; EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.135

a Text not so apposite , upon our so often changes :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.136

An extraordinary Drowth , to the threatning of greate Wants , as to the
fruits of the Earth : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.137

30 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.138

Our Viccar on his {COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended} former Text :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.139

we had now good showers God be praised : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.140

July {COM:preceding_word_"July"_emended} 7 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.141

Viccar proceeded in his former Text : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.142

I received the B: Sacrament EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.143

8 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.144

To Lond: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.145

9 {COM:preceding_word_"9"_emended}

I sat for my Picture to Mr. <font> Kneller <$$font> , for Mr. Pepys
late Secretary of the Admiralty , holding my <font> Sylva <$$font> in my
right hand : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.147

It was upon his long and earnest request ; EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.148

& is plac'd in his Library : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.149

nor did Kneller ever paint better & more masterly work :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.150

11 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.151

I dind at my L: Clarendon@ @s , it being his Ladys Weding day : when
about 3 in the afternoone , so greate & unusual a storme of Thunder ,
raine and wind suddainly fell , as had not been known in an age :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.152

many boates on the Thames were over_$whelmed , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.153

& such was the impetuosity of the wind , as carried up the waves in
pillars & spouts , most dreadfull to behold , rooting up Trees , ruining
some houses , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.154

& was indeede no other than an Hurocan : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.155

The Co: of Sunderland told me , that it extended as far as <font>
Althorp <$$font> , that very moment , which is about 70 miles from Lond:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,911.156

But I blesse <P_912> Almighty God it did us no harme at Deptford ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.157

but at Greenewich it did much mischefe : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.158

14 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.159

Dr. Tenison preached at St. James's on: 4: Eph: 25 :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.160

The B: Sacrament followed , at which I was present :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.161

I din'd at the Countesse of Sunderland@ @s . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.162

16 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.163

I went to Hampton Court , about buisinesse , the Council being there ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.164

A greate appartment , & spacious Garden with fountaines , was beginning
in the Parke , at the head of the Canale : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.165

I return'd to Lond that evening : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.166

19 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.167

I returned home : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.168

The Marishall de Scomberge , went now Generall towards Ireland , to the
reliefe of Lond:_Derry : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.169

Our Fleete lie before Brest : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.170

The Confederates , now passing the Rhyne ; beseege Bonn , and Maence to
obtaine a passage into France : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.171

A greate Victory gotten by the Muscovite , taking & burning <font>
Procop <$$font> : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.172

A new Rebell against the Turks , unkle to Yegen Bassha threatens the
destruction of that Tyrannie : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.173

All Europe in armes against France ; EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.174

& hardly in memory of any {COM:preceding_word_"any"_emended} Historie ,
so universal a face of Warr : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.175

The Convention <paren> or Parliament as some called it <$$paren> sitting
, exempt the Duke of Hanover from the Succession to the Crowne , which
they seeme to confine to the present New King , his Wife , & Princesse
Ann of Denmark , who is so monstroustly {COM:sic} swollen
{COM:preceding_word_"swollen"_emended} , that it@ @s doubted , her being
thought with child , may proove a Tympane onely : so as the unhappy
{COM:preceding_word_"unhappy"_emended} family of Steuarts , seemes to be
extinguishing : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.176

and then what government next , is likely to be set up , whether Regal :
& by Election , or otherwise , The Republicaries & Dissenters from the
C. of England looking evidently that way : The Scots having now againe
newly , voted downe Episcopacy there : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.177

Greate discontent still through the nation , at the slow proceedings of
the King , & the incompetent Instruments & Officers he advances to the
greatest & most necessary charges : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.178

21 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.179

Our Viccar on former Text : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.180

Curate on: 1 {COM:preceding_word_"1"_emended} Cor: 15: 55 &c:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.181

24 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.182

I went to Lond ; EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.183

sate at Mr. Knellers for my picture , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.184

dined at Mr. Pepys' , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.185

return'd that evening : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.186

25 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.187

Came Mr. Knellar , with two other painters to visite me :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.188

27 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.189

My son , & both daughters went to Tunbridge to drink the waters :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.190

28 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.191

Our Viccar , on 27: <font> Jobe: <$$font> 6: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,912.192

<P_913>

The Curate on 22: Luke. 19: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.194

<bracket> 29 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.195

Countesse of Sunderland , Sir W: Godolphin , Dr. Tenison came to dine
&c: <$$bracket> EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.196

August {COM:preceding_word_"August"_emended} 2 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.197

I went to Lond , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.198

return'd that evening : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.199

4 . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.200

Mr. <font> Stringfellow <$$font> preached on: 16: <font> John <$$font>
13: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.201

The H: Communion followed , at which I participated
{COM:preceding_word_"participated"_emended} , <font> Deo laus & gloria
<$$font> : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.202

<font> Marishal Shomberg <$$font> went with forces towards
{COM:preceding_word_"towards"_emended} Ireland , London_Derry in
exceeding want of reliefe : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.203

6 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.204

I went to Lond: about buisnesse , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.205

returned the 8th : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.206

Lond:_Derry relieved , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.207

Dundee slaine in Scotland . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.208

11 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.209

Our Curate preached on 1. <font> Cor: <$$font> 3. 7 , a very handsome
discourse ; EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.210

The extreame heate of the Weather hindred me from Church in the
Afternoone : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.211

18 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.212

Our Viccar proceeded on his former text out of Jobe. 21 :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.213

I went to Lond: to take leave of the Countesse of <font> Sunderland
<$$font> going next day to Holland . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.214

I returned that Evening : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.215

23 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.216

Came to visite me Dr. Tenison , & an Irish Bishop , Mr. Firmine &
others . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.217

25 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.218

Our Viccar proceeded on his former Text . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.219

The Curate of Woolwiche {COM:preceding_word_"Woolwiche"_emended}
preached on: 2. Cor: 1. 22 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.220

very well Hithertoo it has ben a most seasonable Summer :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.221

1 : <font> Sept: <$$font> EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.222

our Vicar on his former Text on Jobe : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.223

The B: Sacrament follow'd at which I received :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.224

The Curate on 53 Isaia 4. 5. &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.225

I was exceeding drowsy : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.226

8th : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.227

Our Viccar & Curate continue the same subjects .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.228

15 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.229

On the same : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.230

<bracket> Karric firgus surrendred <$$bracket> EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.231

Lond_derry after a wonderfull & brave holding out : Relieved .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.232

18 {COM:preceding_word_"18"_emended}

I went to Lond. to see severall of my friends :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.234

The Parliament adjourn'd 'til the 19: Octob: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.235

Mantes taken by the Confederates , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.236

D of Shomberg arived in Ireland <$$paren> <$$em> ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.237

takes the passe at Eure : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.238

21 St. Mathews , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.239

I went to visite the A_bishop of Cant: since his Suspension who received
me with greate kindnesse : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.240

Dr. Stillingfleete promoted to Wooster , Dr. Patrick to Chichester ,
Dr. Lang being dead : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.241

Dr. Tillotson made deane of S. Paules : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.242

I return'd this Evening : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.243

A very dreadfull fire happning in Southwark EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,913.244

<P_914>

22 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.246

Mr. <font> Meriton <$$font> preached on 2. <font> Cor: <$$font> 6 :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.247

1. EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.248

Our Reader on 2. Pet: 3. 11 very well . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.249

29 St. <font> Mich: <$$font> EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.250

the extraordinary wett , &c kept us at home : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.251

Afternoone , the Curate on <font> 18 Luke <$$font> :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.252

<font> Octob: <$$font> 6 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.253

Our Viccar on 22: Apoc. EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.254

A visite kept me at home in the afternoone : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.255

9 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.256

Came to visite us the young {COM:preceding_word_"young"_emended} Marquis
de Ruvignie {COM:preceding_word_"Ruvignie"_emended} & one <font>
Monsieur le Coque <$$font> a French Refugie` , who left greate Riches
for his Religion , a very learned civill person :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.257

he married the sister of the Dutchesse de la Force &c.
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.258

13 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.259

Our Viccar on his former subject : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.260

<font> Bonne <$$font> after a tedious siege rendered to the Confederates
. EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.261

Ottobone a Venetian Cardinal 80 yeares old , made Pope :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.262

20 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.263

Our <font> Viccar <$$font> on 4: <font> Philip: <$$font>
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.264

6 . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.265

I went in the afternoone to the French Congregation at Greenewich ,
where preached a young man on 50 Psal: 13 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.266

27 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.267

Our Viccar continued the same Argument : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.268

29 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.269

To Lond . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.270

31 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.271

My Birthday , being now 69 years old : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.272

Blessed Father who hast prolonged my years to this greate Age , & given
me to see so greate & wonderfull Revolutions , preserved me amidst them
, to this moment ; accept I beseech thee the continuance of my Prayers &
thankfull accknowledgements , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.273

and graunt to me the Grace to be working out my Salvation ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.274

& redeeme the Time , that thou mayst be glorified by me here , & my
immortal Soule saved , when ever thou shall {COM:sic} call for it , to
perpetuate thy prayse to all eternity , in that heavenly Kingdome ,
where there is no more Changes , nor Vicissitudes , but rest & peace , &
Joy & consummate felicity for ever : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.275

Grant this , o` heavenly Father , for the sake of the L. Jesus , thyne
onely Sonn & our Saviour : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.276

Amen : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.277

Nov 3 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.278

I received the H: Sacrament at St. Martines , Dr. Tenison preaching
most excellently <paren> as he allways dos <$$paren> on: 3: <font> Luke
<$$font> 5: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.279

5 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,914.280

Bish: of St. Asaph Lord Almoner &c: preached before K. & Q: on 57:
<font> Psal: <$$font> 7 : the whole discourse being almost nothing save
an historical narrative of the C. of England@ @s several Deliverances ,
especialy that of this Anniversary , signalized , by that of the P: of
Orange@ @s Birthday , & Marriage <paren> which was on the 4th <$$paren>
& of his <P_915> Landing at Tor-bay this day : which ended with a
splendid Ball , & other festival rejoicings : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.281

In the Meane time , No , or not sufficient supplies ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.282

Ireland gives greate apprehension of the successe of our Army there ,
under the D: of Shomberg , K. James , being more powerfull in Horse : &
the Weather exceeding wet & stormy : <bracket> & we having miserably
lost all the past summer for want of prudent menagement of affaires :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.283

The Convention vote a Tax of a_Million &c: <$$bracket>
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.284

Card: Ottaboni <paren> a Venetian <$$paren> chosen Pope :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.285

7th : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.286

I returned home on the 7th . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.287

10 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.288

Our Viccar on his former Text : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.289

the Curate on 6: John: 37: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.290

I received the B: Sacrament with my Wife at home , she as yet not daring
to adventure in the cold , which now <paren> after a very wett season
<$$paren> came on very severely : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.291

17 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.292

Our Viccar proceeded : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.293

Pomerid: the Curate of Greenewich on: 11: Matt: 3 last verses :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.294

Hithertoo much wett , & cold , without frost , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.295

yet the Wind N & Easterly EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.296

The Assembly at Lond , now begin <paren> too late <$$paren> to consider
how miserably publique matters have ben maneiged ; especialy as to
Ireland , the imbarging our Merchant ships now 15 moneths for want of
Convoys <paren> which the Dutch afforded theirs with to the immense
prejudice of our Trade , & advantage of theirs <$$paren> besides the
losse of so many of our best ships & other Vessells both by accidents ,
& pirates : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.297

A Convocation of the cleargy meete , about the Reforming of our Liturgy
, Canons &c: <bracket> obstructed by others of the Cleargy <$$bracket> .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.298

27 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.299

I went to Lond <bracket> with my family <$$bracket> to Winter at Soho`
in the greate Square . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.300

30 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.301

I went to the R: Society , where I was chosen one of the Council , my
Lord Penbrok president , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.302

we dined together : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.303

December 1 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.304

Dr. Tenison preached at St. Martin on 1. Tim. 5. 21. against
partiality and the factions now exceedingly disturbing & threatning the
publique : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.305

The H: Communion followed , at which I was participal , praised be God .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.306

I dind at Sir William Godolphins : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.307

I spent most of this following weeke in receiving and returning Visites
: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,915.308

<P_916>

8 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.310

Dr. <font> Herne <$$font> at St. Anns preached on 7 Luke 19 .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.311

In the Afternoon preached the B: of Bangor: on 37: Psal: 37 :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.312

The Bish: spake so low , that I could heare very little :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.313

11 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.314

To Deptford to see my Grandson falln ill of a scarlet feaver at the
French Schoole at Greenewich , which , after blood_letting so abated
that by Gods mercy I left him in an hopefull way .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.315

15 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.316

The Schoole Master of Leasam preach'd on 5. Joh: 28. 29:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.317

In the Afternoone the Curate of Greenewich on 39 Psal: 14:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.318

16 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.319

I return'd to Lond: blessed be God , in good hopes of The Childs
recovery . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.320

<bracket> My Servant Jo: Brake a rib by a fall , <$$bracket>
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.321

but is I hope in good way also of recovery : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.322

22 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.323

The reader of St. Anns , preached on: 119 Psal: 67: very excellently :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.324

25 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.325

A stranger preached at St. Anns on: 2 Luke 14:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.326

the holy Commun. followed EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.327

Afternoone Mr. Wake on 40. Isa: 3: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.328

29 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.329

Dr. Tenison at St. Martin on 1. Joh: 4 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.330

9 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.331

Afternoone at St. Anns , a stranger on: 90: Psal: 12th :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.332

An extraordinary wet season , & stormy , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.333

greate losses by sea , & much confusion & discontent among our selves :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.334

1690 . Jan: 5 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.335

Dr. Tenison at St. Martines on 2: Philip. 6. 7: against the
Socinians : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.336

The holy Sacrament followed , at which I communicated :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.337

Din'd with Sir W. Godolphin : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.338

11 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.339

There was this night , so extraordinary a storme of win'd {CODE:sic}
accompanied with snow & sharp weather , as had not ben known the like ,
in almost the memory of any man now living : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.340

greate was the harme it did in many places , blowing downe houses ,
Trees &c , killing divers people : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.341

it began about 2 in the morning EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.342

and lasted till 5 : being a kind of Hurecan , which Mariners observe ,
begin of late yeares to come northward , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.343

What mischiefe it has don at sea , where many of our Best ships are
attending to convey the Q: of Spaine
{COM:preceding_word_"Spaine"_emended} , together with a_thousand
merchants laden for several ports abroad , I almost tremble to think of
: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,916.344

This Winter has ben hithertoo , extreamely wett , warme , & windy : Such
as went before the death of the Usurper Cromwell , which was <P_917> in
a stormy day : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.345

The Death of the Queene of Bohemia , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.346

& what this portends , time will discover , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.347

God almighty avert the judgements we deserve , if it be his blessed will
: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.348

12 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.349

A young man preached <paren> at St. Anns <$$paren> on 13. John: 34 :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.350

There was afterward read an Exhortatory Letter to the Clergye of Lond:
from the Bishop , together with a Briefe , for relieving the distressed
Protestants , the <font> Vaudoies
{COM:preceding_word_"Vaudoies"_emended} <$$font> fled from the
persecution of the French & D: of Savoy , to the protestant Cantons of
Switzerland EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.351

Afternoone , Mr. Wake on 14. <font> Luke <$$font> 11: 19:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.352

Strangers preached both morning & Afternoone 3. John: 19:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.353

24 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.354

The famous Infamous Tryal of my unworthy Nephew Montague at the
Kings-bench , which indeede I heard with much regrett , that so vile and
scandalous a Cause should have ben published
{COM:preceding_word_"published"_emended} , the dammages being 6500
pounds : The immense wrong this proflygate wretch did my Niepce ,
drawing justly on him this disgrace : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.355

so vile a Cause had never ben brought to so publique an example :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.356

26 {COM:preceding_word_"26"_emended}

A chaplain of the E. of Suffolke : on 2. <font> Jam: <$$font> 14:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.358

a {COM:preceding_word_"a"_emended} more hopefull young preacher , for
his matter , & manner of delivery I had seldom heard :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.359

In the Afternoone Mr. Wake , proceeded on his former subject :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.360

Extreame wet weather continues : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.361

30 {COM:preceding_word_"30"_emended}

Anniversary K: Ch: Martyrdom : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.363

The Reader of St. Ann's : 3. Lament: 39: shewing for what sinns of
this Nation , this Calamity fell upon it , & the way , by Confession &
forsaking sinn , to obtaine pardon & prevent the like .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.364

At St. Martins , afternoone , a stranger on 2: Apoc: 10 .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.365

The Parliament , unexpectedly Prorogued til 2 <font> Aprill <$$font> ,
to the discontent & surprizal of many members , who being exceeding
averse from settling anything , proceeding with animosities ,
multiplying exceptions , against those whom they pronounc'd obnoxious ,
produc'd as universal a discontent , against K. William & themselves ,
as was before against K: James : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.366

The new King , also having with so much reproch lost now above a yeare ,
resolving an expedition into Ireland in person ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.367

Thought best to proroge this troublesome Session , now they had given
him so much mony , & had no more use of them for the Present :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.368

it being also believed they should hardly meete againe , but in a new ,
& more authenticque Parliament : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,917.369

<P_918>

About 150 of the Members , who were of the more royal part , meting at a
Feast at the Apollo Dunstan {COM:preceding_word_"Dunstan"_emended}
Tavern : sent some of their company to the K. to assure him of their
service ; to whom he returned his Thanks , advising them to repaire to
their several Countries & preserve the peace during his absence , &
assuring them that he would be steady to his resolution of defending the
Laws , and Religion established : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.371

The great Lords , suspected to have counseled this Proroguation ,
universaly denying it ; EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.372

however it was believed , the chiefe Adviser was the Marquis of
Carmardan &c - who now seemed to be most in favor :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.373

Feb: 2 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.374

Dr. Tenison on 66 Psal: 12: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.375

The H: Sacrament followed {COM:preceding_word_"followed"_emended} , at
which I received . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.376

Din'd at Sir W: Godolphins : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.377

The Parliament from a Prorogation , now Dissolved by Proclamation
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.378

& another cald to meete on the 20th of March : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.379

This was a second surprize to the former members ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.380

& now the Court party , or as they call themselves , Ch: of England ,
are making their severall Interests in the Countries &c:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.381

The Marques of Halifex lays down his office of L. Privy-Seale
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.382

& pretends to retire : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.383

9 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.384

A stranger preaches at St. Anns on: 14. Pro: 12:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.385

Afternoone Dr. <font> Wake <$$font> on his former subject :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.386

16 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.387

The Dutchesse of Monmoth@ @s Chaplain on <font> 12: Heb: <$$font> 12 at
St. Martins , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.388

an excellent discourse exhorting to Peace & Sanctitie , it being now at
the time of very greate division & dissention in the nation :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.389

first amongst the Churchmen , among which the moderate & sober part ,
were for a speedy Reformation of divers things , which were thought
might be made in our Liturgie , for the inviting of Dissenters :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.390

Others of the more stiff & ridigid were for no Condescention at all ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.391

Bookes & pamphlets published every day pro & con : so as the Convocation
Were for the present forc'd to suspend any farther progresse ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.392

There was likewise a fierce & greate Canvasing about being elected in
the new Parliament to meete the next moneth . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.393

The K: persists in his intentions to go in person for Ireland , Whither
the French are sending supplies to K: James , and wee the Danish horse
to Shomberge ; EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,918.394

The Confederates abroad preparing <P_919> also for the next Campagne ,
in which all Europe was now engag'd , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.395

The <font> Emp: <$$font> having lost 4 Regiments , & flower of his Armys
, cut off by the Tartars ; EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.396

and much blamed for not accepting such advantagious Conditions as were
offered him by the Gr: Signor , from whom he had already recovered that
goodly K:_dome of Hungrie , & gotten its Crowne settled on his son : so
as he might have ben in Condition to have diverted all his forces on
France , who had now an immense Army ready , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.397

& still threatning all the potentates of Christendome :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.398

19 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.399

I dined with the Marquis {COM:preceding_word_"Marquis"_emended} of
<font> Caermarthen <$$font> <paren> late Lord Danby <$$paren> where was
Lieutenant Gen: Duglas , a very considerable & sober Commander , going
for Ireland , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.400

& related to us the exceeding neglect of the English Souldiers ,
perishing for want of Clothing & necessarys this winter ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.401

& exceedingly magnifying their Courage & bravery during all their
hardships : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.402

There dined also my <font> Lord Lucas <$$font> Lieutenant of The Towre ,
& The Bish: of St. Asaph &c. EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.403

The Privy Seale was now put againe into the hands of Commissioners , Mr.
Cheny <paren> who married my kindswoman , Mrs. Pierpoint <$$paren> Sir
John Knatchbull , & Sir William Poultny : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.404

I think I might have ben one of them , had I thought it seasonable , &
would have ingaged my friends : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.405

23 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.406

Dr. Tenison in the fornoone at St. Martins , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.407

& the same sermon before the Queene at Wh: Hall in the afternoone : upon
1: Thess: 4: 7: against the sin of lust & uncleanesse , The Impudence of
both sex , being now become so greate & universal , Persons of all ranks
, keeping their Courtesans so publiqly , that the King had lately
directed a Letter to the Bishops , to order their Cleargy to preach
against that sin , swearing &c & to put the Laws Ecclesiastical in
execution without any indulgence : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.408

I dined with the Doctor , the Bish of {COM:lacuna_in_edition} & other of
the Chaplains {COM:preceding_word_"Chaplains"_emended} -
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.409

25 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.410

I went on foote to Kinsington , which K. Will: had bought of my Lord of
Notingham , & new altered , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.411

but it was yet a patch'd building , yet with the Gardens a very sweete
Villa , having to it the Parke , and the straite new way through the
park : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.412

I din'd with the <font> Bish: <$$font> of St. <font> Asaph <$$font> ,
Dr. Tenison & Stradling , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.413

return'd that evening : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.414

News of some victory in Ireland . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.415

<font> Mar. <$$font> 2 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.416

Dr. Tenison preached at St. Martins on 6. <font> Micha: <$$font> 8:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,919.417

<P_920>

The holy Sacrament follow'd , of which I participated & was wittnesse to
my Lord Lumley@ @s receiving &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,920.419

Dined at Sir W: Godolphins , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,920.420

visited the Co: of Sunderland just now arrived from Holland .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,920.421

5 {COM:preceding_word_"5"_emended}

<font> Ash-wednesday <$$font> , preached that elegant writer Dr. Scot :
on 1: <font> Joh: <$$font> 3. 7: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,920.423

7 {COM:preceding_word_"7"_emended} Friday : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,920.424

Dr. <font> Tillotson <$$font> , newly Deane of S. Paules , at W.hall
before the new Queene : on 1. <font> Cor. <$$font> 5. 10:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,920.425

7 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,920.426

I din'd with Mr. <font> Pepys <$$font> , late Secretary of the
Admiralty , where was that excellent Shipwright , & sea-man <paren> for
so had he ben , as also Commissioner of the navy <$$paren> Sir <font>
Anthony Deane <$$font> , who amongst other discourses , & deploring the
sad condition of our Navy , as now Govern'd by unexperienc'd men &c
since this Revolution : Related to us , what exceeding advantage we of
this nation {COM:preceding_word_"nation"_emended} had , by being the
first who built Fregats : the first that was ever made , being that
Vessel , which was afterward called the Constant Warwick ; which Pet: of
Chattham built for a tryal of making a Vessel that would saile swiftly ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,920.427

it was built with low Decks , the Gunns lying neere the water ;
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,920.428

& was so light & swift of sailing , that in a short time , he told us ,
she had ere the <font> Dutch-@ @War
{COM:preceding_word_"Dutch-War"_emended} <$$font> was ended , taken as
much mony from Privateers as would have laden her , & that more such
being built , did in a year or two scoure our Channels , from being
exceedingly infested by those of Dynkirk & others :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,920.429

And added that it were the best and onely infallible expedient , to be
masters at sea , & able to destroy the greatest Navy of any enemy
whatsoever , if instead of building huge greate ships , & 2d and 3d
rates &c: they quite left off building them with such high decks , which
he said was nothing but to gratifie Gentlemen Commanders who must have
all their Effeminate accommodations , & for pomp , which would be the
ruine of our Fleetes , if such persons were continued to command , they
neither having Experience , nor being
{COM:preceding_word_"being"_emended} capable of learning , because they
would not submitt to the fatigue & inconveniences , which bred seamen ,
could do , in those so otherwise usefull swift fregats : Which he made
appeare , being to encounter the greatest ships , would be able to
protect , set on , & bring off , those who should manege the Fire-ships
, EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,920.430

& that whatsoever Prince {COM:preceding_word_"Prince"_emended} should
first store himself with numbers of such <paren> viz. Fireships
<$$paren> would thro the help and countenance <P_921> of such Fregats ,
be certainly able to ruine , the greatest force , that , of never so
vast ships , could be put to sea for fight , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.431

& that by reason of the dexterity of working those light & swift-sailing
vessels , to guard the Fireships : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.432

& this he made so evident , that he concluded there would shortly be no
other method of sea fight : & that our greate ships & Men of Warr ,
however stored with Gunns & men , must submitt to whosoever should
encounter them with far lesse number : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.433

He thereupon represented to us , the dreadfullnesse of these Fireships ;
& that he continualy observed in our last maritime warr with the Dutch
{COM:preceding_word_"Dutch"_emended} , that when ever an Enemys fireship
, approch'd , the most valiant both of Commanders & common Sea-men &
sailers , were in such feare and Consternation , that , though of all
times , there was then most neede of the <font> Gunns <$$font> , boomes
, & other Instruments , to keepe the mischief
{COM:preceding_word_"mischief"_emended} off ; they grew pale &
astonish'd , & as if possessed with a quite other meane soule , slung
about , forsooke their gunns & worke , as in dispaire , everyone looking
about , which way they might get out of their ship , though sure to be
drown'd if they did so , or to be burnt to death if they staied :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.434

This he said was likly to prove hereafter the method of sea fights
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.435

& that whatever King , got provision of this before his Neighbour
potentats , must demonstrably destroy the other ,
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.436

& did therefore wish , it might not be the misfortune of England :
especialy , if they continued to put the Gentlemen Commanders over
experienced sea-men , upon accounte of their ignorance , effeminacy &
Insolencie : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.437

9 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.438

Preached at W:_hall in the Morning Dr. <font> Burnet <$$font> late
Bishop of Sarum: on 4: <font> Heb: <$$font> 13 .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.439

I din'd at the Bish: of S. <font> Asaph@ @s <$$font> , <paren> Almoner
to the new Q: <$$paren> where dined also the famous Lawyer Sir <font>
Geo: Makenzie <$$font> <paren> late Lord Advocate of Scotland <$$paren>
against whom , both the Bish: & myselfe had written & published books :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.440

both now most friendly reconciled : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.441

He discovered to us many particulars relating to Scotland , the present
sad Condition of it , The inveterat hatred of the Presbyterians ther to
the family {COM:preceding_word_"family"_emended} of the Stewarts , the
exceeding Tyrannie {COM:preceding_word_"Tyrannie"_emended} of those
Bigots , That they accknowledgd no superior over them on Earth , either
in Civil or divine matters ; That the people onely had the right of
Government : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,921.442

in summ: Their implacable malice to the Episcopal order & C. of England
&c: Upon which the Bishop , shewed us that <P_922> the first Presbyters
disenting from our discipline , were introduced by the Jesuite order ,
about the 20th yeare of Q: Elizabeth & that a famous Jesuite amongst
them , faining himselfe a Protestant , was the first began to pray
Extemporie , & brought in that which they since cald <paren> & are still
so fond of <$$paren> praying by the Spirit : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.443

This <font> Jesuite <$$font> continued many years , befor he was
discoverd , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.444

afterward died in Scotland , EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.445

and is buried at {COM:lacuna_in_edition} having yet on his Monument :
<font> Rosa inter Spinas . <$$font> EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.446

In the afternoone preached the Deane of St. Asaphs on: 1. <font> John:
<$$font> 5. 4: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.447

11 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.448

I went againe to see Mr. Charletons Curiosities both of Art & nature ;
as also his full & rare collection of Medails : which taken all-together
in all kinds , is doubtlesse one of the most perfect assemblys of
rarities that can be any where seene : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.449

I much admired the contorsions of the <font> Thea <$$font> roote , which
was so perplext , large & intricate , <paren> & with all hard as box
<$$paren> that it was wonderfull to consider : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.450

<bracket> 12 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.451

Bish: of St. Asaph . W.hall , on {COM:lacuna_in_edition} long
suffering not willing any should perish &c: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.452

it was the monethly fast for successe in Ireland :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.453

Afternoone Dr. Grove on 18 <font> Jer: <$$font> 7. 8.
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.454

14 March EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.455

Dr. Orlock Deane of Rochester - 19 Psal 13: <$$bracket>
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.456

16 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.457

Preached Dr. Tenison at St. Martins on: 44 Ezek: 24:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.458

Afternoone Dr. {COM:lacuna_in_edition} Deane of St. Asaph on 25 Psal:
11 . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.459

Innumerable were the multitude who filled both Court & streete to see
the new Queene : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.460

19 . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.461

Dr. Tenison at White_hall 4: Matt: 7: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.462

20 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.463

The new Parliament met : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.464

23 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.465

Dr. Tenison at St. Martines on <bracket> 1. Thess: 5: 7. <$$bracket>
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.466

26 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.467

W:_hall . Dr. Hooper . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.468

Repentance never to be repented of &c. EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.469

28 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.470

Dr. Megot . W:_Hall . EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.471

Yeild your bodys a living sacrifice holy , & acceptable to the Lord :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.472

30 : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.473

St. <font> Anns <$$font> . Mr. <font> Mandevil <$$font> <paren> Chap:
to the Dutchesse {COM:preceding_word_"Dutchesse"_emended} of Bouckingham
&c <$$paren> on 1. Cor: 11. 25: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.474

Mr. Wake in the afternoon on Let no man judge you &c.
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.475

I could hardly heare him : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.476

This was the first time of my poore wifes going to church , after above
a yeares Infirmity , for which God Almighty be praised :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,922.477

<P_923>

<font> Aprill <$$font> 2 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.479

Dr. Wake at W:_Hall : Wednesday Lent : on: - Be not partakers of other
mens sinns &c: 1. <font> Tim: <$$font> 5. 22 .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.480

4 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.481

Dr. <font> Kidder <$$font> Deane of Peterborow , at W:_Hall : Friday 5:
James , 16: EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.482

6 EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.483

St. Martins , Dr. Tenison , on Threni Jer 3. ver: 39:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.484

The holy Sacrament followed , at which I participated , the L. Jesus
make me mindfull & thankfull : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.485

I din'd at Sir W: Godolphins : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.486

The Parliament gave K. William , another Pole bill :
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.487

French landed in Ireland EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.488

9 Wednesday {COM:preceding_word_"Wednesday"_emended}

W.hall Dr. Young on: 2: <font> Tim: <$$font> 2. 19:
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.490

11 Friday : EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.491

Dr. Sharp , now Deane of Cant: on: 5. Gal: 13 .
EVELYN-1689-E3-P1,923.492

