<BEGIN_fabyan-1516-e1-p1>

<P_556>

In this yere also a batayll was done at Parys atwene .ii. knyghtis of
the duke of Alenson , wherof the cause ensuyth .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,556.3

This sayde duke hadde in his court two knyghtys , whereof that one was
named Iohn~ Carengon or Carongyon , and y=e= other Iaquet Gryse , which
were both in good fauour of theyr <P_557> mayster .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.4

This Carongion , were it for delyte to se strau~ge coutreys , or cause
of other auenture , as pylgrymage or other , departid out of Fraunce ,
leuynge his wyfe in a castell or fortresse of his owne ; which wyfe was
goadlye & fayer ; after whose departynge , were it for beauty of the
woman or for euyll wyll y=t= he bare towarde his felowe , this Iaquet
Gryse entryd y=e= castell , berynge his wyfe on hande that he was comyn
to see that house , whiche shewyd so fayre outwarde .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.5

The woman castynge no parell , acceptynge hym for hyr husbandis frende
and hyrs , shewyd to hym the cyrcuyte of the place ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.6

but he in contrary awaytynge his praye , whan he saue the woman farre
from company , forsyd hyr in such maner , that contrary hyr wylle he
co~mysed with her auoutry ; at whose departynge she gaue vnto hym many
rebucous wordys , sayinge playnlye , that if hyr husbonde euer retournyd
, she wolde of that velony be reue~gyd . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.7

This dede was kepte secrete tyll the retourne of hyr husbonde , at whose
home commynge , she with lamentable countenau~ce shewyd tyll hyr
husbonde all the demeanure of the sayd Iaquet . After which complaynt
by hyr husbonde well vnderstondyn , he yode streyght vnto the duke of
Alenson , requyrynge hym to do correccyon vpon the auoutrer , or ellys
that he myght trye with hym in the felde by fortune of batayll : wherof
nother y=e= duke wolde grau~t , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.8

but brought the quarell before the kyng , by whose agrement and
commaundement a daye by the kynge was sette to fyght at Parys .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.9

Whan the daye of batayll was comen , Carongion brought his wyfe vnto the
place to iustyfye hyr former sayinge ; after affyrmacion whereof ,
eyther fyrste ranne at other with sharpe-sperys , at whose course Iaquet
wounded his enemye in the thyghe with his spere ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.10

but Carongion beyng with it nothyng dysmayed , lyght from his horse ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.11

& bare hym so manfullye , that he ouercame his aduersarye , and causyd
hym to confesse his offence ; for y=e= which he was streyght drawen vnto
the gybet of Parys and there hangyd : FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.12

and to the sayde Carongion the kynge gaue in rewarde a_thousande frankys
, or. C. <font> li. <$$font> sterlynge money ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.13

and ouer that he gaue vnto hym , as an annuall fee or rent. CC.
frankys , which is i~ value of .xx {COM:sic_without_trailing_period}
<font> li. <$$font> sterlyng money . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.14

In theyse dayes , as wytnessyth Gagwynus , an anker berynge in his hande
a rede crosse , a man to loke to of goostlye conuersacyon , came vnto
the Frenshe kynges court , desyrynge to speke with the kynge , the
whiche by the housholde seruauntys or famylyers of the court , was lo~ge
kepte from his presence ; albe_it y=t= lastelye he was broughte vnto hym
, to whom he shewyd that he was deuynely monysshed that he shuld charge
hym to absteyne from his customable vse in leuyinge so often taskys and
subsydyes , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.15

and if he dyd not , he shulde well vnderstande that the wrath of God was
nere to hym , to punysshe hym if he refusyd his commau~dement ; the
which message the kynge toke at small regarde .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.16

But shortlye after the quene was delyueryd of a doughter that dyed soone
after ; wherefore , the kynge callynge to mynde the ankers wordys , for
feere of other punysshement , refraynyd a season from leuyinge of
trybutys and taskys ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.17

but by the exortacyon of his two vnkyllys , he i~ short season after
tournyd to his former custome . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.18

Kynge Charlys thus passynge his tyme with great murmure of his commons ,
and rebellyon of the duke of Brytayn , with many other aduersaryes ,
whiche were lo~ge to wryte ; lastlye in the. xiiii. yere of his reygne
or nere about , he made warre vpon the people of West Fraunce , callyd
in Laten Cenomanni , in Englysshe {COM:lacuna_in_edition}
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.19

Whan Charlys was entryd this countrey , whiche was in the domynyon of
the duke of Brytayne , the duke sent vnto hym messyngers , sayinge to
hym that he shulde not nede to inuade his countrey with so great
strengthe , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.20

for he and his shulde be hoolye at his commaundement ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.21

but of this message the kynge tooke no regarde ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.22

for sayth myne auctour , he was not moost wysest prynce ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.23

but was rulyd by his housholde serua~tys , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.24

and beleuyd euery lyght tale that was brought to hym ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.25

and ouer that he was so lyberall , that it was of wyse men acco~ptid
more prodygalyte than lyberalytye . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,557.26

As Charlys , not_withsta~dynge this message of the duke , helde on his
iourney , commynge <P_558> nere vnto a woode , he was sodeynly met of a
man lyke vnto a begger , which sayde vnto hym , " Whyther goest thou sir
kynge ? FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.27

be ware thou goo no farther , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.28

for thou arte betrayed , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.29

and into the handys of thyne enemyes thyne owne meynye shall delyuer the
. " FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.30

With this monyssyon of this poore man , the kynge was astonyed ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.31

and stoode styll , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.32

and began to muse ; in whiche study he so beynge , one of his folowers ,
which after hym bare his spere , slepyd vpo~ his horsebacke , and in his
so slepynge lette his spere fall vpon the helmet of his felowe , with
whiche stroke the kynge was sodeynly feryd , thynkynge his enemyes hadde
common vnwarelye vpon hym ; wherefore he in gere he drewe his swerde ,
and layed about hym at y=e= geynyst , and slewe .iiii. of his knyghtys
or he were refraynyd , and toke therwith such an endelye fere , that he
fell therwith dystraught ; wherfore he was to a place there by brought ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.33

and lay there in poynt of deth a longe season after , in so moch that
the fame ranne that he was dede ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.34

but by prayers and other great dedys of charyte done for hym , lastely
he recouered FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.35

and retournyd vnto Parys . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.36

And for he was not yet retournyd to his parfyght helth , his two vncles
, than beyng that one duke of Berry , and that other duke of Burgoyne ,
toke vpon them , by auctoryte of the astatys of the lande , to rule the
realme for y=t= season ; in which season dyuerse offycers were alteryd
and chaungyd . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.37

The kynge thus contynuinge his sykenesse , many interludys and gamys
were deuysyd for the kynggs recreacyon and comforte .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.38

And vpon a season , he beynge lodgyd in the quenys lodgynge in the
subarbis of Seynt Marcell , dyuerse noblemen of y=e= court made a
dysguysynge , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.39

and apparaylyd theym in lynnen clothes glewyd vnto theyr nakyd bodyes
with pytche , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.40

and florysshyd theym with dyuerse paynturys sette out with dyuerse
colours and oylys , so that they were coueryd all excepte the facys ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.41

and thus apparaylyd , w=t= torche lyght entryd the chau~bre where as the
kynge was , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.42

and there in goodly maner shewyd theyr dysporte , so that the kyng was
therwith well contentyd . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.43

But were it of rechelesness or of some euyll_dysposyd persone , fyre was
put to the vesturis of the disguysers , the which anon was vpon suche a
flame that no man there coulde quenche it ; wherefore the sayde
dysguysers , beynge by reason of the pytche and oylys greuously
turmentyd , ranne into pyttes and waters whiche they myght sonest
attayne vnto , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.44

& so with great dyfyculte sauyd theymselfe : in meane tyme wherof , the
chau~ber beynge with the same fyryd , grewe in so great a flame , that
in shorte whyle the more parte of that lodgynge was co~sumyd , to the
great fere of the kyng and other astatys than there beynge present , and
augmentynge agayn of his former sykenesse , so that certeyne
apoyntementys to be holden atwene hym and Rycharde kynge of Englonde ,
were for y=t= tyme put of . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.45

In y=e=. xvi. yere of this Charlys , the maryage of peace atwene bothe
realmys was concluded and fynysshyd at Calays , as before I haue shewyd
to you in the. xix. yere of kynge Rycharde ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.46

and that tryumphe fynysshyd , Charlys , at the contemplation and prayer
of the kynge of Hungry , sent vnto hym Phylyp erle of Artoys , with
dyuerse other knyghtys in good nou~ber , to ayde the sayde kynge agayn
the Turkys ; the whiche after that they hadde there a season warryd ,
the capytayns and the more party of the Frenshemen , of the Turkys were
dystressyd & slayen , and many taken prysoners to theyr great charge .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.47

This Charlys , thus contynuynge his sykenesse , two frerys of seynt
Augustynes order , beynge desyrous of money , toke vpon them to cure the
kynge , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.48

and after they hadde shauen his hede and mynystryd to hym medycyns , the
kynge daylye feblyd in suche wyse that he was nye dede ; for which
co~syderacion , they were {TEXT:missing_"were"} examyned by phylosophers
and doctours of physyke , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.49

and they were founde vncunnynge , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.50

were degradyd of theyr presthode , and after behedyd :
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.51

to this folye were theyse frerys brought , by the excytynge of the duke
of Burgoyne , as the common fame went . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.52

In the. xix. yere of this Charlys , y=e= lande of Fraunce was
greuously vexyd with the plage of ipydymye , of whiche sykenesse a great
multytude of people dyed . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,558.53

And that yere was there also seen a blasynge starre of <P_559>
wonderfull bygnes , with stremys apperynge to mennys syghte of moste
feruent brennynge . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.54

In thys yere also , Charlys herynge of the subduynge of kynge Rycharde ,
sent into Engla~de two of his houshold knyghtys , requyrynge kynge
Henrye the. iiii. , tha~ newly made kynge , to send home his doughter
Isabell latelye maryed vnto kynge Rycharde , w=t= suche dowar as with
hir was promysed ; in doynge of whiche message kynge Henrye toke suche
dyspleasure , that , as sayth Gagwinus myne auctour , he threwe the
sayde .ii. knyghtys in prysone , wherthrough one of theym namyd
Blanchet , dyed in Englonde , and that other callyd Henry , after great
sykenesse , retournyd into Fraunce . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.55

And shortly after kynge Henry sent the sayde dame Isabell vnto Calays ,
where she was ioyously receyued of the Frenshemen , and so conueyed vnto
hyr sayde father , whiche as yet was not of his sykenesse curyd . By
reason whereof , amonge the lordis of Frau~ce , eueryche of theym
coueytynge to haue rule , great dyssencion and malyce bega~ to kendle ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.56

and specyallye atwene the dukys of Orleaunce , of Burgoyne , and of
Berry . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.57

Than the duke of Orleaunce entendyng to promote his cause , vnknowinge
the other lordes , allyed hym with the duke of Geldre ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.58

and stre~gthyd hym with. v._hundreth men of his ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.59

and so entryd the feeldys of Parys . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.60

And in lyke maner the duke of Burgoyne with a stronge company kepte an
other cooste of that countrey . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.61

Notwithstandyng , by meanys of other lordes , theyse two dukys were
kepte asunder , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.62

and at lengthe the duke of Orleaunce , by the kynges commaundement ,
that some what was than amendyd , was ordeynyd regent of y=e= realme ;
the which anon as he was sette in auctoryte , fell to all rauyne , and
oppressyd y=e= people with cotydyan taskys and tallagys , and the
spyrytuell men with dymys and other exaccyons ; wherfore , by reason of
y=t= the studye~tis of Parys , he was at lengthe dischargyd of that
dygnyte , & the duke of Burgoyne for hym put in auctoryte .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.63

Than the duke of Orleaunce beynge dyscontentyd , yode vnto Lucenbourgth
, a towne in hyghe Almayne , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.64

and soughte agayne ayde of the duke of Geldre foresayde ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.65

but by his frendys he was so aduertysed , that with his owne folkys he
retournyd into Fraunce ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.66

but yet the malyce and stryfe atwene hym and the duke of Burgoyn seasyd
not . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.67

About this season , or soone after , dyed y=e= duke of Brytayn ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.68

& as affermyth y=e= auctour afore namyd , kyng He~ry y=e=. iiii.
maried his wyfe . Wherof heryng , the duke of Burgoyn , with a companye
of .vi._M. knyghtys entryd Brytayn , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.69

& there by strength toke from hyr , hyr .iii. sonnys , namyd Iohn~ ,
Rycharde , Arthure ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.70

and presentyd them vnto kynge Charlys . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.71

In the. xxii. yere of this Charlis , was borne of Isabell his wyfe a
man chylde , which also was named Charlys , the which , after the deth
of his father , vnto the great aduersyte of all the realme of Fraunce ,
was kynge of that realme , and contrary the appoyntment taken atwene
Henry the. v. after kyng of Englonde , & this Charlys the father ,
nowe kynge of Fraunce , as after shall more appere in the story of the
sayde kyng Henry y=e=. v. FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.72

In this yere also was dame Isabell , some tyme wyfe of Rycharde , lately
kynge of Englonde , maried vnto Charlys , eldest sone of the duke of
Orleau~ce ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.73

and Iohn~ y=e= eldyst of the. iii. forenamed sonys of the duke of
Brytayne latelye dede , toke to wyfe Margarete the douhter of kynge
Charlys ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.74

and Phylyp , duke of Burgoyn , dyed soone after , leuyng an heyre after
hym named Iohn~ , the whiche after he was gyrde w=t= the swerde of the
duchy of Burgoyne , he anon by euyll entysynge and counceyll , areryd
warre agayne the duke of Orleaunce ; to the great dysturbaunce of all
y=e= realme . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.75

For the sayd duke of Orleaunce was a prynce of a wo~derfull hyghe
courage , & desyrous of great honoure , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.76

& , after the sayinge of Gagwynus , coueytyd to be kyng of Frau~ce ;
y=e= which went to Auyngnyon , where as tha~ sate y=e=. xiii. Benet
tha~ pope , duryng y=e= scisme , & admytted by some of y=e= cardynallys
after the deth of Clement the. vi. ; to which Benet the sayd duke made
great labour to depryue y=e= vnyuersyte of Parys frome the great
auctoryte that it at those dayes stode in , which was of maruelous
auctoryte tha~ , as sayth the forenamed auctour .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.77

In this whyle thus enduryng , y=e= la~de fell full of myseries &
aduersites , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,559.78

y=e= quene which y=t= moch <P_560> fauourid y=e= dukis partye ,
acco~panyed w=t= y=e= sayd duke , rode to take hir disporte of huntynge
into the cou~tey of Meldon , to which place she sent letters vnto y=e=
dalphyn by y=e= duke of Bauary hir brother , that he with his wyfe ,
whiche was doughter vnto the duke of Burgoyne , shulde come for to
dysporte them . Wherof Iohn~ , than duke of Burgoyn , beynge warned ,
suspectyd the quene that she with ayde of the duke wolde co~uey the
daulphyn into Germanye , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.79

and there to holde hym at theyr pleasures : FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.80

and to enpeche that purpose , he in all haste sped hym towarde the
daulphyne , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.81

and contrarye the mynde of the duke of Bauarye , whiche than was vpon
his waye w=t= the sayde daulphyne towarde the quene , retournyd hym
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.82

and lodged hym in a stronge castell callyd Lupar ; whereof herynge , the
duke of Orleau~ce assembled to hym a company of .vi._thousande knyghtys
, FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.83

came agayne towarde Paris , where as that tyme the duke of Burgoyne was
, FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.84

and he {COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} herynge of the dukys co~mynge ,
made hym stronge to receyue hym , to whome the cytezyns of Parys were
favourable and aydynge , for the euyll wyll that they before bare vnto
the duke of Orleaunce , and also for they hoped by hym to be defendyd
from taskys and tallagys . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.85

Thus contynuynge the prouysyon vpon both partyes to mete shortlye in
playne batayll , suche polytyke meanys was founde by a noble man callyd
Mountagu , that a concorde and vnyte was for that tyme by hym sette
atwene the sayd dukys ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.86

and for that newe occasyon shulde not by presence kyndle atwene them ,
therefore the duke of Orleaunce with his co~pany was sent into Guyan to
warre vpo~ the Englysshe men , and that other vnto Calays to laye syege
vnto that towne , the whiche before had preparyd a wonderfull engyne
sette vpon whelys , by the strengthe whereof he thought to wreke great
dysturbau~ce vnto the sayde towne ; and , as sayeth myne auctour Gagwyne
, was in great hope to recouer it agayne to the subieccyon of the house
of Fraunce . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.87

But that hope soone dyspayred {TEXT:dysprayed} ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.88

for it was not longe after or the sayde duke by the kynge was
cou~tyrmaundyd and retournyd . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.89

And the duke of Orleaunce , after he knewe that rescous were commynge
from Burdeaux , he removed his syege layde by hym to Burgus , a towne of
Guyan , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.90

and so retourned into Fraunce , to his confusyon as after shall appere .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.91

In the. xxvii. yere of this Charlys , y=e= former malyce and enuye
contynuyng in the brestys of the sayd dukys of Orleaunce and of Burgoyne
, as the sayd duke of Orleau~ce was goyng towarde his lodgyng in the
nyght of the. x. daye of December , fell vpon hym certayn knyghtes ,
of the which one named Rafe Auctouyle was leder ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.92

and slewe hym nere vnto a gate of the cytie of Parys named Barbet gate .
After which murder fynysshed , y=e= sayde syr Rafe , with his adherentys
, fled vnto y=e= place of y=e= erle of Artoys , where the duke of
Burgoyne vsyd accustomably to resorte ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.93

and the dede corps was soone after , by suche as came to the exclamacyon
, with also a seruaunt of his w=t= hym slayen , borne into the nexte
housys . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.94

Whan the rumour of this murder was blowen abowte the cytie , anon Lewys
, vncle vnto the kynge , and than kynge of Scecyle , the dukys of Berry
and of Burbon with other , drewe thyder , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.95

& there with lamentacion beholdynge the corps , commaunded prouysyon to
be made for y=e= buryinge of it w=t=in the monasterye of Celestynys ,
where vpon the seconde daye folowynge he was buryed with great pompe ,
whom , amonge other lordys , folowed to his buryinge , the duke of
Burgoyne , not w=t=out great susspicion of the sayde murder .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.96

And that enterement with due obseruaunce fynysshed , auctoryte was geue~
vnto .ii. knyghtys , namyd Robert Tuyller and Peter Orpheuer , to make
enquery for the murder of this prynce : whereof the duke of Burgoyne
beyng asserteynyd , voyded the cytie , and brake the brydge of seynt
Maxence after hym , that pursute after hym shulde not be made ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.97

and so hastely sped hym , that that nyght folowynge he came to Andwarpe
, whiche is vpon an._C. myle from Parys . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,560.98

Wha~ Charlys the kyng harde of y=e= escape of y=e= sayd duke , feryng
lest he wolde accuse hym to be co~sentynge vnto that euyll dede , sent
vnto hym comfortable messagys , so that the sayde duke without warre
restyd <P_561> all y=t= wynter , some tyme in Arthoys , and an other
whyle in Flau~ders at his pleasure . In the which passe_tyme he sent
into dyuerse placys of Fraunce sundry accusasyons of the duke before
slayen , that he ente~dyd to depose the kyng , and to take vpon hym the
rule and gouernaunce of the realme , and to haue poysoned the sayd kynge
, as by dyuerse tokyns by hym affermyd for perfourmaunce of the same .
And also y=t= the sayde duke of Orleau~ce was cause of fyryng of the
dysgusers garmentis before shewyd , to the ende to brynge the kynge in
more daunger of sykenesse , or ellys to be co~sumyd with the same fyre ,
with sundry other diffamacions , as leuyinge of taskys and imposycio~s
of y=e= people , to his synguler auau~tage & hugely enrychynge , whereby
he myght y=e= soner atayn vnto his sayd purpose .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.99

Thus contynuyng great vnkyndenesse grewe atwene y=e= duke of Burgoyn &
the sone , and other of his blode of y=e= duke of Orleaunce ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.100

the sayde duke agayne the begyn~ynge of y=e= yere , herynge that the
kynge and the quene were departyd from Parys to Chartris , assemblyd to
hym a stronge power of Holanders and other , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.101

and came unto Parys ; in which cytie he moche trustyd , to the ende to
cause the kyng , the quene and the doulphyne , to whom he had maryed his
doughter , for to retourne vnto Parys . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.102

And to strength his partye , he brought with hym Wyllya~ erle of Hanster
, which Wyllyam was a man of great strengthe and allyaunce , and hadde
maryed his syster vnto the duke of Burgoyne foresayd , and his doughter
and heyre unto one of kyng Charlys sonnys , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.103

and was gossyp vnto the quene : FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.104

for which sayd co~syderacions the sayd erle entendyng the weale of that
realme of Fraunce , laboured suche wayes and meanys , that by hym for
that tyme a concorde & vnyte was dryuen and made atwene the. ii. dukys
of Orleaunce and Burgoyne , with assuryd othes and necessary actys to
y=t= co~corde belongyng , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.105

and the kyng with his retynewe was agayn retournyd vnto Parys .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.106

Theyse dukys thus appeasyd , and the duke of Burgoyne agayn restored to
the gouernaunce of the realme , associat vnto hym the kynge of Nauerne ,
whiche varyed not from his fathers vnstable co~dicions , so that by hym
newe occasyons of stryfe and varyau~ce were moued atwene the sayde dukys
& theyr allyes . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.107

For fyrste they sought occasyon agayn the forenamed Mountagu , a man of
great wysedome & honoure in the kynges courte , & especyall frende unto
the duke of Orleaunce , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.108

& by theyr malyce and vntrewe surmyses , fynally put hym
{COM:preceding_word_"hym"_emended} to deth . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.109

And one named Peter Essayer or Sayer than prouoste of the cytie of Paris
or gouernoure , they admytted to y=e= rule of y=e= kynges treasoury ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.110

& other dyuerse officers such as were any thyng fauoured of the duke of
Orleau~ce they clerely dyscharged ; the whiche , for theyr relefe &
comforte , resortyd vnto the sayd duke , shewynge to hym all the
demeanure of theyr aduersaries , addyng thereunto that all suche
conuencions concernynge the amyte , atwene hym & y=e= duke of Burgoyn
before sworne and enacted , were clerely adnullyd and broken .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.111

With theyse tydynges the duke beynge fyred with new malyce , accompanyed
to hym the dukes of Berry , of Burbon , and of Alenson , the erlys of
Rychemount , of Alybert , & of Armenake , with other nobles not a fewe ,
by whose cou~ceyllys he determyned to be auengyd vpo~ the duke of
Burgoyn and other his fawtours : whereof the sayd duke beynge monysshed
, drewe hym towarde Parys , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.112

and strengthyd the fortressys as he yode . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,561.113

To this duke of Burgoyne was brother the duke of Brabande named Antony ,
a man of great polycy and wysedome , the which forecastyng y=e= great
shedyng of Cristen mannys bloode , with many other inconuenyencys lykely
to haue ensuyd of this variaunce atwene theyse .ii. dukis , made such
affectuouse labour , y=t= with great dyffycute he pacyfyed them agayn
for that tyme , and brought them to personall co~munycacion , and lastly
to amyable and frendely departynge . After which concorde & amyte thus
agayn concluded , the duke of Burgoyne departyd into Pycardy , leuynge
behynde hym y=e= forenamed Peter Essayr to rule the cytie of Paryse ,
the whiche shortlye after drewe to hym such persones as before tyme had
vexyd and dystourbyd y=e= duke of Orleaunce
{COM:preceding_word_"Orleaunce"_emended} frendys and seruau~tis within
that cytie : by whose meanys the sayde Petyr soughte fyrste occasyon
agayne a <P_562> knyght namyd Venyt Thorney , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.114

and by false suggestyon smote first of his hede ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.115

and after dyd his body to be hanged vpon the co~mon gybet of Parys , in
dyspyte of the sayde duke , as testyfyeth myne auctour : wherewith the
duke beynge wondersly {COM:sic} amoued , reassemblyd his knyghtis , and
sped hym towarde a towne named Scha~ny {COM:edit._1559} ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.116

and for to strengthe another towne named Hane {COM:edit._1559} , he sent
a certayne noumber of his knyghtys , chargyng them with the dwellers to
withstande the force of his enemyes . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.117

Of this herynge the duke of Burgoyne , anon gatheryd vnto hym the
noumber of .xvi._M. Flemynges and Pycardys , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.118

and sped hym vnto the sayd towne of Hane {COM:edit._1559}
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.119

and so with his instrumentis of warre assayled the gate of the sayde
towne , which ledyth towarde Seynt Quyntynes , that in short space y=e=
sayde Flemynges wan the entre of the towne . In which meane season ,
the dwellers with y=e= other soudyours by a backe waye or water ,
whereof the maner by this auctour is not expressyd , lefte the towne and
yode vnto the duke of Orleaunce , beyng as yet at the foresayde towne of
Schanne {COM:edit._1559} FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.120

Whan the Flemynges were entryd the towne , & fou~de it deserte of people
and pyllage , were it for that that they lackyd theyr praye , or for
other cause here not shewyd , they toke suche vnkyndenesse agayn y=e=
duke , that for prayer , nor yet for manassis , they wolde not
{COM:preceding_word_"not"_emended} with hym any lenger tary , but
retournyd them home in all hasty spede towarde theyr owne countrey ; so
that the duke was fayne to withdrawe , and for the more suretie , to
aske ayde and helpe of Englisshemen , and so was holpen by the prince
his cosin {COM:edit._1559} , Henry sone of He~rye the. iiii , as after
shall be towchyd in the. xii. yere of the. iiii. Henry .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.121

In y=e=. xxxi. yere of this kyng Charlys , whiche was the. xii. yere
of the. iiii. Henrye then kynge of Englonde , the duke of Orleaunce
seinge his enemye was turned from Parys , caused suche brydges as before
by his sayde enemye were broken , to be reedyfyed , by the whiche he
passyd the ryuer tyll he came to Seynt Denys , where as than he fande a
capytayne a noble man namnyd syr Iohn~ Cabylon , of y=e= dukys of
Burgoyne , there lefte by hym to strengthe y=e= towne ; the which syr
Iohn~ , cosyderynge {COM:sic} the wekenesse of the sayd towne , with
also his lacke of strengthe , yeldyd hym and the towns vnto y=e= duke ,
swerynge to hym by solempne othe , that after that daye he shulde neuer
bere armys agayne hym . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.122

In this passe_tyme , an other capytayn of the Burgonyons , Gancourt ,
secretly by nyght wan vpon the Frenshe men the brydge of Seynt Cloalde ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.123

but not longe after the duke of Orleaunce sent thyder certeyne Brytons ,
the which agayn recouered y=e= sayd brydge , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.124

and helde it vnto the sayde dukys vse . In which tyme and season , the
duke of Burgoyne recouerynge his strenght , passyd the brydge of Melent
, FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.125

and so came unto the citie of Parys , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.126

& the day folowynge , with helpe of the cytezyns , recouered the aboue
sayde brydge of Seynt Clodalde , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.127

& dystressyd vpon a. M. Brytons which had the warde of the same .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.128

Then the duke of Orleaunce made out of Seynt Denys ouer Sayne brydge
towarde Paris ; wherof y=e= other duke beynge warnyd , refusyd the cytie
, FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.129

and with the kynge tha~ there beyng present , remouyd with the dolphyne
to a towne callyd Stamps , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.130

and sent the erle of Marche named Iamys , with a certeyne knyghtys to a
towne named Poysete {COM:edit._1559} to strengthe it agayne the duke of
Orleaunce , the which of the sayd dukys knyghtys was encountryd with &
taken , and so sent to prysone . Wherof herynge , the duke of Burgoyne
, in shorte processe after , retournyd vnto Paris w=t= the kyng and
dolphyne , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.131

& the duke of Orleaunce yode to a towne callyd Seyntclowe .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,562.132

And in the. xxxii. yere of this sayd kynge Charlys , by counceyll of
y=e= duke of Berry & other , seynge that the sayd cytye of Parys was so
sette agayn hym , with also the kynge and the doulphyne , sent a noble
man of his hoost named Albrete vnto He~ry y=e=. iiii. yet kyng of
Englonde , to requyre hym of ayde to withstande the tyranny of the duke
of Burgoyne , that with his <P_563> complycis ente~dyd to subuerte the
realme of Frau~ce : FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.133

to this requeste kynge Henrye gaue good ere , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.134

and lastly graunted to his petycion , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.135

& sent thyder , as sayeth the Fre~sh Cronycle , Thomas his sone duke of
Clarence , also y=e= duke of Yorke , w=t= Iohn~ erle of Cornewayll ,
accompanyed with. viii._C. knyghtis and sowdyours & a._M. archers ;
the which company when they were landyd i~ Frau~ce , & harde that y=e=
Fre~she lordis were i~ treatye of a peace , & no man gaue wagys as they
tofore were promysed , fell vpo~ a towne called Belin {COM:edit._1559} ,
and it ryffled , and therin toke as prysoners the abbot of that
monastery with other , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.136

& co~ueyed them to Burdeaux and after into Englonde , where for theyr
fynaunce and other money due of olde by the Frenshe kyng , as affermyth
Gagwyne , they remayned many yerys after . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.137

After y=t= the Englysshmen were thus departyd , albe_it that in the
Englysshe Cronycle , and. xiii. yere of the forenamyd kynge Henry , of
them is other reporte made , y=e= lordis of France retournyd to theyr
olde dyssencyon , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.138

and co~tynued in longe stryfe , wherof the cyrcumstaunce were longe and
tedyouse to tell , and to shewe the vnstablenesse of them , howe some
whyle the duke of Orleau~ce was fauoured of the kynge and the dolphyne ,
& there agayye the duke of Burgoyne clene out of conceyte . The which
co~tencyon thus endurynge , kyng Henry the. iiii. dyed ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.139

and He~ry his sone the. v. Henry , was admytted for kyng of Englonde
after hym , that shortlye after sent his ambassadours vnto the Fre~she
kynge , axyng of hym his doughter Kateryne i~ mariage , as affermyth
y=e= Fre~she boke . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.140

But dyuerse other wryters shewe , that he asked the hoole landys due to
hym within the realme of Fraunce , by reason of the composycion made i~
tyme passid , atwene his progenytour Edwarde the thyrde & Iohn~ tha~
kynge of Frau~ce . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.141

And for he was dysdeynously answeryd , he therfore made vpo~ the~ sharpe
warre , as in the. iii. yere of the sayd Henry after somedeale doth
apere . By reaso~ of which warre , the cyuyle batayll or stryfe that
longe whyle had contynued amonge y=e= Frensshemen , than dyd asswage :
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.142

for in the. iii. yere of this Henry , which was the. xxxv. yere of
this Charlys , y=e= sayd He~ry inuadyd the realme of Fraunce ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.143

& had at Egyncourt a tryumphaunt vyctorye , as in the sayde. .iii.
yere of Henry the. v. is more at lengthe declared .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.144

Than it foloweth in the story , after many townes & stronge_holdys by
the Englysshe men in sundry placys of Frau~ce opteynyd , in {COM:sic}
xxx._&._viii. yere of this Charlys , a Fre~sshe man named y=e= lorde of
y=e= Ile of Adam & Iohn~ Vyllers in proper name , gatherynge to hym a
company of tyrauntis to the noumber of .CCC. or moo , whereof many were
olde seruauntys of the kynges housholde , and than put out by the
dolphyne & other , that than had the rule of the kynge , by treason of a
clerke opteynyd the keyes of one of the gatys of Parys ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.145

& so entryd y=e= cytie by nyghte , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.146

& by a watch_worde amonge them deuysyd , assocyat to them many
Burgonyons , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.147

& so beynge stronge yode where the kyng was FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.148

& gate y=e= rule of his parsone , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.149

& that done all such as they myght fynde that tha~ bare any rule , they
slewe by one meane & other ; so that vpon the day folowynge was nou~bryd
of dede corpsys within the cytie vpon .iiii.M. Amonge the whiche , of
noble men was Henry de Marle than chau~celler of France , and Grauntpre
with many other . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.150

And for to haue the more assistence of the common people , the sayde
Vyllers set the kynge vpon an horse , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.151

and ladde {COM:sic} hym about the cytie as he that hadde small reason to
gyde hym selfe , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.152

& so rulyd all thyng as he and his company wolde . Wherefore the
dolphyne ferynge to fall in the dau~ger of so wylde a co~pany , yode to
Meldune or {COM:lacuna_in_edition} , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.153

and there called to hym such as the~ were lefte on lyue to w=t=sta~de
theyse tyrauntys : & the duke of Burgoyne , than beynge within the cytie
, & compasser of all this myschefe , as some construed and demyd .
After which company to hym gatheryd , he
{COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} retournyd to y=e= cytie of Parys , and
assaylyd one of the gatys ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,563.154

but wha~ he sawe the cytezyns toke party agayne hym , he thought his
trauayle lost , wherfore , without great assawte makyng , he called
these his knyghtys , and so departyd agayn to the place which he came
fro , and from thens vnto <P_564> Thuron , in appeasynge the countreys &
townes as he went , whiche at those dayes were farre out of frame .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,564.155

And tha~ in the. xxxix. yere of the sayde Charlys , kyng Henry the v.
landyd with a stro~ge power at a place callyd Touke in Normandy ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,564.156

and after layde siege to many stronge_holdys and townes ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,564.157

and them wanne , as Cane , Phaleys , Roan , and other , as in the. vi.
yere of the sayd Henry folowyng is more at length declared . In tyme of
whiche warre thus made by kynge Henry , y=e= dolphyne & the duke of
Burgoyne , eyther of them prouydyd to defende the malyce of the other ,
in so moche that , as testyfyeth y=e= Fre~she Cronycle , the duke was
aduysed to haue taken party with y=e= Englysshemen .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,564.158

This sayinge , as wytnessyth an auctour named Floure of Hystoryes ,
whiche towchyth in Laten many gestys and dedys done by kynges of
Englonde , sayeth y=t= y=e= Frenshemen brynge in y=t= , for to excuse
theyr infortune & cowerdyse , by reason wherof they lost not onlye all
{SIC:all_onlye} theyr la~de , but also the honour & name of the same .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,564.159

Tha~ lastly the duke beynge of mynde , by exortacyon of Phylyp Iosquyne
& Iohn~ de Tolongn~ , w=t= also a lady callyd the cou~tesse of Grat ,
the duke was recounsyled vnto the dolphyne , and a day of metynge
apoynted at Mo~struell , where eyther of them shuld be accompanyed with.
x. lordes onelye w=t=out moo : at whiche daye the sayde prynces with
theyr assygned lordes beynge asse~blyd , many reasons & argume~tys were
layed and replyed vpon both sydes , by occasyon whereof one of the
dolphynes company sodeynly drewe hys knyfe & strake the duke vnto the
herte , so that he dyed soone after ; whiche murder was supposed to be
done by a knyght callyd Tanguyde de Chastell , which oftyme passid had
ben famylyer seruau~t with the duke of Orleaunce , before slayen by
meanys of the sayde duke of Burgoyne . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,564.160

After which murder thus co~myttyd , the la~de of Frau~ce was brought in
moche more stryfe & variau~ce , in so moch that Phylyp the sone of the
sayde Iohn~ duke of Burgoyne beynge than in Parys , and hauynge the rule
of the kynge and the cytie , toke partye with the Englysshe men agayne
the dolphyne ; by reason whereof , as sundry wryters agre , kyng Henryes
party was greatlye augmentyd and holpen , so that fynally , kyng Henry
opteynyd moche of his wyll , and shortlye after maryed dame Katheryne
doughter of Charlys this {COM:preceding_word_"this"_emended} kynge , in
the. xli. yere of his reygne , with assuraunce & promyse of the
enherytance of the realme of Fraunce to hym and his heyres , after the
deth of the sayde Charlys , as to you more playnlye shall be shewyd in
y=e=. viii. yere of the sayde Henry the. v . After which maryage
concluded & fynysshyd , yet the dolphyne ceasyd not to make newe mocyons
and sterynges : durynge the whiche kynge Charlys dyed in Octobre ; and
was buryed at Seynt Denys , whan he hadde reygnyd in great trouble upon
the poynt of .xlii. yeres , leuynge after hym , as is affermyd by the
forenamyd auctour Gaguyne , a sone and dolphyne of Vyenne callyd Charlis
, which after was kynge of Frenshemen , and was namyed Charlys the.
vii. or the. viii. after some wryters . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,564.161

{COM:insert_helsinki_1}

<P_570>

<heading>

Anno Domini. M.CCCC. i. Anno Domini. M.CCCC. ii.
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.165

Wylliam Venour . Iohn~ Shadworth . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.166

Anno. iii. FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.167

Iohn~ Fremyngham . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.168

<$$heading>

In this yere the cunduyte standynge vpon Cornhylle in London was begon
to be made . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.170

And in the somer folowynge , sir Thomas Percy erle of Worceter {COM:sic}
, and sir Henry Percy sone and heyre vnto y=e= erle of Northumberlande ,
gaderyd a great power , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.171

and vpon the daye of saynt Paraxede the virgyne , or the. xxi. daye of
Iuly , mette w=t= the kynge nere vnto Shrowysbury ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.172

and there gaue vnto hym a cruell batayll ; but to theyr owne confusyon
{TEXT:concluco~n} : FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.173

for in that fyght the@ @sayd sir Thomas Percy was taken ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.174

and his neuew the foresayd sir Henry , with many a stronge man vpon
theyr partie , was there slayne ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.175

and vpon the kynges partie the prynce was wou~ded in the heed , & the
erle of Stafforde with many other slayne . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.176

And y=e=. xxv. day of Iuly folowynge , at Shrowysbury , y=e= sayde sir
Thomas Percy was behedyd , and after his heed caryed to London , & there
set upon the brydge . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.177

In this batayl was many a noble man slayne vpon eyther partie ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.178

and it was the more to be notyd vengeable , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.179

for there the fader was slayne of the sone , and sone of the fader , and
brother of brother , and neuewe of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended}
neuewe . FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.180

And in the moneth of August folowynge , y=e= duchesse of Brytayne landyd
at Fulmouth , in y=e= prouynce of Cornwayll , FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.181

and from thens was conueyed to Wynchester , where in shorte tyme after ,
kynge Henry maryed her in the cathedrall churche of y=e= sayd cytie .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.182

And soon vpon was the eldest doughter of kyng Henry , named dame Blanche
, maryed at Coleyn to the dukes sone of Bayer .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P1,570.183

