<BEGIN_fiennes-1698-e3-p1>

<P_154>

From thence I went 8 mile to Ely which were as long as the 12 I came
from St. Edmundsbery , the wayes being very deep
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,154.3

it@ @s mostly lanes and low moorish ground , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,154.4

for 4 miles together I passed over a low ground on each side deffended
by the fendiks which are deep ditches with draines ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,154.5

the Fens are full of water and mudd ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,154.6

these also encompass their grounds , each mans part 10 or a_dozen acres
a piece or more , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,154.7

so these dicks are the fences , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,154.8

on each side they plant willows FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,154.9

so there is 2 rows of trees runns round the ground which looks very
<P_155> finely to see a flatt of many miles so planted ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.10

but it must be ill to live there ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.11

all this while Ely Minster is in ones view at a mile distant you would
think , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.12

but go it is a long 4 miles ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.13

a mile distant from the town is a little hamlet from which I descended
from a steep hill and so cross a bridge over water which enters into the
Isleand of Ely , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.14

and so you pass a flatt on a gravel Causey which way the Bishop is at
the charge to repaire FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.15

else there would be no passing in the summer ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.16

this is secured by some dikes which surround more grounds as the former
, full of rows of trees , willows round them which makes Ely looke
finely through those trees , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.17

and that stands very high . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.18

In the winter this Caussey is over_flowed FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.19

and they have no way but boates to pass in ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.20

they cut peate out of some of these grounds ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.21

the raines now had fallen so as in some places near the Citty the
Caussey was covered FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.22

and a remarkable deliverance I had , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.23

for my horse earnest to drinke ran to get more depth of water than the
Caussey had , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.24

was on the brinke of one of these diks FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.25

but by a speciall providence which I desire never to forget and allwayes
to be thankfull for , escaped ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.26

that bridge was over the River Linn which comes from Norfolke and does
almost encompass the Island of Ely , which is 20 mile in bigness in
which are severall little towns as Wisbech and many others .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.27

There is another river that joyns with the Linn which composes this land
into an Island ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.28

at this bridge is a gate FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.29

but by reason of the great raines the roads were full of water even
quite to the town which you ascend a very steep hill into ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.30

but the dirtyest place I ever saw , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.31

not a bitt of pitching in the streetes so it@ @s a perfect quagmire the
whole Citty , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,155.32

only just about the Palace and Churches the streetes are well enough
<P_156> for breadth FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.33

but for want of pitching it seemes only a harbour to breed and nest
vermin in , of which there is plenty enough , so that tho' my chamber
was near 20 stepps up I had froggs and slow-worms and snailes in my
roome - FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.34

but suppose it was brought up with the faggotts -
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.35

but it can@ @not but be infested with all such things being altogether
moorish fenny ground which lyes low ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.36

it@ @s true were the least care taken to pitch their streetes it would
make it looke more properly an habitation for human beings , and not a
cage or nest of unclean creatures , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.37

it must needs be very unhealthy , tho' the natives say much to the
contrary which proceeds from custom and use , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.38

otherwise to persons born in up and dry countryes it must destroy them
like rotten sheep in consumptions and rhumes .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.39

The Bishop does not care to stay long in this place not being for his
health ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.40

he is the Lord of all the Island , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.41

has the command and the jurisdiction : FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.42

they have lost their Charter FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.43

and so are no Corporation FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.44

but all things are directed by the Bishop FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.45

and it@ @s a shame he does not see it better ordered and the buildings
and streetes put in a better condition ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.46

they are a slothful people and for little but the takeing care of their
grounds and cattle which is of vast advantage :
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.47

where the yeares prove drye they gaine so much that in case 6 or 7 wet
yeares drown them all over the one good yeare sufficiently repaires
their loss . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.48

There is a good palace for the Bishop built of stone ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.49

but it was unfurnished ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.50

there are two Churches , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.51

Ely Minster is a curious pile of building all of stone the outside full
of carvings and great arches and fine pillars in the front
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.52

and the inside has the greatest variety and neatness in the works ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.53

there are two Chappels most exactly carved in stone
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,156.54

all sorts <P_157> of figures cherubims FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.55

and gilt and painted in some parts ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.56

the roofe of one Chappell was one entire stone most delicately carved
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.57

and hung down in great poynts all about the Church ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.58

the pillars are carv'd and painted with the history of the Bible
especially the New Testament and description of Christs miracles ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.59

the Lanthorn in the Quire is vastly high and delicately painted ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.60

and fine carv'd worke all of wood in it , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.61

the bells used to be hung five , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.62

the dimention of the biggest was so much when they run {COM:sic} them it
shooke the Quire so and the carv'd worke that it was thought unsafe ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.63

therefore they were taken down ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.64

it@ @s 80 odd steps to the top of the Lanthorn and 160 steps round in
compass . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.65

There are very good monuments and abundance of niches in the walls where
statues have been , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.66

there is one of white marble laying at length and so exactly cut that
the hand lookes extreamely natural the sinewes and veines and very turn
of the fingers so finely done as to appear very proper ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.67

there is another that was a Bishop {COM:Cox} made by Queen Elizabeth ,
whose garments and all are marble and so finely embroydered carv'd and
painted and gilt , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.68

and a verge all down before and round the neck with the figures of the
apostles done in embroydery as it were , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.69

all marble very fine ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.70

there was 4 or 5 more good marble statues ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.71

there was on one of the pillars the shape of the seameless coate which
Christ wore , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.72

in another place there is a great red cross very high on some of the
arches FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.73

and it@ @s very dangerous to go or climb round the pillars to it being
of a vast height , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.74

and this used to be a pennance to the people in the tyme of Popery ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.75

there is one Chappel for Confession with a roome and Chaire of State for
the priest to set to hear the people on their knees confess into his
eare through a hole in the wall ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.76

this Church has the most Popish remaines in its walls of any I have seen
, FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.77

there still remaines a Cross over the alter FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.78

the Candlesticks are 3 quarters of a yard high FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.79

massy silver gilt very heavy . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.80

The Font is one entire piece of white marble stemm and foote ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,157.81

the Cover was carv'd wood with the image of Christs being baptised by
John and the holy Dove descending on him , all finely carved white wood
without any paint or <P_158> varnish ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.82

they draw up the Cover by a pully FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.83

and so let it down again which shutts close unless against rains
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.84

then it swells open as it did now , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.85

and I believe in that Citty it@ @s usually annoy'd with wet .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.86

This Cathedrall was much frequented by the priests in King James the
Second@ @s tyme and many of their Relicts washed faire to be seen
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.87

and the woman told me the priest use to shew her {SIC:here} where every
thing was FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.88

and they hoped quickly to be in possession of it ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.89

and made many promises how kind they would be to them their retainers to
the Church , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.90

but blessed be God that put a tymely stop to the Protestants utter ruin
and the hopes of the Papists ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.91

when I was upon the Tower I could see Cambridg and a great prospect of
the country which by reason of the great rains just before laid under
water , all the fenny grounds being overflow'd which I could see for a
huge tract of ground being all on a flatt , unless it be one side of the
town which is all the high dry grounds into which they drive up their
cattle to secure them in the wet seasons ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.92

there is no tradeing in the town , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.93

their maine buissiness and dependance is on draining and fencing their
grounds and breeding and graseing cattle ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.94

there is a fine gate of stone arch'd like a church which is called the
Abbey but no remaines of the Abby left only as it@ @s built into houses
for the Doctors and Clergy , within which is the Palace for the Bishop
which is their temporall as well as spiritual prince or lord .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.95

<heading>

2 . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.97

THROUGH PETERBOROUGH AND LEICESTER TO WOLSELEY FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.98

<$$heading>

From this Citty I passed over those higher grounds on which was some
good corn FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.100

but mostly is for grass for their cattle , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.101

you see many pretty little towns 4 or 5 in view together 2 or 3 mile
distant ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.102

I went to Sutton one of them 6 miles off the Citty ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.103

this was a little Market town ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,158.104

thence on <P_159> the fenn banks on the top of which I rode at least two
miles with the fenns on both sides which now were mostly under water , a
vast tract of such grounds which are divided by the Dikes without trees
as those I observ'd before , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.105

and these high banks are made to draine and fence out the water from the
lower grounds and so from one banck to another which are once in many
acres of land 100 so that at length it does bear off the water ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.106

but in the winter it returns , so as they are forced to watch and be
allwayes in repaireing those bancks , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.107

and considering the vast allowance yearly for draining those fenns at
least 3000 +L per_annum I wonder they have not perfectly runn off the
water , and so barracadoed it as not to FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.108

soe it often overflows it againe as it does in many places -
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.109

but they are all a lazy sort of people FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.110

and are afraid to do too much ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.111

here I see the many swans nests on little hillocks of earth in the wett
ground that they look as if swimming with their nests ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.112

some were with their young signetts 3 or 4 in a troope with their damms
hovering over them for their security ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.113

this brought me to the Armitage along 8 mile in all from Ely town
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.114

and here I repass'd the River Lin {COM:the_Ouse} on a wooden bridge
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.115

and so went out of the Island of Ely which was in Cambridgshire
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.116

and entred into Huntingdonshire . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.117

There was another bridge over a deep place of the river under which the
boates and barges went , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.118

and this bridge was in the water , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.119

one must pass thro' water to it , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.120

and so beyond it a good way , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.121

and the road was so full of holes and quick sands I durst not venture ,
the water covering them over , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.122

and a stranger then can@ @not easily escape the danger , tho' I see the
Carryers went that way to save the expence of the ferry ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.123

but I rather chose to ride round and ferry over in a boate <paren> 2
pence a horse <$$paren> to a little town ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.124

this river runs along by St. Ives which was an old monastery and a rich
one ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.125

from this ferry it@ @s 8 mile to Huntingdon town ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.126

one goes much in sight of the river and the severall places built on its
bancks which looks well , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.127

these are pretty long miles . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.128

From Huntingdon town I went to Stillton 9 mile more ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,159.129

<P_160>

and thence I went to the Citty of Peterborough in Lincolnshire which was
5 long miles , the wayes deep and full of sloughs ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.131

it stands very high and to be seen at a great distance , the towers of
the Minster being all in view FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.132

one would think it but a quarter of a mile when you have a mile or two
still to it ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.133

the whole Citty looks very well and handsomely built
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.134

but mostly timber worke ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.135

you pass over a long stone bridg ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.136

the streetes are very clean and neate well pitch'd and broad as one
shall see any where , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.137

there is a very spacious Market place a good Cross and Town Hall on the
top ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.138

the Cathedrall is a magnificent building standing in the midst on
advanced ground all stone the walls very neately wrought ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.139

the front is in 3 great arches full of small stone pillars smoothly
turn'd FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.140

and halfe paces as it were in the 2 side arches ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.141

the head is with no high tower but 5 little ones 3 of which in the
middle are higher and bigger than the other , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.142

between each are 3 peakes like great Canteliver windows but all finely
carv'd in stone ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.143

the middle arch is the entrance which is exceeding lofty as is the roofe
of the whole and so well painted that it appears to be hollow carving ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.144

this seems to be the two remarkable things in the whole ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.145

it@ @s a spacious place FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.146

but one large Isle which is in the middle leading up to the Quire where
I observ'd they put the seate of any of their deceased dignatorys of the
Church in black with an Escutcheon , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.147

here was one so now ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.148

here was the statue of the person that was last Abbott and first Bishop
of the place , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.149

there was also the 2 monuments of 2 Queens that of Catherine of Spain
King Harry the 8th@ @s Queen and also the statue of the Queen Mary of
Scotts - that was both beheaded and buried here ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.150

and there is also the picture of an old man with the inscription of the
whole matter which was the Sexton and dugg both their graves ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.151

here is a Pallace for the Bishop of stone building very neate , and the
Doctors houses all in a space called the Colledg very neate but nothing
curious , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.152

the river Linn washes the town almost round it ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,160.153

looks like <P_161> a very industrious thriveing town ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.154

spinning and knitting amongst the ordinary people .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.155

I went thence to Wansford FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.156

and passed by Mr. St. Johns house {COM:Thorpe_Hall} son to Oliver Lord
St. John which stands on a hill a mile from the town in a fine parke ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.157

there was no gates to Peterborough town , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.158

and as I pass'd the road I saw upon the walls of the ordinary peoples
houses and walls of their out_houses the cow dung plaister'd up to drie
in cakes which they use for fireing - FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.159

it@ @s a very offensive fewell FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.160

but the country people use little else in these parts ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.161

Wansford is 5 mile from Peterburough , where I passed over the Bridge
which entred me into Northamptonshire , the town being part in that
shire which is towards London , the other in Lincolnshire which a mile
or two farther joyns with Rutlandshire at Stamford <paren> which town
stands in the 3 Countys <$$paren> where I lay at the Swan in
Wanstead-in-England {COM:Wansford} , being a jest on a man makeing hay
fell a sleep on a heap of it FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.162

and a great storme washed the hay and man into the River ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.163

and carry'd him to the Bridge , where he awoke and knew not where he was
, FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.164

called to the people in the grounds FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.165

and told them he liv'd in a place called Wanstead in England , which
goes for a jest on the men of Wanstead to this day .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.166

Thence I went to Durant {COM:Duddington} 5 miles
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.167

and passed over a very good stone bridge ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.168

here we are neare the quarrys of stone FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.169

and all the houses and walls are built of stone as in Glocestershire ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.170

this river and bridge enter'd me into Leicestershire which is a very
rich country , red land , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.171

good corne of all sorts and grass both fields and inclosures ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.172

you see a great way upon their hills the bottoms full of enclosures
woods and different sort of manureing and herbage , amongst which are
placed many little towns , which gives great pleasure of the travellers
to view ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.173

the miles are long but hitherto pretty hard good way
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.174

to Coppingham {COM:Uppingham} 5 mile more , which is a neate market town
; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.175

Satturday is their market which is very good affording great quantetys
of corn leather yarne and cattle , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,161.176

such a concourse <P_162> of people that my Landlord told me used to have
100 horse set up at his inn , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.177

and there were many publick houses here ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.178

you see very large fine sheep and very good land but very deep bad roads
; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.179

from hence to Leister {COM:Leicester} which they call but 13 mile
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.180

but the longest 16 I ever went and the most tiresome , being full of
sloughs , clay deep way , that I was neer 11 hours going but 25 miles -
as they reckon it - between Wansford and Leicester town ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.181

a footman could have gone much faster than I could ride ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.182

their fewell here is , as I said but now , cowdung , or coale which they
are supplyed with out of Warwickshire . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.183

Leicester town stands on the side of a little riseing ground tho' at a
distance from the adjacent hills it looks low ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.184

but it@ @s a good prospect ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.185

it has 4 gates , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.186

the streetes are pretty large and well pitch'd ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.187

there are five parishes , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.188

the Market place is a large space FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.189

very handsome with a good Market Cross and Town Hall ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.190

the river Sow {COM:Soar} which runs into the river Reeke {COM:Wreak}
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.191

and both empts themselves into the Trent ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.192

I went to the Bow Bridge which is one arch over into the Priory , which
King Richard the Third pass'd over out of the Priory when he went to
fight in Bosworth field with King Henry the Seventh ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.193

but the Stone he struck his heel at , and against which his head was
struck at his return when brought athwart the horse dead , I could not
see , it being removed ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.194

but I saw a piece of his tombstone he lay in , which was cut out in
exact form for his body to lye in , that remains to be seen at the
Grey-hound in Lecester but is partly broken ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.195

there I saw a piece of the jury {COM:Jewry} wall as it@ @s called being
in arches FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.196

and was a place where the Jews burnt their sacrifices .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.197

There are two Hospitalls {COM:Holy_Trinity_and_Wigston's} one for old
men the other women 24 in number , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,162.198

they are <P_163> allow'd 2@ @s. 8@ @d. per weeke , candle , fewell ,
oatmeale , butter and salt ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.199

I saw the Library which is pretty large FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.200

there was two large Divinity Books the Arch-Bishop gave them lately ,
and the names of all their Benefactors , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.201

there was one book all written hand by a scribe before printing was
found out , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.202

it was a fine vellum ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.203

and there was another Book of the New Testament in Chineaze Language and
Caractour ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.204

the town is old timber building except one or two of brick ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.205

there is indeed that they call the Newark , which is encompass'd with a
wall off a good thickness and two great gates with towers as the town
gates are , in which they keep their arms and ammunition ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.206

the walls now are only to secure gardens that are made of the ruin'd
places that were buildings of strength ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.207

in this Newark which is a large space of ground are severall good houses
some of stone and brick in which some lawyers live franck {GLOSS:free} ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.208

there is also a new pile of building all of brick which is the Guild
Hall where the Assizes are kept twice in the yeare and the session
quarterly . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.209

St. Martins Church which is one of the biggest
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.210

<paren> there is none very big and none fine <$$paren>
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.211

but here I saw Hyricks {COM:Heyrick} tomb who was Major of the town and
was married to one wife 52 years , in all which tyme he buried neither
man woman nor child tho' most tymes he had 20 in his family ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.212

his age was 79 and his widdow 97 at her death ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.213

she saw 142 of her posterity together . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.214

They have a water house and a water mill to turn the water into the
pipes to serve the town , as it is in London ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.215

it comes but once a day FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.216

so they save the water in deep leaden tubbs or cisterns for their use ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.217

there are wells in some streetes to draw water by a hand wheel , for the
common use of the town ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.218

the major and alderman goes about in procession on Holy Thursday which
was the day I was there ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.219

here are a great many Descenters in this town .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,163.220

<P_164>

This Country as I said was all rich deep land FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.222

and they plough their land all with ploughs without wheels as they do in
Oxfordshire and other deep lands ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.223

from thence I passed to Bosworth {COM:Market_Bosworth} 8 miles
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.224

and went by a Gentlemans {COM:Mr._Dixie's} house {COM:Bosworth_Hall} and
thro' a little parck where the deer were very tame ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.225

and passed through Bosworth and over the ground where was the battle
between King Richard that lost his life by the hand of the Earle of
Richmond , afterwards King Henry the Seventh , who was crown'd in this
Bosworth Field with the Crown taken off from King Richards head , who
being dead was ignominiously cast across a horse and carried to Leicter
{COM:Leicester} and buried there as a just judgment of God for killing
his two nephews and reigning in their stead .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.226

This is a great flatt full of good enclosures ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.227

near this is Narsby {COM:Naneby} where was the great battle fought
between King Charles the First and the Parliament of England ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.228

from thence I went to Fallmouth {COM:?_Fazeley} 7 miles more
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.229

and so into Warwickshire over a bridg ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.230

this is a little market town ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.231

thence 3 miles more to Tamworth a neate town built of brick and mostly
new - FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.232

in sight at its approach it look'd like Litchfield but not a quarter so
big a market town , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.233

it stands halfe in Warwickshire and halfe in Staffordshire -
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.234

and so to Litchfield over a large stone bridg that crosses the Tamworth
river that gives name to the town ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.235

to Litchfield is 5 mile more , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.236

all very good way mostly gravel FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.237

I went it in an hour ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.238

this side entring the town I came by a large good Almshouse which I saw
not before ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.239

they have in this town a custome at Whitsontide the Monday and Tuesday
call'd the Green Bower feast by which they hold their Charter ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.240

the Bailiff and Sheriff assist at the Cerimony of dressing up Baby's
with garlands of flowers and greens FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.241

and carry it in procession through all the streetes
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.242

and then assemble themselves at the Market place
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,164.243

and so go on in a solemn procession through the great streete to a hill
beyond the town where is a large Bower made with greens in which <P_165>
they have their feast ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.244

many lesser Bowers they make about for the conveniency of the whole
company and for selling Fruite Sweetemeetes and Gingerbread which is a
chief entertainment . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.245

Thence I went to Woolsely FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.246

7 mile farther to Sir Charles Woolsley where I staid 6 weekes , it being
my Aunt his Lady who engaged my stay ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.247

his Seate stands very finely by the river Trent ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.248

there is also a moate almost round the house ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.249

the house is old timber building FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.250

only a large parlour and noble staircase with handsome chambers Sir
Charles has new built ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.251

it@ @s built round a Court with a gate house which leads to the outward
court that has a paved walke FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.252

broad stone the same as the first court is paved with ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.253

there are green spaces and a fine green banck with box or philleroy
hedge cut round , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.254

there are very good gardens abundance of fruite of all sorts and the
finest dwarfe trees I ever saw , so thick like a hedge and a huge
compass every single tree and very full of fruite of apples pears and
cherries ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.255

there are fine flowers tuber roses white and yellow ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.256

there was a fine sena tree that bears a great branch of yellow flowers ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.257

the ground lyes all well about the house , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.258

and a fine park by the end of it part of which is on a high hill the
side of which the deer sports themselves , which looks just on the house
and is wonderfull pleasant ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.259

it@ @s a large parke 6 miles round full of stately woods and replenish'd
with red and fallow deer , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.260

one part of it is pretty full of billberryes which thrives under the
shade of the oakes , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.261

it@ @s a black berry as big as a large pea FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.262

and are ripe about harvest ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.263

there is a very ill Custome amongst them , now not to be broken ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.264

when they are ripe the Country comes FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.265

and makes boothes and a sort of faire the outside of the parke
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.266

and so gather the berries FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.267

and sell them about the Country ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.268

the greenes they call Wissums FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.269

and on these Wissums the deer browse in the winter and on holly of which
there is great quantetys . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.270

In Kank wood {COM:Cannock_Wood} just by there is also great quantetys of
ferne , which tho' it overuns {COM:sic} their ground and so spoiles the
grass where it@ @s much , yet the usefullness of it renders it necessary
to be preserv'd ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,165.271

when it@ @s at its maturity <P_166> which happens just before harvest or
hay tyme the whole Country are employ'd in cutting it up and burning it
in heapes for the sake of the ashes , which they make fine and rowle
them up in balls and so sell them or use them all the year for washing
and scouring , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.272

and send much up to London , the ashe balls being easily sent about ;
without which they would have no ashes in the country for such uses ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.273

for their fewell is altogether coales which indeed are very good and
plenty , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.274

you might have a load for 3 or 4 shillings brought home that would serve
a poore mans familly the winter ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.275

it@ @s in great pieces FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.276

and so cloven burns light , so as the poorer sort works by it
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.277

and so it serves for heate and light ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.278

it@ @s very shineing coale all about this country tho' they complaine
they have lost the vein of the best sort which they call Channell
{COM:Cannel} Coale , and is the sort they have still in Wales and
Lancashire , which burnt much lighter and less waste ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.279

but this I thought to be very good no better than it ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.280

I have in London given 40@ @s for such a load .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.281

In this parke is severall ponds which affords good fish , as does the
moate and the Trent , as trouts eeles tench perch etc. -
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.282

the largest perch I ever saw just caught and dress'd immediately which
eates in perfection - FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.283

the hill in the parck called Harts Hill is so high that from the top of
it you see near 20 miles round , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.284

shews all the Country which in this part of Staffordshire is full of
woods and inclosures and good land except the Kanck-wood
{COM:Cannock_Wood} , which is but a barren heath ground but good wood ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.285

it@ @s fine for Hawking in the heath , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.286

it@ @s full of little brookes and rivulets which abounds with crawfish
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.287

and they were the sweetest and largest I have seen any where .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.288

<heading>

3 . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.290

WOLSELEY AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.291

<$$heading>

From hence to Stafford town is 5 mile FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.293

you go by the banck of the Trent most of the way
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.294

and passing over two Rivers on stone bridges called the Sore {COM:Sow}
and the Pink {COM:Penk} which both empt themselves into the Trent -
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,166.295

and so enter <P_167> the town through a gate ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.296

it@ @s an old built town FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.297

timber and plaister pretty much in long peaked rooffes of tileing ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.298

3 gates to the town , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.299

there was another which leads to the Castle which now is ruinated ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.300

and only remaines on a hill the fortification trenches that are grown
over with green , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.301

the streetes are pretty large and well pitched ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.302

a broad space for the market place wherein is a good Market House on
stone pillars with a handsome Town Hall over it ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.303

some of the houses are pretty good ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.304

this country is much for entertainments FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.305

in every house you must eate and drinke . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.306

From thence back to Woolsley againe 5 mile , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.307

from thence to Heywood {COM:Haywood} Parke , which was 2 mile , where
lived a Daughter of my aunt Woolsley marryed Mr. Wedgewood ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.308

a little neate box they live in ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.309

from thence back againe 2 mile , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.310

to the Kank wood {COM:Cannock_Wood} is pleasant rideing ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.311

it@ @s 20 mile long FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.312

belongs to the Lord Paget , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.313

there are 4 lodges in it a great deale of wood and deer and goates ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.314

I went to Furnes Coppice which is 4 mile on , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.315

it is {TEXT:missing_"is"} a fine covert of tall trees on a hill
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.316

and a mile farther was a fine wood called Hedgford ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.317

a {COM:preceding_word_"a"_emended} poole a quarter of a mile long full
of good fish , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.318

thence home 5 mile ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.319

another day I went to Stiles Coppice 2 mile off which is on a high hill
and a fine tufft of trees , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.320

it looks but little at a distance FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.321

but is a fine covert for the sheep and cattle ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.322

I went quite round it , from whence could see the Country a good
distance and see into 7 Countys together , Warwickshire Leicestershire
Gloucestershire Derbyshire Staffordshire Shropshire and Cheshire ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.323

so home againe by Ridgly {COM:Rugeley} a mile aboute ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.324

so it was 4 mile . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.325

Another day I went to Boudezworth {COM:Beaudesert} the Lord Paget@ @s
house , 4 mile off , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.326

and passed by the Coale pitts where they were digging ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.327

they draw up the coale in baskets with a little wheele or windless like
a well , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.328

it@ @s very good ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.329

Lord Paget's house is old brick built , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.330

the front is uniforme and very handsome with towers
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.331

but there is no good rooms but a long gallery that@ @s worth seeing ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.332

it@ @s a fine parke , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.333

just by it is a high hill on which is the remaines of an old
fortification FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,167.334

<P_168>

they call it the Castle Wall , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.336

it@ @s of very greate antiquity but now grown over with grass ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.337

from thence the prospect of the Country is great ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.338

this parke is of large extent FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.339

and some of those pitts are in it , the Channell Coales ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.340

but the water has overflow'd some of them and spoyl'd their digging ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.341

thence I went home againe 4 miles . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.342

Another day I went to Panckeridge {COM:Penkridge} Race over the Kankwood
7 mile , where were most of the Gentlemen and Ladies of the Country ,
severall coaches and six horses ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.343

indeed the miles are long and the wayes bad in the winter
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.344

that obliges them to drive more horses , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.345

these were persons of good estates also , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.346

there appear'd only one horse to run for the plaite which was a salver ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.347

thence to Woolesley again 7 mile more ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.348

it@ @s a fine country hereabout for rideing FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.349

one has a pleaseing prospect every way , especially on any advanc'd
ground . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.350

I went to Brinsy Coppice {COM:Brindley_Heath} which was 4 mile thence ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.351

could see towards Shrewsbury and the high hill the Reekee {COM:Wrekin}
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.352

and in a cleare day could see something of Chester ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.353

and so home againe 4 mile more ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.354

another day I went upon Itching Hill {COM:Etchinghill} 4 mile which is a
sort of rock FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.355

but the stone is of a red coullour FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.356

and looks like a sandy stone by its moldring ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.357

but they tell me when it@ @s wrought in a wall and have been season'd
with the weather it grows very hard and serviceable in building ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.358

from thence I went a compass round to Heywood Parke {COM:Haywood} 4 mile
off FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.359

and then home againe 2 mile ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.360

and another day I went the same tour about to Heywood Parke and back
which was 6 mile more ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.361

while I stay'd at Woolsley I went twice directly to Heywood Parke above
what I mentioned before FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.362

and returned home which was in all 8 miles , FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.363

and another day I went to a poole in the Kanckwood 3 mile to fish and
from thence to Heywood Parke thro' a very fine coppice of trees on a
hanging brow of a hill which look'd very fine ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,168.364

and so home <P_169> 2 mile more . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,169.365

I name the number of miles I went only to see the whole account of miles
I travell'd this yeare . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,169.366

These coppices there are many of them which is a good shelter for the
cattle . FIENNES-1698-E3-P1,169.367

