<BEGIN_fisher-1521-e1-p1>

<P_323>

For the seconde instruccyon the next wordes enseweth .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.3

<font> Ille testimonium perhibebit de me . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.4

that is to saye . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.5

And he shall bere wytnesse or gyue euydence of me .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.6

what meruaylous vertue what wonderfull operacyon is in the bemes of the
sonne whiche as we se this tyme of the yere spred vpon the grounde dothe
quycken & make lyfely many creatures the whiche before appered as deed .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.7

who that vewed and beheld in the wynter season the trees whan they be
wydred and theyr leues shaken from them and all the moystour shronke in
to the rote & no lust of grenenes nor of lyfe appereth outwardly .
{COM:sic} yf he had had none experyence of this mater before he wold
thynke it an vnlyke thyng that the same trees sholde reuyue agayn & be
so lustely cladde with leues & floures as we now se them .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.8

And yet this is done by the subtyll operacyon and secrete workynge of
the sonne bemes spred vpon the grounde . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.9

Neuerthelesse not euery beme of the sonne hathe this vertue .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.10

It is a trouthe the bemes of the sonne in wynter be lyght as they be now
this tyme of the yere but that lyght is so faynt and feble that it
gyueth no lyfe . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.11

for than we sholde haue herbes and trees to growe as well in wynter as
they now do this tyme of the yere . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.12

The cause of this weykenes is . for the sonne shooreth so lowe by the
grounde that his bemes thaune sklaunteth upon the grounde and dothe not
rebounde nor double in theymselfe agayne towardes the sonne .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.13

and this is the cause of this weykenes . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.14

Ye se whan a bowle is throwen sklantlynge vpon a wall it slydeth
forwarde & reboundeth not bakwarde dyrectly agayne to hym that was the
thrower . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,323.15

but whan it is dyrectly cast agaynst a <P_324> wall with a grete
vyolence than it dothe dyrectly rebounde agayne .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.16

In this maner it is of the sonne bemes FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.17

the more nye that the sonne draweth vnto vs now this tyme of the yere
the more dyrectly his bemes bete vpon the grounde & the more dyrectly
they rebounde & retourne agayne towardes the sonne .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.18

And by the reason of the nyenesse of beme to beme ryseth a greter
strengthe in the beme and a more full lyght . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.19

<font> quia omnis virtus vnita fortior est . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.20

that is to say . For euery vertue that is gadred togyder is more
stronger . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.21

A sengell threde is nothynge so stronge as is a double ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.22

nor a syngle beme of the sonne is nothynge so myghty as whan it is
doubled & bowghted in it selfe by reboundynge and reflexyon .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.23

Forthermore of these two ryseth an hete & a warmenes the whiche is the
pryncypal worker of lyfe in euery creature . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.24

But for all this we be not yet sure that any tree is alyue to than we se
some puttynge forthe of buddes or lefes out of the same tree .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.25

This example yf ye perceyue it maye enduce vs to conceyue how
wonderfully the spyrytuall sonne almyghty god worketh by his spyrytuall
and inuysyple bemes of his lyght spred vpon the soule of man or vpon the
chyrche . bothe whiche is called in scrypture a spyrytuall erthe .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.26

<font> Dominus dabit benignitatem et terra nostra dabit fructum suum .
<$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.27

That is to saye . our lorde shall gyue his gracyous influence
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.28

and our erthe shal yelde fruytfull workes . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.29

The bemes of almyghty god spred vpon our soules quyckeneth them .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.30

& causeth this lyfe in vs and the fruyte of good workes .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.31

Fyrst they cause the lyght of faythe FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.32

but this is a veray {COM:sic} sklender lyght withouten the reboundynge
of hope and the hete of charyte . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.33

faythe without hope is a sklender beme & of a lytle power .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,324.34

But Ioyne vnto hym hope <P_325> whiche reboundeth vp to god agayne
<font> ad ea que non videntur . <$$font> & than is he moche stronger
than he was byfore . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.35

For nowe this is a_doubled and boughted in it selfe and gadred more nye
vnto himselfe & made more valyaunt and mighty than it was before .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.36

Before it was lyke vnto the faythe that saynt Peter had whan christ bad
hym come to hym vpon the see . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.37

he beleued his mayster FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.38

but he had no veray fast hope that he myght walke there .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.39

He was not stronge in his faythe FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.40

& therfore our sauyour sayd vnto hym . <font> Modice fidei quare
dubitasti . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.41

But of the stronge faythe that hath a confydence & hope adioyned .
{COM:sic} therunto he sayth in another place . <font> Si habueritis
fidem sicut granum sinapis dicetis monti huic . transi hinc et
transibit . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.42

That is to say . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.43

yf ye had faythe lyke vnto a corne of mustard sede ye shold commaunde
this mountayn to remoue hymselfe FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.44

& it shold by your faythe auoyde . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.45

this is a grete fayth FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.46

& hath also confydence & hope adioyned therwith .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.47

A corne of mustard sede is veray lytle FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.48

but it hath a gret vertue compact and gadred in it .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.49

So whan the bemes of faythe & hope be ioyned togyder in one poynt than
it is of myghty power . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.50

The bemes of the sonne whan by reflexyon of a brennyng glasse they be
gadred togyder . they be so myghty that they wyll set tynder or clothe
on fyre . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.51

And lykewyse it is of the bemes of the {COM:sic} faythe & hope whan they
be ioyntly compacte and vnyte togyder . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.52

Yf a man had suche a faythe and confydence than he myght commaunde a
gret mountayne to remoue for his pleasure FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.53

and this were a myghty faythe . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.54

Neuerthelesse yf a man had suche a faythe yet yf he wanted the hete of
charyte he were but as a deed tree . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.55

For saynt Paule sayth . <font> Si habuero omnem fidem ita vt montes
transferam charitatem autem non habuero nihil sum . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,325.56

yf I haue all faythe he that speketh of all leueth <P_326> none vnspoken
of . yf I haue all faythe he saythe & so myghty faythe that by my
faythe I maye remoue at my commaundement grete mountaynes , yet yf I
want the hete of charyte I am nothyng but as a deed stoke a tree
withouten lyfe . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.57

And therfore saynt Iames sayth . <font> Fides fine operibus mortua est
. <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.58

Faythe withouten the fruyte of good workes is deed .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.59

To this purpose our instruccyon saythe . <font> Ille testimonium
perhibebit de me . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.60

that is to saye FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.61

he shall bere wytnesse of. {COM:sic} me . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.62

Of whom ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.63

of christ . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.64

what is christ ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.65

<font> Lux vera que illuminat omnem hominem venientem in hunc mundum .
<$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.66

that is to saye the true lyght the whiche enlyghtneth every creature
commynge into this world . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.67

who shall bere wytnesse or gyue euydence of this lyght ?
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.68

the spyryte of god . <font> Quia charitas dei diffusa est in cordibus
nostris per spiritum sanctum qui datus est nobis . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.69

That is to saye FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.70

the hete of the charyte of god is spred in our hertes by the holy
spyryte the whiche is gyuen vnto vs . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.71

hete of charyte gyueth euydence that that lyght is lyfely .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.72

Haue a man neuer so moche lyght of faythe onlesse he haue also this hete
of charyte sterynge his soule and bryngyng forthe lyfely workes he is
but a deed stock & as a tree withouten lyfe . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.73

For as I sayd though the naturall sonne shyne neuer so bryght vpon a
tree . yf this tree haue in it no grenenes nor puttynge forthe of
buddes & lefes this tree is not alyue . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.74

So whan the bemes of the spirytuall sonne be spred vpon oure soules yf
we fele not the sterynge hete to fruytfull workes our soules be but deed
. FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.75

But now to what purpose serueth this instruccyon ?
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.76

To this . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,326.77

it subuerteth one grete grounde of Martyn luther whiche is this that
faythe alone withouten workes dothe Iustifye a synner . vpon the whiche
ground he byldeth many other erroneous artycles & specyally that the
sacramentes of christes chirche dothe not Iustyfye <P_327> but onely
faythe . A perylous artycle able to subuerte all the order of the
chirche . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.78

but touchynge these sacramentes the kynges grace our souerayne lorde in
his owne persone hath with his pen so substauncyally foghten agaynst
Martyn luther that I doute not but euery true christen man that shal
rede his boke shal se those blessed sacramentes clered & delyuered from
the sklaunderous mouthe & cruel tethe that Martyn luther hath set upon
them . wherin al englond maye take grete comforte and specyally al
those that loue lernynge . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.79

Plato saythe . <font> Tum beatas fore respubiicas quando aut philosophi
regnent aut reges philosophentur , <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.80

That is to saye . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.81

than shall comen_welthes be blessed whan eyther those that be
philosophers gouerne , or elles those that gouerne gyue them to
phylosophy . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.82

And scrypture exhorteth prynces to the same sayenge . <font> Et nunc
reges intelligite erudimini qui iudicatis terram . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.83

that is to say FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.84

And now ye that be kynges studye to haue vnderstandynge .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.85

& ye that take vpon you the Iudgementes of the worlde inforse you to
haue lernynge . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.86

But now lette vs retourne to our mater agayne .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.87

For this grounde he bryngeth saynt Paule in dyuers places sayenge that a
man is iustyfyed by his fayth onely withouten workes .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.88

Neuerthelesse saynt Austyn sayth that saynt Paules wordes were
misconceyued in the begynnynge of the chyrche for the whiche as he
saythe the other apostles in theyr epystoles studyeth to the contrary
parte . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.89

But some here thynketh that Martyn luther lytle regardeth saynt Austyn .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.90

And a trouthe it is . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.91

but yet that is a foule presumpcyon . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.92

let hym at the leest beleue the other apostles whome withouten manyfest
heresye he can not denye . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.93

Saynt Iames sayth . <font> Ex factis iustificatur homo & non ex fide
tantum . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,327.94

A man is iustyfyed by his dedes and not <P_328> by his faythe alone .
whiche thynge saynt Iames dothe not onely saye but also proueth it by
dyuers wayes . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.95

One is this . <font> Demones credunt et contremiscunt . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.96

The deuylles he saythe hathe faythe FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.97

& yet no man maye saye that the deuylles be iustyfyed by theyr faythe .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.98

How many that lyue in horryble synne that yet haue the faythe of chryst
Iesu & wolde rather dye or they shold renye {COM:sic} theyr faythe .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.99

but for all that they be not iustyfyed . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.100

But yf onely faythe dyd iustify bothe they and the deuylles also shold
be iustifyed . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.101

Seconde the same example that saynt Paule vseth vnto the Romaynes to
proue that faythe iustyfyed a synner withouten workes . the same vseth
saynt Iames to the contrary . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.102

the example I meane of Abraham as there appereth in the same place .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.103

But ye than wyll saye . Syr be these apostles one contrary to another .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.104

To this saynt Austyn saythe that nay forsothe . But that saynt Iames
onely contrareth that that may be construed & mystaken in saynt Paule .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.105

For saynt Paule meaneth of the workes that gothe before faythe .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.106

& saynt Iames meaneth of the workes that folowe after the faythe .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.107

Saynt Paule meaneth that the worke of cyrcumcysyon or of other workes of
the lawe was not necessary for the iustyfyeng of Abraham to go before
his faythe but his faythe withouten them dydde iustyfye hym .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.108

Saynt Iames meaneth of the fruytfull workes that folowe after faythe the
whiche gyue euydence of a lyfely faythe FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.109

and these iustyfyeth a man . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.110

and these he saythe yf Abraham hadde not had . he had not ben iustyfyed
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.111

yf Abraham had not ben redy to offre vp his sone Isaac at the
commaundynge of god he hadde not ben iustyfyed .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.112

but bycause he was so redy therfore he saythe . <font> Abraham ex
operibus iustificatus est . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.113

That is to saye . Abraham was iustifyed by his workes .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,328.114

wherfore saynt Iames <P_329> speketh not agaynst saynt Paule but agaynst
the mysunderstandynge and mysconceyuynge of hym . Of the whiche
mysconceyuynge saynt Peter also speketh in his second epistle sayeng
<font> In quibus sunt quedam difficilia intellectu que indocti et
instabiles deprauant sicut et ceteras scripturas ad suam ipsorum
perditionem . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.115

That is to saye FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.116

in the epistoles of oure ryght dere broder Paule be some thynges harde
to be conceyued whiche the vnstable myndes dothe misconstrue lyke as
they do many other scryptures to theyr owne dampnacyon .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.117

Thus ye may se that dyuers other haue mysconstrued saynt Paule byfore
this as nowe dothe Martyn luther to his owne peryll and dampnacyon .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.118

But here one thynge I merueyle moche of Martyn luther specyally that he
saythe that in all scrypture there is no more testymony agaynst him but
this one place of saynt Iames . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.119

for it is not to be douted but many moo maye be brought .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.120

And fyrst oure sauyour in the gospell of Luce saythe . <font> Date
eleemosynam & ecce omnia munda sunt vobis . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.121

That is to saye . gyue ye almes and all thynges shal be clene vnto you
. FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.122

what is this clennesse but the iustyfyenge of oure soules the whiche is
promest for the workes of almes . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.123

yf I beleue neuer so moche and yf I releue not the poore in theyr
necessyte I shall not atteyne vnto this clennesse .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.124

Ferthermore in the gospel {COM:preceding_word_"gospel"_emended} of
mathew . <font> Si remiseritis homimbus errata sua remittet & vobis
pater vester celestis . Quod si non remiseritis hominibus errata sua
nec pater remittet vobis errata vestra . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.125

That is to saye . yf ye do forgyue vnto them that hathe greued you
theyr offences your father in heuen shal do lykewyse to you .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,329.126

and yf ye do not forgyue to men whiche hath greued you theyr offences
<P_330> nor your father shall not forgyue to you youre offence done
agaynst hym . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.127

Ouer this he saythe in the same gospell . <font> Non omnis qui dicit
mihi domine domine intrabit in regnum celorum . sed qui facit
voluntatem patris mei . <font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.128

that is to say . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.129

yf we worke not the wyll of almyghty god the father we shal not be
iustyfyed nor entre in to the kyngdome of heuen
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.130

Besydes these in the same gospell . <font> Nisi abundauerit iusticia
vestra plusquam scribarum & phariseorum non intrabitis in regnum celorum
. <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.131

That is to saye . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.132

onlesse your iustyce or your maner of lyuynge be more better and ample
than was the iustyce and lyuynge of the Iewes and pharasees ye shal not
entre in to the kyngdom of heuen whiche is to be vnderstanded <font> de
iusticia operum . <$$font> of the iustyce of workes . as clerly
appeereth of all that foloweth . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.133

Besydes this he saythe <font> Omnis qui audit verba mea hec & non facit
ea similis erit viro stulto qui edificauit domum suam super arenam .
<$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.134

That is to saye . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.135

All that hereth these my wordes & worketh not therafter is lyke unto an
vnwyse man that buyldeth his house vpon an vnsure ground .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.136

And saynt Paule also sayth . <font> Non auditores legis sed factores
iustificabuntur . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.137

that is to saye . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.138

Suche as onely be herers of the lawe of god shal not be iustyfyed but
the workers therafter . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.139

And saynt Iames saythe . <font> Estote factores verbi et non auditores
tantum fallentes vosmetipsos . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.140

that is to saye FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.141

be ye workers of the worde of god and not onely the herers
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.142

for than ye disceyue yourselfe . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.143

& saynt Paule agayne saith . <font> Si secundum carnem vixeritis
moriemini . Si spiritu facta carnis mortificaueritis viuetis .
<$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.144

that is to saye . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.145

yf ye lyue after the workes of your flesshe ye shall dye .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.146

but yf ye mortyfye in you by spyryte the workes of youre flesshe ye
shall lyue . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,330.147

And <P_331> fynally saynt Paule sayth resoluyng his owne sentence .
<font> fides que per dilectionem operatur . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,331.148

that is to saye . Faythe whiche is wrought by loue . accordynge to the
{COM:word_missing_in_text} whiche saynt Iames sayth . <font> Vides
quoniam fides cooperabatur operibus illius : ex operibus fides
consummata est . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,331.149

That is to saye . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,331.150

Thou seest how that faythe helped his workes and how of the workes his
faythe was made perfyt . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,331.151

By all the whiche testimonyes ye may playnely se that not onely faythe
suffyseth but also loue and workes be requyred to the iustyfyenge of our
soules . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,331.152

And thus moche for the seconde instruccyon . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,331.153

<P_388>

A Sermon verie fruitfull , godly , and learned , vpon thys sentence of
the Prophet Ezechiell , <font> Lamentationes , Carmen , et vae ,
<$$font> very aptely applyed vnto the passion of Christ : Preached vpon
a good Friday , by the same Iohn Fisher , Bishop of Rochester .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,388.155

The Prophet Ezechyell telleth that hee sawe a booke spread before him ,
the which was written both within and without ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,388.156

& there was written also in it , <font> Lamentationes , Carmen , et vae
, <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,388.157

that is to say , lamentation , songe , & woe .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,388.158

This was a wonderfull booke , and much to be merueiled vpon .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,388.159

Much comfortable knowledge and sweetnesse this Prophette gate by this
booke , <paren> as he saith in the Chapter next ensuing <font> factum
est in ore meo sicut mell dulce , <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,388.160

thys booke was in my mouth as swe'ete as honye .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,388.161

This booke to our purpose may be'e taken unto vs , the Crucifixe , the
which doubtlesse is a merueylous booke , as we'e shall shewe he'ereafter
. In the which if we'e doe exercise our admiration , we'e shall come to
wonderfull knowledge . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,388.162

Meruayling was the cause , why that the Philosophers came to so greate
knowledge , as they had . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,388.163

They behelde and sawe many wonderfull thynges , and effectes in thys
worlde , as the marueylous earthquakes , Thunders , lightnings , Snow ,
Rayne , & Frostes , blasinng Starres , the Eclipses <P_389> of the Sunne
and of the Moone , and suche other effectes . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.164

And those marueylous wonders moued them to search for the causes of the
same . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.165

And so by dyligent searche and inquisition , they came to great
knowledge and cunning , which cunnyng men call Philosophie naturall .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.166

But there is another higher Philosophie which is aboue nature , which is
also gotten with marueyling . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.167

And this is the verye Philosophie of Christian people .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.168

And doubtlesse amongest all other things concerning a Christian man , it
is a thyng muche marueylous , and most wonderfull , that the sonne of
God , for the loue that he had unto the soule of man , woulde suffer hym
selfe to be'e crucified , and so to take upon him that most vyllanous
death upon the Crosse . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.169

Of thys the Prophet Abacuck sayeth . <font> Admiramini et obstupescite
, quia opus factum est in diebus vestris , quod nemo credet quum
narrabitur , <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.170

marueyle , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.171

and wonder you , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.172

for a worke is done in your dayes , which when it shall be'e shewed , no
man will bele'eue . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.173

Is it not a wonderfull thyng , that he whych is most to be'e dreade and
feared , would be in so much feare , that for e'erie feare and dreade of
payne hee had to suffer , he swet water and bloud .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.174

Is it not a wonderfull thyng , that he that was most inestimable in
price , and most precyous , woulde suffer hys bodie to be'e solde for so
little a pryce , as for the value of thyrtye pence ?
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.175

Is it not a wonderfull thyng , that hee that is the Lorde of heaven and
earth , and all other creatures , would suffer him selfe to be bound of
those vyllaynes wyth ropes lyke a the'efe ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.176

Is it not a wonderfull thing that he that hath so great might and power
, would suffer him selfe to be taken of his cruell & mortall enimyes ,
and so led unto all these paynes ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,389.177

Is it not a wonderfull thyng , that hee that is the <P_390> Iudge of all
the worlde , woulde thus wrongfullye be iudged ?
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.178

Is it not a wonderfull thyng , that hee that had in hym all wisedome ,
would thus be'e mocked and reputed as a foole ?
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.179

Is it not a wonderfull thing , that he that is so strong & mightie ,
would be made so weake , and fe'eble , that he fell vnder the wayght and
burthen of the Crosse ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.180

Is it not a wonderfull thing , that hee that is the Lord of Angels ,
would be spytted and bobbed of a sorte of Lorrelles in that moste
dispytefull maner ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.181

Is it not a wonderfull thyng , that he that is the Kyng of euerlastyng
glorie would suffer his head in mockerie to be crowned with thornes ?
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.182

Is it not a wonderfull thyng , that he that giueth lyfe to euery
creature , would suffer this most shamefull , sorowfull , and so
painfull death ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.183

Is it not a wonderfull thing , that he that is the Lord , and Aucthor of
all libertie , would thus be bounde with ropes , and nayled hand and
foote vnto the Crosse ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.184

Thus who that list with a me'eke harte , and a true fayth , to muse and
to maruayle of this most wonderfull booke <paren> I say of the Crucifixe
<$$paren> hee shall come to more fruitefull knowledge , then many other
which dayly studie vpon their common bookes . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.185

This booke may suffice for the studie of a true christian man , all the
dayes of his life . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.186

In this boke he may finde all things that be necessarie to the health of
his soule . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.187

Sainct Fraunces coulde passe hys time with this booke ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.188

& was neuer wery thereof , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.189

and his great studie was in the compasse of a fewe wordes . <font> Quis
tu , et quis ego domine . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.190

That is to say , who arte thou Lord , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.191

and who am I . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.192

Thys thought alway dyd run from hym selfe to Christ :
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.193

And agayne , from Christ vnto hym selfe . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,390.194

And so euer he meruayled of the most excelent <P_391> noblenesse of
Christ , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.195

and compared it with hys owne naughtynesse , alwayes meruaylynge that
Christ being of so incomparable worthynesse , woulde suffer that moste
paynefull death for so vnworthye sinners , which lesson is so playne ,
and so common , that euerie man <paren> be he neuer so simple ,
<$$paren> may somewhat profite in it . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.196

And agayne , it is so hygh , that fewe can attayne to reach to the
specyall fruite of it . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.197

This holie Sainct Fraunces so profited in this lesson , that it caused
in hys hearte such a feruent loue , such a deuotion , such an affection
to Christ , that the capitall woundes which he behelde in the handes and
fe'ete , and syde of Christ , ware {COM:sic} by myracle imprinted in hys
owne handes and fe'ete . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.198

This thing the B. of R. Innocent and hys Cardinalles dyd se'e ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.199

and had verye proofe thereof . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.200

The meditation and imagination of this booke was so earnest , and so
continuall , that the token of the fiue woundes of Christ , were
imprinted and ingraned in thys holy Saynctes bodye .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.201

But to this hygh fruite <paren> as I sayde <$$paren> fewe or none
besides him doth attayne . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.202

It is a singular gyfte of almightie God , and not common to be'e looked
for of other persons . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.203

Neuerthelesse , who that will exercise this lesson , though he come not
to thys hygh poynte of perfection , he shall neuerthelesse greatly
profite in the same , and come to a great knowledge both of Christ & of
him selfe . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.204

A man may easily say & thinke with him selfe <paren> {COM:sic} beholding
in his hart the Image of the Crucifixe , who arte thou ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.205

and who am I . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.206

Thus euerie person both ryche and poore , may thinke , not onely in the
church here , but in euery other place , and in hys businesse where
about hee goeth . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.207

Thus the poore laborer maye thinke , when he is at plough earyng hys
grounde , and when hee goeth to hys pastures to see hys Cattayle , or
when hee is sittyng at home by hys fire side , or els when he lyeth in
hys bed waking and can not sle'epe . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,391.208

Likewyse the rich man may do in his businesse <P_392> that concerneth
him . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.209

And the poore women also in theyr businesse , when they be spinning of
their rocks , or seruing of their pullen . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.210

The riche weomen also in euerie lawfull occupation that they haue to doe
. FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.211

It is an easie thyng for any man or woman to make these two questions
wyth them selfe . O my Lorde that wouldest dye for me vpon a Crosse ,
how noble and excelent arte thou ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.212

& agayne , how wretched and myserable am I ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.213

Doubtlesse O thou christian soule , he that hunge for thy sake on the
Crosse , was verelie the sonne of God , as the noble Centurio sayde ,
when at the death of Christ he sawe so many wonderfull tokens .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.214

He saw the sunne withdrawe his lyght , and the ayre in darkenesse ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.215

and felte all the earth tremble and quake , and the stones brake asunder
, FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.216

then he sayde , <font> vere filius dei erat iste . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.217

That is to say , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.218

verely thys person was the sonne of God . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.219

Thinke with thy self , O christian soule , how great a person he is that
is the sonne of God ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.220

And thinke againe how vilaynous and how wretched thou art , in
comparison of him . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.221

What art thou but ashes , <font> cinis es , <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.222

and vnto ashes thou shalt returne , <font> et in cinera reuerteris .
<$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.223

Abraham which was a man of high perfection , yet when he should speake
vnto almightie God he sayde , <font> quum sum puluis et cinis loquar ad
dominum , <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.224

that is to say , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.225

I am but dust and asshes , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.226

and yet I must speake unto my Lorde . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.227

Dauid also sayth , <font> vniuersa vanitas omnis homo viuens , <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.228

that is to saye , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.229

man contayneth in him all vanitie . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.230

Furthermore Iob speaketh of man saying in this maner , <font> Qui quasi
flos egreditur , et conteritur , et fugit velut vmbra . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.231

Man is lyke a flower , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.232

he dooth issue foorth into the worlde , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.233

and soone after he is troden downe , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.234

and so finally hee passeth lyke a shadowe . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.235

Man is but earth and asshes , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.236

& shall passe away lyke a shadow , and lyke a me'ere vanitie .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,392.237

<P_393>

Contrarywyse Christe , was , is , and euer shal@ @be , the prince of
heauen , the Lorde of Angells , and the creator of all creatures ,
<font> Qui fecit coelum et terram et omnia que in eis sunt , <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.239

He made heaven and earth & all that is in them .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.240

His power is infinit , & most to be dreade . <font> Omnipotens rex , et
metuendus nimis . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.241

His wisedome is incomprehensible . <font> O altitudo diuitiarum
sapientiae et scientiae dei . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.242

His greatnesse passeth all measure , <font> Magnus dominus et laudabilis
nimis , et magnitudinis eius non est finis . <$$font>
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.243

Shortly to saye , when a man hathe spoken or thought all that can be to
the prayse of his excellencie , yet he dooth farre passe and surmount
all that , as the Scripture sayth , <font> Glorificantes dominum ,
quantum cumque poteritis super valebit adhuc et admirabilis
magnificentia illius . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.244

Now then , O thou sinfull creature , maruell at his excellent worthines
, that was thus crucified . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.245

And maruell also at thy naughtinesse , for whose loue he was thus
crucified . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.246

Thus I say dyd the holy sainct Francis , <font> Quis es tu et quis sum
ego domine , <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.247

Who arte thou my Lord so excellent , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.248

and who am I , for whome thou wouldest endure all this payne .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.249

O Christen soule often beholde this booke , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.250

and saye with this holy man , <font> Quis es tu et quis sum ego .
<$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.251

Marueyle that his inestimable goodnesse would thus dye for so myserable
a vanitie . And so maruelinge , thou shalt profyt in a gracious
knowledge of Christ , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.252

and thy heart shall taste maruelous swe'etenese , and be replenished
with a devoute fauour of his most excelent goodnesse .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.253

But you maruell peraduenture why I call the crucifix a booke ?
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.254

I will now tell you the consideracion why ? FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.255

A booke hath boardes , leaues , lynes , wrytinges , letters booth small
and great . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.256

First I saye that a booke hath two boardes : FISHER-1521-E1-P1,393.257

the two boardes of this booke is the <P_394> two partes of the crosse ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.258

for when the booke is opened & spread , the leaues be cowched vpon the
boardes . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.259

And so the blessed body of Christ was spred upon the crosse .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.260

The leaues of this booke be the armes , the handes , legges , and fe'ete
, with the other members of his most precious and blessed body .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.261

Never anye Parchement skynne was more strayghtlye stratched {COM:sic} by
strength vpon the tentors then was this blessed body vpon the crosse .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.262

These lorells that crucifyed him , drewe by vyolence his moste precious
armes , with ropes vnto either braunche of the crose , that the sinowes
burst in sonder , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.263

and so nayled his handes fast with spykinge nayles of yron , unto the
crosse . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.264

After they stretched his fe'ete lykewyse vnto an other hole beneath in
the crosse , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.265

and there nayled them with the third nayle thorough bothe his fe'ete .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.266

And so they reared vp this body aloft against the sunne , euen as a
parchment skinne is sette foorth before the heat of the Sun for to drye
. FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.267

It was set vp a_loft to the entent that all the worlde might looke vpon
this booke . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.268

This booke was written with_in {COM:sic} and without .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.269

Fyrst within was wrytten but one worde : FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.270

neuerthelesse this one word compryseth in it , as sayth saint Paule ,
the whole treasure of al cunning and wisdome partayning vnto God ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.271

<font> In quo sunt omnes thesauri sapientiae dei , <$$font> in whome are
all the treasure of the wisedome of god . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.272

of this worde Saint Iohn speaketh , saying , <font> In principio erat
verbum , <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.273

the word was in the begynning before all creatures ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.274

thys worde is the second person in the godhead , the sonne of God which
by the holie Ghost was written in the inward syde of thys parchment .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.275

For the Godheade of Christe was couered and hidde under the lykenesse of
man . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.276

The holy Ghost was the penne of almyghtie God the father ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,394.277

He set hys most mightie word vnto the body of Christ , within the
<P_395> wombe of the Vyrgine Marye , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.278

and so this booke was written within . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.279

For as Sainct Paule sayeth , <font> si cognouissent nunquam dominum
gloriae crucifixissent , <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.280

That is to saye , if they had knowne the sonne of God , which was and is
the Lorde of euerlasting glorie , they woulde never have crucified hym .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.281

They sawe his manhood which was in outwarde sight ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.282

but they sawe not hys Godheade whych was covered within the same .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.283

The Godhead was the inward syde , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.284

and the manhoode was the outwarde syde . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.285

Furthermore when a booke is spread , you se'e that in the leaves are
many lynes drawen . And many letters , some read , some blacke , and
some blewe , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.286

so in this booke , <paren> the moste blessed bodie of Christ <$$paren>
was drawne many lynes , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.287

for it was all to scourged with whippes , so that every where the print
of the cordes of the scourges , was left behynd , & that in every place
, from the necke downward unto the soles of his fe'ete , so that there
was no margent lefte in all thys booke , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.288

there was no voyd place , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.289

but every where it was eyther drawne with lynes , or els wrytten with
letters , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.290

for these scourges fylled not onely his moste precyous bodie with lynes
drawne euerie where , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.291

but also left many small Letters , some blacke , some blewe , some reade
. FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.292

For the blood by the vyolence of the schourges {COM:sic} sprunge out in
every place . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.293

And for bycause no parte of thys booke shoulde be'e unwritten , hys head
also was pearsed with sharpe thornes . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.294

These cruell Iewes put upon hys heade a Crowne of thornes ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.295

and pressed it downe upon the same , as hard as they myght presse it by
vyolence , beatyng it downe with a strong Re'ede . <font> Et Arundine
percuciebant caput eius . <$$font> FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.296

And hys blessed heade so crowned , they dyd beate it downe with a gadde
, or a harde Re'ede . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,395.297

Thus you perceyue that this booke was full of lynes and small Letters ,
whyche were of dyuers coulers , <paren> as I <P_396> sayde <$$paren>
some black , some blewe , some reade , some blewyshe ,
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,396.298

that is to saye , full of stroakes , and lasshes , where by the skynne
was toarne , and rente in a_thousande places .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,396.299

Besides these small letters , yet was there also greate Capytall Letters
precyouslie illumyned with Roset colour : FISHER-1521-E1-P1,396.300

Roset is a reade colour lyke unto the coulour of a Rose , which colour
that most precyous bloude , whiche issued out of his hands and fe'ete ,
doeth represent vnto vs , FISHER-1521-E1-P1,396.301

with this most precious blud was illumined the fyue great Capital
letters in this wonderful booke . FISHER-1521-E1-P1,396.302

I mean by these capital letters the great wounds of his body , in his
handes , and in hys fe'ete , and in his side .
FISHER-1521-E1-P1,396.303

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2}

