<BEGIN_fitzh-1534-e1-p1>

<P_9>

1 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.3

Here begynneth the boke of husbandry , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.4

and fyrste where-by husbande-men do lyue . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.5

The mooste generall lyuynge that husbandes can haue , is by plowynge and
sowyng of theyr cornes , and rerynge or bredynge of theyr cattel ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.6

and not the one withoute the other . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.7

Than is the ploughe the moste necessaryest instrumente that an husbande
can occupy . Wherfore it is conuenyent to be knowen , howe a plough
shulde be made . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.8

2 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.9

<heading>

DYUERS MANERS OF PLOWES . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.11

<$$heading>

There be plowes of dyuers makynges in dyuers countreys ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.13

and in lyke wyse there be plowes of yren of dyuers facyons .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.14

And that is bycause there be many maner {COM:sic} of groundes and soyles
. Some whyte cley , some redde cley , some grauell or chylturne , some
sande , some meane erthe , some medled with marle , and in many places
heeth-grounde , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.15

and one ploughe wyll not serue in all places . Wherfore it is
necessarye , to haue dyuers maners of plowes . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.16

In Sommersetshyre , about Zelcester , the sharbeame , that in many
places is called the ploughehedde , is foure or fyue foote longe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.17

and it is brode and thynne . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.18

And that is bycause the lande is verye toughe , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.19

and wolde soke the ploughe into the erthe , yf the sharbearne were not
long , brode , and thynne . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.20

In Kente they haue other maner {COM:sic} of plowes ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.21

somme goo with wheles , as they doo in many other places ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.22

and some wyll tourne the sheldbredth at euery landes ende , and plowe
all one waye . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,9.23

In Buckynghamshyre , are plowes made <P_10> of an nother {COM:sic} maner
, and also other maner of plougheyrons , the whyche me semeth generally
good , and lykely to serue in many places , and specially if the
ploughbeame and sharbeame be foure ynches longer , betwene the shethe
and the ploughe-tayle , that the sheldbrede myght come more a-slope :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.24

for those plowes gyue out to sodeinly , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.25

and therfore they be the worse to drawe , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.26

and for noo cause elles . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.27

In Leycestershyre , Lankesshyre , Yorkeshyre , Lyncoln , Norfolke ,
Cambrydge-shyre , and manye other countreyes , the plowes be of dyuers
makinges , the whyche were to longe processe to declare howe , &c.
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.28

But how so euer they be made , yf they be well tempered , and goo well ,
they maye be the better suffred . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.29

3 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.30

<heading>

TO KNOWE THE NAMES OF ALL THE PARTES OF THE PLOWE .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.32

<$$heading>

Men that be no husbandes maye fortune to rede this boke , that knowe not
whiche is the ploughe-beame , the sharebeame , the ploughe-shethe , the
ploughe-tayle , the stilte , the rest , the sheldbrede , the fenbrede ,
the roughe staues , the ploughe-fote , the ploughe-eare or coke , the
share , the culture , and ploughe-mal . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.34

Perauenture I gyue them these names here , as is vsed in my countre ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.35

and yet in other countreyes they haue other names : wherfore ye shall
knowe , that the ploughe-beame is the longe tree aboue , the whiche is a
lytel bente . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.36

The sharbeame is the tre vnderneth , where-vpon the share is set ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.37

the ploughesheth is a thyn pece of drye woode , made of oke , that is
set fast in a morteys in the plough-beame , and also in to the
share-beame , the whiche is the keye and the chiefe bande of all the
plough . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.38

The plough-tayle is that the husbande holdeth in his hande ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.39

and the hynder ende of the ploughebeame is put in a longe slyt , made in
the same tayle , and not set faste , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,10.40

but it maye ryse vp and go <P_11> downe
{COM:preceding_word_"downe"_emended} , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.41

and is pynned behynde , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.42

and the same ploughetayle is set faste in a morteys , in the hynder ende
of the sharebeame . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.43

The plough-stylte is on the ryghte syde of the ploughe , whervpon the
rest is set ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.44

the rest is a lyttell pece of woode , pynned fast vpon the nether ende
of the stylt , and to the sharebeame in the ferther ende .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.45

The sheldbrede is a brode pece of wodde , fast pinned to the ryghte side
of the shethe in the ferther ende , and to the vtter syde of the stylte
in the hynder ende . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.46

The fenbrede is a thyn borde , pynned or nayled moste commonly to the
lyft syde of the shethe in the ferther ende , and to the ploughe-tayle
in the hynder ende . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.47

And the sayde sheldbrede wolde come ouer the sayde shethe and fenbrede
an inche , and to come past the myddes of the share , made with a sharpe
edge , to raceyue and turne the erthe whan the culture hath cut it .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.48

There be two roughe staues in euery ploughe in the hynder ende , set
a-slope betwene the ploughe-tayle and the stilt , to holde out and kepe
the plough abrode in the hynder ende , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.49

and the one lenger than the other . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.50

The plough-fote is a lyttell pece of wodde , with a croked ende set
before in a morteys in the ploughe-beame , sette fast with wedges , to
dryue vppe and downe , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.51

and it is a staye to order of what depenes the ploughe shall go .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.52

The ploughe-eare is made of thre peces of yren , nayled faste vnto the
ryght syde of the plough-beame . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.53

And poore men haue a croked pece of wode pynned faste to the ploughbeame
. FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.54

The share is a pece of yren , sharpe before and brode behynde , a fote
longe , made with a socket to be set on the ferther ende of the
share-beame . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.55

The culture is a bende pece of yren sette in a morteys in the myddes of
the plough-beame , fastened with wedges on euery syde ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.56

and the backe therof is halfe an inche thycke and more , and three
inches brode , and made kene before to cutte the erthe clene ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.57

and it must be wel steeled , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,11.58

and that <P_12> shall cause the easyer draughte , and the yrens to laste
moche lenger . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.59

The plough-mal is a pece of harde woode , with a pynne put throughe ,
set in the ploughbeame , in an augurs bore . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.60

4 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.61

<heading>

The temprynge of plowes . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.63

<$$heading>

Nowe the plowes be made of dyuers maners ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.65

it is necessarye for an housbande , to knowe howe these plowes shulde be
tempered , to plowe and turne clene , and to make no reste-balkes .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.66

A reste-balke is where the plough byteth at the poynte of the culture
and share , and cutteth not the ground cleane to the forowe , that was
plowed laste before , but leaueth a lyttell rydge standynge betwene ,
the whiche dothe brede thistyls , and other wedes .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.67

All these maner {COM:sic} of plowes shulde haue all lyke one maner of
temperyng in the yrens . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.68

Howe-be-it a man maye temper for one thynge in two or thre places , as
for depnes . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.69

The fote is one : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.70

the setting of the culture of a depnes , is a-nother :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.71

and the thyrde is at the ploughetayle , where be two wedges , that be
called slote-wedges : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.72

the one is in the slote above the beame , the other in the saide slote ,
vnder the plough-beame ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.73

and other whyle he wyll set bothe aboue , or bothe vndernethe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.74

but alway let hym take good hede , and kepe one generall rule , that the
hynder ende of the sharebeme alway touche the erthe , that it may kyll a
worme {COM:preceding_word_"worme"_emended}
{COM:following_ed._1598,_ed._1534_has_"worde"} , or elles it goth not
truly . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.75

The temperynge to go brode and narowe is in the settyng of the culture :
and with the dryuinge of his syde-wedges , forewedge , and helewedge ,
whiche wolde be made of drye woode , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.76

and also the settynge on of his share helpeth well ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.77

and is a connynge poynte of husbandry , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.78

and mendeth and payreth moch plowyng : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,12.79

but it is so narowe <P_13> a point to know , that it is harde to make a
man to vnderstande it by wrytynge , without he were at the operation
therof , to teache the practyue : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.80

for it muste leane moche in-to the forowe , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.81

and the poynt may not stande to moch vp nor downe , nor to moche in-to
the lande , nor into the forowe . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.82

Howe-be-it , the settynge of the culture helpeth moche .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.83

Somme plowes haue a bende of yron tryanglewise , sette there as the
plough-eare shulde be , that hath thre nyckes on the farther syde .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.84

And yf he wyll haue his plough to go a narowe forowe , as a sedeforowe
shulde be , than he setteth his fote-teame in the nycke nexte to the
ploughe-beame ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.85

and yf he wyll go a meane bredth , he setteth it in the myddell nycke ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.86

that is beste for sturrynge ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.87

and if he wolde go a brode forowe , he setteth it in the vttermoste
nycke , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.88

that is beste for falowynge : The whyche is a good waye to kepe the
bredthe , and soone tempered , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.89

but it serueth not the depenesse . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.90

And some men haue in stede of the ploughfote , a piece of yron set
vpryghte in the farther ende of the ploughe-beame ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.91

and they calle it a coke , made with ii. or thre nyckes ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.92

and that serueth for depenes . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.93

The plowes that goo with wheles , haue a streyghte beame ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.94

and maye be tempred in the yron , as the other be , for the bredth ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.95

but their most speciall temper is at the bolster , where-@ @as the
plough-beame lyeth , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.96

and that serueth both for depnes and for bredth .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.97

And they be good on euen grounde that lyeth lyghte ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.98

but me semeth they be farre more costly than the other plowes .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.99

And thoughe these plowes be well tempred for one maner grounde , that
tempre wyll not serue in an other maner of grounde ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.100

but it muste reste in the dyscretion of the housbande , to knowe whanne
it gothe well . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,13.101

<P_14>

5 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.103

<heading>

THE NECESSARY THYNGES THAT BELONGE TO A PLOUGHE , CARTE , AND WAYNE .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.105

<$$heading>

Bvt or he begyn to plowe , he muste haue his ploughe and his
ploughe-yren , his oxen or horses , and the geare that belongeth to them
; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.107

that is to say , bowes , yokes , landes , stylkynges , wrethynge-temes .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.108

And or he shall lode his corne , he muste haue a wayne , a copyoke , a
payre of sleues , a wayne-rope , and a pykforke .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.109

This wayne is made of dyuers peces , that wyll haue a greate reparation
, FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.110

that is to saye , the wheles , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.111

and those be made of nathes , spokes , fellyes , and dowles ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.112

and they muste be well fettred with wood or yren .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.113

And if they be yren_bounden , they are moche the better ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.114

and thoughe they be the derer at the fyrst , yet at lengthe they be
better cheape ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.115

for a payre of wheles yren_bounde wyl weare vii. or viii. payre of
other wheles , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.116

and they go rounde and lyght after oxen or horses to draw .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.117

Howbeit on marreis ground and soft ground the other wheles be better ,
bycause they be broder on the soule , and will not go so depe .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.118

They must haue an axiltre , clout with .viii. waincloutes of yren , ii.
lyn-pinnes of yren in the axiltre-endes , ii. axil-pynnes of yren or
els of tough harde wodde . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.119

The bodye of the wayne of oke , the staues , the nether rathes , the
ouer_rathes , the crosse somer , the keys and pikstaues .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.120

And if he go with a hors-ploughe , than muste he haue his horses or
mares , or both his hombers or collers , holmes whyted , tresses ,
swyngletrees , and togwith . Alsoo a carte made of asshe , bycause it
is lyghte , and lyke stuffe to it as is to a wayne , and also a
cart-sadel , bakbandes , and belybandes , and a carte-ladder behinde ,
whan he shall carye eyther corne or kyddes , or suche other .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.121

And in many countreys theyr waynes haue carteladders bothe behynde and
before . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,14.122

Also an husbande muste haue an axe , a hachet , a hedgyngebyll , a
pyn-awgur , <P_15> a rest-awgur , a flayle , a spade , and a shouell .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.123

And howe-be-it that I gyue theym these names , as is most comonly vsed
in my contrey , I knowe they haue other names in other contreyes .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.124

But hereby a manne maye perceyue many thynges that belonge to husbandry
, to theyr greate costes and charges , for the mayntenance and vpholdyng
of the same . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.125

And many moo thynges are belongynge to husbandes than these , as ye
shall well perceyue , er I haue made an ende of this treatyse .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.126

And if a yonge husbande shulde bye all these thynges , it wolde be
costely for hym : wherfore it is necessarye for hym to lerne to make his
yokes , oxe-bowes , stooles , and all maner of plough-geare .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.127

6 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.128

<heading>

WHETHER IS BETTER , A PLOUGH OF HORSES OR A PLOUGH OF OXEN .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.130

<$$heading>

It is to be knowen , whether is better , a plough of horses , or a
plough of oxen , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.132

and therin me semeth oughte to be made a distinction .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.133

For in some places an oxe-ploughe is better than a horse-plough ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.134

and in somme places a horse-ploughe is better : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.135

that is to say , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.136

in euery place where-@ @as the husband hath seueral pastures to put his
oxen in whan they come fro theyr warke , there the oxeploughe is better
. FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.137

For an oxe maye nat endure his warke , to labour all daye , and than to
be put to the commons , or before the herdman , and to be set in a folde
all nyghte without meate , and go to his labour in the mornynge .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.138

But and he be put in a good pasture all nyghte , he wyll labour moche of
all the daye dayely . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.139

And oxen wyl plowe in tough cley , and vpon hylly grounde , where-@ @as
horses wyll stande still {COM:preceding_word_"still"_emended} .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.140

And where@ @as is noo seuerall pastures , there the horse-plowe is
better , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.141

for the horses may be teddered or tyed vpon leys , balkes , or hades ,
where as oxen maye not be kept : and it is not vsed to tedder them , but
in fewe places . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,15.142

<P_16>

And horses wyl goo faster than oxen on euen grounde or lyght grounde ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.144

& be quicker for cariage : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.145

but they be ferre more costly to kepe in winter ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.146

for they must haue both hey and corne to eate , and strawe for lytter ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.147

they must be well shodde on all foure fete , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.148

and the gere that they shal drawe with is more costely than for the oxen
, FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.149

and shorter whyle it wyll last . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.150

And oxen wyll eate but straw , and a lyttell hey , the whiche is not
halfe the coste that horsis must haue , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.151

and they haue no shoes , as horses haue . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.152

And if any sorance come to the horse , or he
{COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} {COM:"he"_added_by_editor} waxe olde ,
broysed , or blynde , than he is lyttell worthe .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.153

And if any sorance come to an oxe , and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} he {COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended}
{COM:"and_he"_added_by_editor"} waxe olde , broysed , or blinde , for
ii. s. he maye be fedde , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.154

and thanne he is mannes meate , and as good or better than euer he was .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.155

And the horse , whan he dyethe , is but caryen .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.156

And therfore me semeth , all thynges consydered , the ploughe of oxen is
moche more profytable than the ploughe of horses .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.157

7 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.158

<heading>

THE DYLYGENCE AND ATTENDAUNCE THAT A HUSBANDE SHULDE GYUE TO HIS WARKE ,
IN MANER OF AN OTHER PROLOGUE , AND THE SPECIALL GROUNDE OF ALL THIS
TREATYSE . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.160

<$$heading>

Thou husbande , that intendeste to gette thy lyuynge by husbandry , take
hede to the sayenge of the wyse phylosopher , the which sayth , <font>
Adhibe curam , tene mensuram , et eris diues <$$font> .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.162

That is to saye , Take hede to thy charge , kepe measure , and thou
shalt be ryche . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.163

And nowe to speke of the fyrste artycle of these .iii. scilicet
{COM:preceding_word_"scilicet"_emended} <font> Adhibe curam <$$font> .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.164

He that wyll take vpon hym to do any thinge , and be slouthefull ,
recheles , and not diligent to execute and to performe that thynge that
he taketh vpon hym , he shall neuer thryue by his occupation .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,16.165

And to the same entente saythe our lorde in his gospell , by a parable
<font> Nemo mittens manum suam ad aratrum respiciens retro , aptus
<P_17> est regno dei <$$font> . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.166

The spirytuall constructyon of this texte , I remytte to the doctours of
dyuynitie , and to the greate clarkes ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.167

but to reduce and brynge the same texte to my purpose , I take it thus .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.168

There is noo man , puttynge his hande to the plough , lokyng backewarde
, is worthy to haue that thynge that he oughte to haue .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.169

For if he goo to the ploughe , and loke backewarde , he seeth not
whether the plough go in rydge or rayne , make a balke , or go
ouerthwarte . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.170

And if it do so , there wyll be lyttell corne . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.171

And so if a man attende not his husbandrye , but goo to sporte or playe
, tauerne or ale-house , or slepynge at home , and suche other ydle
warkes , he is not than worthy to haue any corne .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.172

And therfore , <font> Fac quod venisti <$$font> ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.173

Do that thou comest fore , and thou shalte fynde that thou sekest fore ,
&c. FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.174

8 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.175

<heading>

HOWE A MAN SHULDE PLOWE ALL MANER OF LANDES ALL TYMES OF THE YERE .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.177

<$$heading>

Nowe these plowes be made and tempered , it is to be knowen howe a man
shoulde plowe all tymes of the yere . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.179

In the begynnynge of the yere , after the feast of the Epiphany , it is
tyme for a husbande to go to the ploughe . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.180

And if thou haue any leys , to falowe or to sowe otes upon , fyrste
plowe them , that the grasse and the mosse may rotte ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.181

and plowe them a depe square forowe . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.182

And in all maner of plowynge , se that thy eye , thy hande , and thy
fote do agree , and be alwaye redy one to serve a-nother , and to turne
vp moche molde , and to lay it flat , that it rere not on edge .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.183

For if it rere on edge , the grasse and mosse wyll not rotte .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.184

And if thou sowe it with winter-corne , as whete or ry , as moche corne
as toucheth the mosse wyll be drowned , the mosse dothe kepe such wete
in it self . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,17.185

And in some countreys , if a man plowe depe , <P_18> he shall passe the
good grounde , and haue but lyttel corne : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.186

but that countrey is not for men to kepe husbandry vppon , but for to
rere and brede catell or shepe , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.187

for elles they muste go beate theyr landes with mattockes , as they do
in many places of Cornewayle , and in som places of Deuonshyre .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.188

9 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.189

<heading>

TO PLOWE FOR PEASE AND BEANES . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.191

<$$heading>

Howe to plowe for pees and beanes , were necessarye to knowe .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.193

Fyrst thou muste remember , whiche is mooste cley-grounde ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.194

and that plowe fyrste , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.195

and lette it lye a good space , er thou sowe it : bycause the froste ,
the rayne , the wynde , and the sonne may cause it to breake smalle , to
make moche molde , and to rygge it . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.196

And to plow a square forowe , the bredthe and the depenes all one , and
to laye it close to his felow . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.197

For the more forowes , the more corne , for a generall rule of all maner
of cornes . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.198

And that may be proued at the comynge vp of all maner of corne , to
stande at the landes ende and loke toward the other ende ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.199

And than may ye se , howe the corne groweth . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.200

10 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.201

<heading>

HOWE TO SOWE BOTHE PEASE AND BEANES . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.203

<$$heading>

Thou shalt sowe thy peas vpon the cley-grounde , and thy beanes vpon the
barley-grounde : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.205

for they wolde have ranker grounde than pease . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.206

How-be-it some husbandes holde opynion , that bigge and styffe grounde ,
as cley , wolde be sowen with bigge stuffe , as beanes ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.207

but me thynke the contrary . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.208

For if a dry sommer come , his beanes wil be shorte .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.209

And if the grounde be good , putte the more beanes to the pease , and
the better shall they yelde , whan they be thresshed .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,18.210

<P_19>

And if it be very ranke grounde , as is moche at euery towne-syde ,
where catel doth resort , plowe not that lande , tyll ye wyll sowe it ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.212

for if ye do , there wyll come vppe kedlokes and other wedes .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.213

And than sowe it with beanes ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.214

for if ye sowe pees , the kedlokes wyll hurte them ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.215

and whan ye se seasonable time , sow both pees and beanes , so that they
be sowen in the begynnynge of Marche . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.216

Howe shall ye knowe seasonable tyme ? FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.217

go vppon the lande , that is plowed , and if it synge or crye , or make
any noyse vnder thy fete , than it is to wete to sowe :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.218

and if it make no noyse , and wyll beare thy horses , thanne sowe in the
name of god . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.219

But howe to sowe ? FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.220

Put thy pees in-to thy hopper , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.221

and take a brode thonge , of ledder , or of garthe-webbe of an elle
longe , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.222

and fasten it to bothe endes of the hopper , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.223

and put it ouer thy heed , lyke a leysshe ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.224

and stande in the myddes of the lande , where the sacke lyethe , the
whiche is mooste conueniente for the fyllynge of thy hopper ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.225

and set thy lefte foote before , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.226

and take an handefull of pees : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.227

and whan thou takeste vp thy ryghte foote , than caste thy pees fro the
all abrode ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.228

and whan thy lefte fote ryseth , take an other handeful ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.229

and whan the ryght fote ryseth , than cast them fro the .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.230

And so at euery ii. paces , thou shalte sowe an handful of pees :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.231

and so se that the fote and the hande agree , and than ye shal sowe euen
. FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.232

And in your castynge , ye muste open as well your fyngers as your hande
, FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.233

and the hyer and farther that ye caste your corne , the better shall it
sprede , excepte it be a greatte wynde . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.234

And if the lande be verye good , and wyll breke small in the plowynge ,
it is better to sowe after the ploughe thanne tarye any lenger .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,19.235

<P_20>

11 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.237

<heading>

SEDE OF DISCRETION . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.239

<$$heading>

There is a sede , that is called Discretion , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.241

and if a husband haue of that sede , and myngle it amonge his other
cornes , they wyll growe moche the better ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.242

for that sede wyll tell hym , how many castes of corne euery lande ought
to haue . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.243

And a yonge husbande , and may_fortune some olde husbande , hath not
sufficyente of that sede : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.244

and he that lackethe , let hym borowe of his neyghbours that haue .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.245

And his neyghbours be vnkynde , if they wyll not lende this yonge
housbande parte of this sede . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.246

For this sede of Discretion hath a wonders property :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.247

for the more that it is taken of or lente , the more it is .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.248

And therfore me semeth , it shoulde be more spyrituall than temporall ,
wherin is a greate dyuersitie . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.249

For a temporall thynge , the more it is deuyded , the lesse it is :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.250

and a spirytuall thynge , the more it is deuided , the more it is .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.251

<font> Verbi gratia <$$font> . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.252

For ensaumple , I put case a wyfe brynge a lofe of breade to the churche
, to make holy breade of ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.253

whan it is cut in many smal peces , and holy breade made therof , there
may be so many men , women , and children in the churche , that by that
tyme the priest hath delte to euery one of them a lyttell pece , there
shall neuer a crume be lefte in the hamper . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.254

And a spiritualle thynge as a Pater-noster , or a prayer , that any man
can say , let hym teache it to .xx. , a_.c. , or to a_.m. , yet is
the prayer neuer the lesse , but moche more . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.255

And so this sede of Discrecion is but wisdome and reason :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.256

and he that hath wysedome , reason , and discretion may teche it , and
enforme other men as he is bounde to do . Wherein he shall have thanke
{COM:sic} of god : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.257

and he doth but as god hath commaunded hym in his gospell , <font> Quod
gratis accepistis , gratis date <$$font> : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.258

That thynge that ye toke frely , gyue it frely again , and yet shall ye
haue neuer the lesse . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,20.259

<P_21>

12 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.261

<heading>

HOWE ALL MANER CORNE SHOULDE BE SOWEN . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.263

<$$heading>

Bvt yet me thynkethe it is necessarye to declare , howe all maner of
corne shuld be sowen , and howe much upon an acre most comonly ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.265

and fyrste of pease and beanes . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.266

An acre of grounde , by the statute , that is to say xvi. fote and a
half to the perche or pole , foure perches to an acre in bredth , and
fortye perches to an acre in lengthe , may be metelye well sowen with
two London busshelles of pease , the whyche is but two strykes in other
places . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.267

And if there be the .iiii. parte beanes , than wylle it have halfe a
London bushelle more : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.268

and yf it be halfe beanes , it wyll have thre London bushels :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.269

and if it be all beanes , it wyll have foure London busshelles fullye ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.270

and that is half a quarter ; bycause the beanes be gret , and grow vp
streight , & do not sprede and go abrode as pease do .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.271

An acre of good beanes is worth an acre & a half of good pees , bycause
there wylle be more busshelles . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.272

And the beste propertie that belongeth to a good husband is , to sowe
all maner of corne thycke ynough , and specially beanes and barley .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.273

For commonly they be sowen upon ranke ground , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.274

and good grounde wylle have the burthen of corne or of wede .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.275

And as moche plowynge and harowynge hath an acre of grounde ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.276

and sowe thervppon but oone busshelle , as yf he sowed .iiii.
busshelles . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.277

And vndoutedly .i. busshell may not gyue so moche corne agayne , as the
.iiii. busshels , though the .iii. bushels , that he sowed more , be
alowed and set aparte . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.278

And i. busshel and an halfe of white or grene pees , wyll sowe as moche
grounde , as two busshels of gray pees : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.279

and that is bycause they be so smal , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.280

and the husband nedeth not to take so great an handful .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.281

In some countreys they begyn to sowe pees soone after Christmasse :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.282

and in some places they sowe bothe pees and beanes under forowe :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,21.283

and those of reson must be sowen <P_22> betyme .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.284

But moste generally , to begyn sone after Candel_masse is good season ,
so that they be sowen ere the begynnynge of Marche , or sone vpon .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.285

And specially let them be sowen in the olde of the mone .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.286

For th@ @opinion of olde husbandes is , that they shoulde the better
codde and the sooner be rype . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.287

But I speke not of hasty pees , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.288

for they be sowen before Christmasse , &c. FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.289

13 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.290

<heading>

To sowe barley . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.292

<$$heading>

Every good housbande hath his barleye-falowe well dounged , and lyenge
rygged all the depe and colde of wynter ; the whiche ryggynge maketh the
lande to be drye , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.294

and the dongynge maketh it to be melowe and ranke .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.295

And if a drye season come before Candelmasse , or sone after , it wolde
be caste downe and waterforowed bytwene the landes , that the wete rest
not in the raine : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.296

and in the begynnynge of Marche , rydge it vppe agayne ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.297

and to sowe in euery acre fyue London bushelles , or foure at the leaste
. FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.298

And some yeres it maye so fortune , that there cometh no seasonable
wether before Marche , to plowe his barley-erthe .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.299

And as soone as he hath sowen his pees and beanes , than let hym caste
his barley-erthe , and shortly after rygge it agayne : soo that it be
sowen before Apryll . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.300

And if the yere-tyme be paste , than sowe it vpon the castynge .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.301

It is to be knowen that there be thre maner of barleys ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.302

that is to say , sprot-barleye , longe-eare , and beare-barley , that
some menne call bigge . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.303

Sprot-barley hath a flat eare most comonly , thre quarters of an inche
brode , and thre inches long , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.304

and the cornes be very great and white , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.305

and it is the best barley . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.306

Long-eare hath a flatte eare , halfe an inche brode , and foure inches
and more of length : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.307

but the corne is not so greate nor soo whyte , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,22.308

and sooner it wyll turne and growe <P_23> to otes .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.309

Bere-barleye or bygge wolde be sowen vppon lyghte and drye grounde ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.310

and hathe an eare thre ynches of lengthe or more , sette foure-square ,
lyke pecke-whete , small cornes , and lyttel floure ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.311

and that is the worste barley , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.312

and foure London bushels are suffycient for an acre .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.313

And in some countreyes , they do not sowe theyr barley tyll Maye ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.314

and that is mooste commonly vpon grauel or sandy grounde .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.315

But that barley generally is neuer soo good as that that is sowen in
Marche . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.316

For if it be verye drie wether after it be sowen , that corne that lyeth
aboue , lyeth drie , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.317

and hath noo moysture , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.318

and that that lyeth vndernethe , commeth vp : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.319

and whan rayne cometh , than sprutteth that that lyeth aboue ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.320

and oftentymes it is grene whan the other is rype :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.321

and whan it is thresshen , there is moche lyghte corne , &c.
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.322

14 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.323

<heading>

TO SOWE OTES . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.325

<$$heading>

And in Marche is tyme to sowe otes , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.327

and specially vpon lyght grounde & drie , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.328

howe-be-it they wylle grow on weter grounde than any corne els :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.329

for wete grounde is good for no maner of corne ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.330

and thre London bushels wyl sowe an acre . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.331

And it is to be knowen , that there be .iii. maner of otes ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.332

that is to saye , redde otes , blacke otes , and roughe otes .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.333

Red otes are the beste otes , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.334

and whan they be thresshed , they be yelowe in the busshell , and verye
good to make otemele of . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.335

Blacke otes are as great as they be , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.336

but they haue not so moche floure in them , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.337

for they haue a thycker huske , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.338

and also they be not so good to make otemele . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.339

The roughe otes be the worste , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.340

and it quiteth not the coste to sowe them : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.341

they be very lyghte , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.342

and haue longe tayles , wherby they wyll hange eche one to other .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.343

All these maner of otes weare the grounde very sore ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,23.344

and <P_24> maketh it to beare quyche . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.345

A yonge housbande ought to take hede , howe thycke he sowethe all maner
of corne , two or three yeres : and to se howe it cometh vp , and
whether it be thycke ynoughe or not : FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.346

and if it be thynne , sow thycker the nexte yere :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.347

and if it be well , holde his hande there other yeres :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.348

and if it be to thynne , let hym remember hym selfe , whether it be for
the vnseasonablenes of the wether , or for thyn sowynge .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.349

And so his wysedome and discretion muste discerne it .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.350

15 . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.351

<heading>

To harowe all maner of cornes . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.353

<$$heading>

Nowe these landes be plowed , and the corne sowen , it is conuenient ,
that they be well harowed ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.355

or els crowes , doues , and other byrdes wyll eate and beare awaye the
cornes . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.356

It is vsed in many countreys , the husbandes to haue an oxe-harowe , the
whiche is made of sixe smal peces of timbre , called harowe-bulles ,
made eyther of asshe or oke ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.357

they be two yardes longe , and as moche as the small of a mannes legge ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.358

and haue shotes of wode put through theym lyke lathes ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.359

and in euery bull are syxe sharpe peces of yren called harowe-tyndes ,
set some-what a-slope forwarde , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.360

and the formest {COM:preceding_word_"formest"_emended} slote must be
bygger than the other , bycause the fote-teame shall be fastened to the
same with a shakyll , or a withe to drawe by . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.361

This harrowe is good to breake the greatte clottes , and to make moche
molde , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.362

and than the horse-harowes to come after , to make the clottes smaller ,
and to laye the grounde euen . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.363

It is a greate labour and payne to the oxen , to goo to harowe :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.364

for they were better to goo to the plowe two dayes , thanne to harowe
one daye . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.365

It is an olde saying , ' The oxe is neuer wo , tyll he to the harowe goo
. ' FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.366

And it is bycause it goeth by twytches , and not alwaye after one
draughte . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,24.367

The horse-harrowe is made of fyue <P_25> bulles ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.368

and passe not an elne of lengthe , and not soo moche as the other ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.369

but they be lyke sloted and tinded . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.370

And whan the corne is well couered , than it is harowed ynough .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.371

There be horse-harowes , that have tyndes of wodde :
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.372

and those be vsed moche about Ryppon , and suche other places , where be
many bulder-stones . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.373

For these stones wold weare the yren to soone , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.374

and those tyndes be mooste commonly made of the grounde ende of a yonge
asshe , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.375

and they be more thanne a fote longe in the begynnynge ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.376

and stande as moche aboue the harowe as benethe .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.377

And as they weare , or breake , they dryue them downe lower ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.378

and they wolde be made longe before , ere they be occupied , that they
maye be drye ; FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.379

for than they shall endure and last moche better , and stycke the faster
. FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.380

The horses that shall drawe these harowes , muste be well kepte and
shodde , FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.381

or elles they wyll soone be tyred , and sore beate , that they may not
drawe . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.382

They must haue hombers or collers , holmes withed about theyr neckes ,
tresses to drawe by , and a swyngletre to holde the tresses abrode , and
a togewith to be bytwene the swyngletre and the harowe .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.383

And if the barleye-grounde wyll not breake with harrowes , but be clotty
, it wolde be beaten with malles , and not streyght downe ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.384

for than they beate the corne in-to the erthe . FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.385

And if they beate the clot on the syde , it wyll the better breake .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.386

And the clot wyll lye lyghte , that the corne maye lyghtely come vp .
FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.387

And they vse to role theyr barley-grounde after a shoure of rayne , to
make the grounde euen to mowe , &c. FITZH-1534-E1-P1,25.388

