<BEGIN_fox-1674-e3-p1>

<P_89>

1664 FOX-1674-E3-P1,89.3

And when I was in prison att Lancaster : there was a great noise of ye
turke spreadinge over Christendome & a great feare in Christendome
FOX-1674-E3-P1,89.4

& as I was walkeinge in my prison Chamber : I saw : ye Lords power turne
against him : y=t= hee was turneinge backe againe . FOX-1674-E3-P1,89.5

And soe within a month after : ye news_booke came doune wherein it was
mentioned y=t= they had given him a defeate . FOX-1674-E3-P1,89.6

And this I declared to some what ye Lord had lett mee see when there was
such feares of his overspreadinge Christendome . FOX-1674-E3-P1,89.7

And another time as I was walkeinge in my Chamber with my eye to ye Lord
: I saw ye angell of ye Lord : with <P_90> a glitteringe drawe {COM:sic}
sworde southwarde : & as though ye Courte had beene all off afire :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.8

& not longe after : ye warrs begann with Holland FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.9

& ye sicknesse begann : FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.10

& ye Lords sworde was drawne . FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.11

And then I was removed to Scarborough : FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.12

& ye first day I came out of y=t= prison ye fire broake out in London :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.13

& then I saw ye Lord God was true & Just in his worde y=t= hee had
shewed mee . FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.14

And yett few people layde it to hearte FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.15

but grew rather more wicked & higher in pride . FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.16

And wee had a frende y=t= was moved to come out of Huntingeton sheere
before y=e= fire & to {COM:"to"_interlineated} scatter his money uppe &
doune y=e= streets & to turne his horse loose in y=e= streets : & to
untye his briches knees & lett his stockens fall : & to unbotton his
dublett & to tell ye people soe should they runn uppe & doune
scatteringe there money & there goods halfe undrest like mad people as
hee gave y=m= a signe : FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.17

& soe they did when ye fire broake out & ye Citty was burneinge .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.18

And thus ye Lord has exercised his prophetts & people & servants by his
power : & shewd y=m= signes of his Judgements : FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.19

& some they beat & evilly entreated & Imprisond both in ye other powers
days & since FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.20

but ye Lord is Just FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.21

& happy are they y=t= obeys his worde . FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.22

And many has been moved to goe naked in there streets as signes of there
nakednesse : FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.23

& many men & women has beene moved to goe naked &
{COM:"naked_&"_interlineated} in sackecloth in ye other powers days &
since as signes of there nakednesse from the image of God &
righteousnesse & holynesse & how y=t= God would strippe y=m= & make y=m=
bare & naked as they was : FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.24

but insteade of consideringe of it they have many times whipt y=m= &
imprisoned y=m= or abused y=m= . FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.25

And in O: P: days many was moved to goe som to ye great Turke & to
Jerusalem : & to ye Pope : & to warn y=m= of ye day of ye Lord : & to
preach his everlastinge gospell FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.26

& much tryalls & sufferinges they went through FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.27

but ye Lords power did upholde all ye faithfull yea even to death .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,90.28

And in his days ye preists putt uppe severall petions to O: P: & his son
R: C: & to y=e= parlaments : & Judges & <P_91> Justices & ye sessions
against us stufft full of lyes & vilifyeinge words & slaunders :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.29

but through ye Lords power wee gott y=m= FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.30

& aunswered y=m= all : FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.31

& wee cleered ye Lords truth & our selves of y=m= .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.32

Butt oh ye body of darknesse y=t= risse against ye truth whoe made lyes
there refuge FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.33

but ye Lord swept y=m= away FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.34

& in his power & truth light & life hedged his lambs about :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.35

& did presserve y=m= as on eagles winges . FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.36

And therfore I & wee had great Incouragement to trust to ye Lord : whome
wee did see by his power & spiritt howe hee did overturne & bringe all
ye Confederates & councells & darknesse y=t= was hatcht against ye truth
& his people to nought & by the same truth gave his people dominion y=t=
in it they might serve him . FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.37

1664 FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.38

There was great Imprisonements : in this & ye former yeere :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.39

& severall was banished : FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.40

& many was crowded Into Newgate where ye sicknesse was
FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.41

& many freindes dyed In prison FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.42

for very many were Imprissoned as aforesaid : betwixt these 2 yeeres .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.43

And severall was sett on shippeboarde by ye kinges order :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.44

& some masters sett y=m= a shoare againe : FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.45

& som were sent to Barbadoes & Jamaica & to Mevis FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.46

& ye Lord there blest y=m= FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.47

& one master of a shippe which carryed ffreindes : was soe plagued for
his wickednesse whoe kept freindes under deckes though ye sicknesse was
amongst y=m= & many dyed of it
{COM:16_words_from_"whoe"_to_"it"_interlineated} : FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.48

& hee lost most of his sea {COM:"sea"_interlineated} men also
{COM:"also"_interlineated} with ye plague FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.49

& lay : for severall months Crost with contrary windes though other
shipps past out & went there voyages : FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.50

& att last hee arrived In ye sounde att Plymouth FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.51

& there ye governor & magistrates woulde not suffer him nor none of his
men to come a shoare : though hee wanted many necessaryes for his voyage
: FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.52

butt freindes went to ye shippes syde FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.53

& carryed necessaryes to ye shippe for freindes : FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.54

Tho: Lower & Jo: Light of Plymouth & other ffrendes went with it : to
y=m= . FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.55

And soe ye master beinge sore crost & plagued & vext : hee cursed y=m=
y=t= putt him upon this fright : FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.56

& hopet hee shoulde not goe farr before hee was taken .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,91.57

And within a litle time y=t= ye vessell went foorth of ye sounde of
Plymouth shee was taken by a Dutch: man of <P_92> warr : & carryed Into
Hollande : FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.58

& ye banished freindes were sent Into Englande by ye states of Hollande
with a lett_passe : & certificate . FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.59

And at last ye Lords power came over all FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.60

& many of our persecutors was ashamed & confounded FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.61

& largely I might write off these thinges FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.62

but ye bookes of suffringes testifyes of it more at large .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.63

1665 FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.64

And about 6 weekes after they gott an order for removeall off me from
Lancaster {COM:6_words_from_"for"_to_"Lancaster"_interlineated} :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.65

& Coll. Kirby threatned y=t= I should bee sent farr enough & beyonde
sea . FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.66

And soe ye order came doune for ye removeall of mee : from ye kinge &
his Councell : FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.67

& there came another letter from ye earle of Anglesey : y=t= if those
thinges were founde true {COM:"true"_interlineated} against mee y=t= I
was charghed withal I deserved neither clemency nor mercy .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.68

And ye greatest matter they had against mee was because I coulde not
disobey ye commande of Christ : & sweare . FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.69

And ye undersheriffe : & ye head sheriffes man : & some bayliffes came
FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.70

& fetcht mee when I was not able to goe or stande : FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.71

& had mee out of y=t= smoakey prison being very weake :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.72

& had mee doune to ye goalers house : where was Will Kirby a Justice &
ye undersheriffe & several others
{COM:3_words_from_"&"_to_"others"_interlineated} . FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.73

And soe they caled for wine to give mee FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.74

but I tolde y=m= I woulde have none of there wine .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.75

And then they cryed bringe out ye horses . FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.76

Then I desired y=m= to shew mee {COM:"me"_interlineated} a Copy of there
order : if they Intended to remove mee : FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.77

but they woulde shew mee none but there swords . FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.78

Then I tolde y=m= there was noe sentence past upon mee nor I
{COM:"I"_interlineated} was not premunired & therfore was not made ye
kinges prisoner but ye sheriffes : FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.79

& they & all ye country knew {COM:"knew"_interlineated} y=t= my
Indictment was not {COM:"not"_interlineated} fully pleaded unto : nor ye
{COM:"ye"_interlineated} errors allowed which were sufficeent to have
quasht ye Indictment : though they had kept mee from one assises to ye
other to y=t= ende to try mee : FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.80

& they & all ye country knew y=t= there was noe sentence passed upon mee
of praemunire : FOX-1674-E3-P1,92.81

& therfore as before said : they coulde not make mee ye kinges prisoner
but ye sheriffes till I had pleaded & <P_93> aunswered to my Indictment
: FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.82

& therfore as I said before I desired to see there order .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.83

But they haled mee out : FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.84

& lifted mee uppe upon on of ye sheriffes horses : FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.85

& when I was in ye street : ye tounds_people being all uppe in ye
streets : I tolde ye oficers y=t= I had neither received of y=m=
civvility sobriety humanity or Christianity . FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.86

And soe they hurryed mee away : about 14 mile : to Bentom
FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.87

& I was very weake & hardely able to sett on horsebacke
FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.88

& my cloaths smelt soe of smoak that they were loathsome to my selfe .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.89

And ye wicked goaler : one Hunter : a younge man : hee would come & give
ye horse a whippe & make him skippe & leape : FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.90

& then hee would come & looke mee in ye face & say : how doe you M=r=
ffox : FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.91

but I tolde him it was not civill In him to doe soe .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.92

Butt ye Lord cutt him of soone after . FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.93

And at last they mist FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.94

& lost there way FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.95

but when wee came to Bentam in Yorkesheere
{COM:"in_Yorkesheere"_interlineated} : there mett us a many troopers & a
marshall : FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.96

& many of ye gentry of ye country was come in & aboundans of people : to
stare at mee : FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.97

& I beinge very weak I desired y=m= to lett mee lye of a bed : which ye
souldyers permitted mee . FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.98

Soe they went Into a roome FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.99

& left a guarde upon mee FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.100

& gave ye marshall & ye souldyers there order . FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.101

And soe after they had stayde there a while : they prest horses
FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.102

& raised ye bayliffe of ye hundred & ye constables & others
{COM:5_words_from_"&"_to_"others"_interlineated} : FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.103

& soe had mee to Gigglsweeke y=t= night . FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.104

And an exceedinge weake man I was : FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.105

& there they raised ye constables with there clogge shooes : whoe sate
drinkeinge all night in ye roome by mee soe as I coulde not gett much
rest . FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.106

And ye next day wee came to a markett tounde where there was severall
freinds came to see mee : where Rob: Withers came to mee : & severall
freinds upon ye roade . FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.107

And ye next night I askt ye souldyers whether they Intended to carry mee
: & whether I was to bee sent FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.108

& some of y=m= said beyonde sea & others of y=m= to Tinmouth Castell :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.109

& a great faire there was amongst ye souldyers least some should rescue
mee out of there handes FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.110

but y=t= feare was needlesse . FOX-1674-E3-P1,93.111

<P_94>

And ye next night wee came to Yorke : FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.113

& ye marshall putt mee uppe in a chamber : Into a great roome where
there came most part of two troopes to see mee : FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.114

& one of y=m= beinge an envyous man : hearing y=t= I was premunired askt
of mee whether my estate was Copy holde or free lande .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.115

But I was moved to declare ye worde of life to ye souldyers
FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.116

& many of y=m= was very loveinge : FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.117

& at night ye Lord frettwel y=t= commanded ye horse came to mee
FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.118

& was very civill & very loveinge FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.119

& I was made to declare many thinges unto him of truth & of ye reason of
my Imprisonement . FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.120

And soe after they had stayde at Yorke 2 days : I was sent by ye
marshall & 4 or 5 souldyers : to Scarborough Castle whoe were very
civill men : FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.121

& carryed y=m=selve very loveingely to mee . FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.122

And as wee went wee baited att Malton : where they permitted ffreinds to
come & visitt mee . FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.123

And when wee came to an Inn att Scarborough they sent for ye governor :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.124

& hee sent for halfe_a_dozen souldyers : FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.125

& sett y=m= upon mee to bee my guarde y=t= night : FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.126

& ye next day : they conducted mee uppe Into ye castle .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.127

And there putt mee Into a roome FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.128

& sett a centaury on mee FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.129

& I beinge weake & ready to fainte they lett mee goe a litle Into ye
ayre with ye Century . FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.130

And after they removed mee : out of y=t= roome where there was another
prisoner : FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.131

& putt mee in an open roome where I bestowed a matter of 50@ @=s= to
keepe ye raine out of it : & from smoakeinge . FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.132

And when I had donne they removed mee out of y=t= FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.133

& putt mee in to {COM:"to"_interlineated} another worse roome
{COM:"worse_room"_interlineated} where I had noe chimney nor fire hearth
. FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.134

And whilst I was there that space beinge there att Scarborough many
great persons came to see mee . FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.135

And there came on Sir ffrancis Cobb : FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.136

& ye governor Sir Jos. Croslande came with him : FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.137

& I desired ye governor to goe Into my roome & see what a roome I had :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.138

& I had gott a litle fire made in it : FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.139

& it smoakt soe y=t= they could not finde ye way out of it :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.140

& hee beinge a papist I tolde him y=t= was his purgatory : where they
had putt mee into : FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.141

& this was ye former {COM:"former"_interlineated} roome y=t= they
removed mee out of after I had bestowed y=t= cost upon it .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,94.142

<P_95>

And there came another great {COM:"great"_interlineated} company of
papists : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.144

& they affirmed ye Pope was Infallible & had stood Infallible ever since
Peters time : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.145

but I told y=m= & shewed y=m= out of Eusebius y=t= one of ye Bishopps of
Rome denyed ye faith & sacrificed to Idolls & therfore hee was not
Infallible : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.146

& if they was in ye infallible spiritt they need not have goales swords
& staves rackes & tortures fires & faggotts whipps & gallowes
{COM:"fires"_to"gallowes"_interlineated} to holde uppe there religion .
And to destroy mens lifes : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.147

for if they was in ye infalible spiritt they woulde preserve mens lifes
& use none but spirituall weapons
{COM:6_words_from_"&"_to_"weapons"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.148

Then I tolde y=m= there was a woman in Kent y=t= had beene a papist &
had brought sevrall to y=t= religion : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.149

& after shee came to bee convinced of Gods truth & turned by it to
Christ her saviour : shee admonished ye papists to ye same :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.150

& one of y=m= beinge a taylor whoe was workeinge att her house : as shee
was admonishinge of him hee drew his knife at her FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.151

& gott betwixt her & ye doore : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.152

& I askt ye woman what hee woulde have donne with his knife
FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.153

& shee said hee woulde have stabbed her FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.154

& she bid him put uppe his knife FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.155

for she knew his principle . FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.156

Stabbe thee said I : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.157

what would hee stabbe thee ffor thy religion : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.158

yes said shee FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.159

it was ye principle of ye papists if any turned from there religion it
was there principle to kill y=m= . FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.160

And I told y=m= : this was one y=t= had beene of y=m= y=t= had forsaken
there principles & had discovred there practises FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.161

& hee did not deny it FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.162

but said what woulde I declare this abroade : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.163

& I tolde y=m= yes such thinges ought to bee declared abroade & howe
contrary to true Christianity It was : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.164

& hee went away in a rage . FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.165

And then there came on D=tr= Wittey which was esteemed a great D=tr= of
physicke {COM:"of_physicke"_interlineated} & Lourd fauconbridge & ye
governor of Tinmouth Castell & sevrall knights : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.166

& this Wittey tooke uppe ye discourse FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.167

& askt mee what I was in prison for : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.168

& I said because I would not disobey ye commande of Christ & sweare :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.169

soe hee said I ought to sweare my allegians to ye kinge :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.170

& hee was a great presbyterian : FOX-1674-E3-P1,95.171

& I askt him <P_96> whether hee had not sworne against ye kinge & house
of Lords & taken ye Scotch Covenant
{COM:5_words_from_"&"_to_"Covenant"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.172

And now had hee not sworne : for ye kinge FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.173

& what was his swearinge good for . FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.174

And my allegians did not consist in swearinge but in truth &
faithfulnesse . FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.175

And soe after a while : I was had away to my prison : after many more
words with y=m= {COM:"with_y=m="_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.176

& this Wittey boasted in ye townde amongst his patients y=t= hee had
conquered mee : FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.177

& I tolde Sir. Jos: Crosland Itt was a small boast in him to say hee
had conquered a bounde man : FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.178

& desired him to bid him come to me againe when hee came to ye castell :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.179

& hee came againe with a matter of 16 or 17 great persons .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.180

And hee affirmed before y=m= {COM:"y=m="_interlineated} all y=t= Christ
had not enlightned every man y=t= cometh Into ye worlde & y=t= ye grace
of God had not appeared unto all men y=t= brought
{COM:the_letter_"t"_interlineated} salvation & y=t= Christ had not dyed
for all men . FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.181

Then I askt him what sorte of men those were y=t= Christ had not
enlightned : & his grace had not appeared to y=m= & y=t= he had not dyed
for . FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.182

And hee said hee did not dy for Adulterers & Idolaters : & wicked men :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.183

then I askt him again whether Adulterers & Idolaters : & wicked men was
not sinners : & whether Christ did not dy for sinners : & came not to
call sinners to repentans . FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.184

And hee said yes : FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.185

soe said I thou has stopt thy owne mouth FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.186

for I proved y=t= ye grace of God had appeared unto all men though some
turned it Into Wantonnesse & walked despitefully against it : & y=t=
Christ had enlightned all men though some hated it :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.187

& severall of ye people confest y=t= it was true : FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.188

& hee {COM:"confest"_to"_hee"_interlineated} went away in a great
{COM:"great"_interlineated} rage : FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.189

and came noe more att mee . FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.190

And another time ye governor brought a preist FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.191

but his mouth was soone stoppt : FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.192

& another time after hee brought 2 or 3 parlament men :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.193

& they askt mee whether I did owne ministers & Bishopps :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.194

& I tolde y=m= yes such as Christ sent foorth & said freely you have
received freely give & such as {COM:"such_as"_interlineated} was
qualifyed & was in ye same power & spiritt y=t= they was in in ye
Apostles days . FOX-1674-E3-P1,96.195

<P_97>

But such teachers & Bishops {COM:"&_Bishops"_interlineated} as theres
was y=t= woulde goe noe farther then they had a great benefice I did not
owne FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.197

for they was not like ye Apostles . FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.198

For Christ saith to his ministers goe yee into all nations
FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.199

& preach ye gospell : FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.200

& you parlament men y=t= kepes your preists & Bishopps in such great
fatt benefices you have spoiled y=m= all : FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.201

for doe yee thinke they will goe Into all nations to preach ye gospell :
or will goe any farther than they have a great fatt benefice
FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.202

Judge your selves . FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.203

Then there came a great Company with ye old {COM:"ye_old"_interlineated}
Lord fairefax his widow & a preist : FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.204

& I was made to speake to y=m= ye Truth : FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.205

& ye preist askt mee why wee said thee & thou to people .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.206

And I askt him whether they y=t= translated ye scriptures & made ye
grammor & acidens was fooles & Idieotts y=t= left it soe translated to
us : as thee & thou to a singulor & you to a pleural :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.207

& if they was fooles & Idioetts then why had not they which lookt upon
y=m=selves as {COM:5_words_from_"which"_to_"as"_interlineated} wise men
y=t= coulde not beare thee & thou to a singulor : altered both ye
grammor accidens & bible : & made it pleurall insteade of singulor .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.208

But if they was wise men y=t= soe translated it : then was not they
fooles & Idiotts y=t= did not practise it . FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.209

And was it not {COM:"it_not"_interlineated} wronge in y=m= to bee
offended att us y=t= did practise it & call us fooles & Idiotts
{COM:6_words_from_"&"_to"Idiotts"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.210

Soe many of y=m= was pretty loveinge & tender : FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.211

& acknowledged to truth FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.212

& wold have given mee money FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.213

but I woulde not receive it . FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.214

And after this came D=r= Craddock with 3 preists more & ye governor & a
great Company with y=m= & his lady & an {COM:"an"_interlineated} other
lady . FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.215

And hee askt mee what I was in prison for : FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.216

& I tolde him for obeyeinge ye Commande of Christ & ye Apostle
{COM:3_words_from_"&"_to_"Apostle"_interlineated} in not swearinge :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.217

& if hee coulde convince mee y=t= after Christ & ye Apostle had
forbidden swearinge that then they commanded people to sweare : I might
then sweare : as I had said to ye Judge at Lancaster .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.218

And hee was a Justice of ye peace FOX-1674-E3-P1,97.219

& if hee coulde <P_98> convince mee of this I would sweare :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.220

& heere was ye bible FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.221

& bid him shew it to mee . FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.222

Then said hee : Itt is written you shall sweare in truth &
righteousnesse FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.223

I told him I did commende him y=t= hee had brought scripture :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.224

& I did beleive I could bringe as many Instances in ye old testament for
swearinge as hee & it may be more to : FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.225

but what you was this : FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.226

was it you Jewes or you Gentiles y=t= this commande was to :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.227

for hee knew y=t= wee was gentiles by nature . FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.228

And where did God ever give a Commande to ye gentiles to sweare but to
ye Jews : FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.229

& soe was this you : to you Jews or you Gentiles or you Christians after
Christ came in ye gospell times . FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.230

And unto this hee woulde not aunswer : FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.231

but at ye last one of ye preists aunswered y=t= was with him
{COM:4_words_from_"y=t="_to_"him"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.232

& said it was to ye Jews : y=t= this Commande was to swear in truth &
righteousnesse . FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.233

Then D=tr= Craddock hee confest it was soe {COM:"soe"_interlineated} :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.234

Indeed says hee In ye gospell times every thinge was to bee established
out of ye mouth of two or three wittnesses for there was to bee no
swearinge then . FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.235

Then said I why does thou force oaths upon Christians contry to thy own
knowledge in the gospell times . FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.236

And I said unto him why dost thou excommunicate my frends
FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.237

for hee had excommunicated abundans both in Yorkesheer & Lancashere :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.238

& hee said for not comeinge to ye Church : FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.239

then I said you left us above 20 yeeres agoe when wee were but younge
lads & lasses : to ye presbyterians Independants & baptists : whoe made
spoile of our goods & persecuted us because wee woulde not follow y=m= :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.240

& as for ye old men y=t= knew your principles if you woulde have kept
y=m= alife you shoulde have sent y=m= your epistles & gospells &
homilyes & eveningesongs . FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.241

For Paul writt epistles to ye saintes though hee was in prison :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.242

& soe ye younge men y=t= knew litle of your principles & ye old men if
you had intended to have preserrved y=m= you should have sent y=m= some
of your homilyes & kept your principles alife : & not have fled away
from us : & leave us to ye presbyterians & Independants & baptists : to
persecute us & spoile our goods because wee coulde not follow y=m=
FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.243

& soe they & {COM:"they_&"_interlineated} wee might have turned turkes &
Jewes for any Collects or homilyes or epistles wee had from you all this
while {COM:25_words_from_"&"_to_"while"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,98.244

<P_99>

And so thou hast excommunicated us both olde & younge
FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.246

y=t= is you have putt us out of your Church : before you have gott us
Into your Church & brought us to know your principles :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.247

& this is madnesse to putt us out before wee bee brought in .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.248

Now had you brought us in to your Chuch {COM:sic} & after if wee had
donne some bad {COM:"bad"_interlineated} thinge then to putt us out had
beene somethinge like a grounde for excommunication .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.249

But what dost thee cal ye Church : FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.250

Why says hee y=t= which you call ye steeplehouse .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.251

Then I askt him whether Christ shed his blood for ye steeplehouse :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.252

& purchased & santifyed ye steeplehouse with his bloode :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.253

ffor ye Chuch {COM:sic} was Christs wiffe & bride FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.254

& hee was heade of ye Church : FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.255

& thinkes thee is ye steeplehouse Christs bride & wiffe : & y=t= hee is
ye heade of y=t= olde house {COM:"olde_house"_interlineated} or of ye
people . FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.256

Nea says hee : FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.257

Christ is ye heade of ye people : FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.258

& they are ye Chuch {COM:sic} : & not ye steeplehouse .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.259

Then I said : butt you have given y=t= title Church
{COM:"Church"_interlineated} to an olde house which belonges to ye
people FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.260

& you have taught people to beleive soe . FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.261

Then I askt him why he persecuted freinds concerneinge there not payinge
tyths : & whether God did ever give a Commande to ye gentiles y=t= they
should pay tyths & whether Christ had not ended ye leviticall
preisthoode {SIC:peist_hoode} y=t= tooke tyths & tyths . And whether
Christ y=t= sent foorth his dsciples to preach had not commanded y=m= to
preach freely as hee had given to y=m= freely : & whether all ye
ministers of Christ are not bounde to observe this Commande of Christ .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.262

And hee said hee woulde not dispute y=t= : FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.263

but said you marry : FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.264

but I know not howe . FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.265

Then I said unto him it may bee soe FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.266

but why did hee not come & see FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.267

then hee threatned how hee had & woulde use his power aginst us :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.268

but I bid him take heed FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.269

for hee was an olde man : FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.270

then I askt him where did ever any preist from Genesis to ye Revelations
marry any : FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.271

if hee coulde shew mee any Instans {COM:"any_Instans"_interlineated} wee
would come to y=m= to marry us : FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.272

for thou hast excommunicated one of my freinds 2 yeeres after hee was
deade about it {COM:"about_it"_interlineated} . FOX-1674-E3-P1,99.273

And why dost not excommunicate Isaac & Jacob & <P_100> Boaz & Ruth &
Christ & his disciples for goeinge to a mariage : FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.274

& why dost not use thy power against y=m= FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.275

for wee doe not reade y=t= they were ever marryed by ye preists
FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.276

but they tooke one another in ye assemblyes of ye righteous in ye
presence of God & his people FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.277

& soe doe wee : FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.278

& wee have all ye holy men & women of our syde y=t= ye scripture speaks
of in this practise . FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.279

Soe after a while hee past away & his Company FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.280

& many such like disputes & discourses I had with severall such sortes
of people which will be to longe & tadious to relate heere
{COM:"heere"_interlineated} . FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.281

And few freinds they would lett come att me FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.282

nea many times not soe much as to bringe mee a litle meate :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.283

but I was forct to hire one of ye worlde ye first quarter
FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.284

& sometimes ye souldyers woulde take it from her FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.285

& then shee would fight with y=m= for it . FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.286

And then I hired a souldyer to fetch mee water & breade : & something to
make a fire when I was in a room where a fire could bee made :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.287

& a threepenny loafe served mee 3 weekes & sometimes longer .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.288

And it being a colde place I was exceedingely swelld & nummd in my body
{COM:"in_my_body"_interlineated} : FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.289

& if a freinde came upp Into ye Castle about busnesse if hee lookt but
at mee they would rage att him : FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.290

& there was two bad prisoners y=t= often woulde drinke with ye officers
& souldyers : FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.291

& because I woulde not sett & drinke with y=m= they made y=m= worse
against mee . FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.292

And one time when they was almost {COM:"almost"_interlineated} drunke
one of y=m= one Will Wilkison came FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.293

& chalenghed mee to fight with him
{COM:4_words_from_"to"_to_"him"_interlineated} : FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.294

& they was both full of beere : FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.295

& when one would bee at mee then ye other withhelde him
FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.296

& when ye other woulde bee at mee then ye other woulde withholde him .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.297

And ye next morninge when they were more sober : I told him y=t=
chalenghed mee I was come to aunswer him with my hands in my pocketts &
there was my haire & my backe : & what a shame it was for him to
challenge a man whome hee knew his principle was not to strike :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.298

& hee should have chalenghed some of ye souldyers y=t= might have
aunswered him againe FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.299

but hee goes his ways : FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.300

& one of ye officers said you are a happy man y=t= can bear such thinges
. FOX-1674-E3-P1,100.301

<P_101>

And they sett a marshall over us to gett money FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.303

butt I was not to give him a farthinge : FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.304

& soe at last hee was taken off againe : FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.305

& often they threatned to hange mee over ye wall FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.306

& ye officers often in there rage would bid ye souldyers shoote mee &
runn mee through : FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.307

& ye deputy governor said : if any stirr was in ye nation : I was sent
thither : y=t= they might hange mee over ye walls FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.308

soe I tolde him if y=t= was it they lookt for
{COM:3_words_from_"they"_to_"for"_interlineated} I was ready : beinge
innocent of all stirringes & plottinges FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.309

& I never feard death nor sufferinges in my life .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.310

Soe y=t= stoppt y=m= from threatninge mee any more .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.311

And one time when it was very colde weather I had gotten a litle
elicampane beere FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.312

for I had taken a great colde
{COM:9_words_from_"elicampane"_to_"colde"_interlineated} :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.313

and I hearde one of ye prisoners say to ye others they woulde goe play a
pretty tricke FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.314

for they woulde send for mee upp to ye deputy governor which they did
FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.315

& in ye meane time they would drinke my stronge beere out which they did
. FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.316

And after one of ye officers came to mee in a Jeere
FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.317

& askt mee for some stronge beere FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.318

but I tolde y=m= they had playde ther petty tricke
FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.319

& soe tooke noe farther {COM:"farther"_interlineated} Notice of there
wickednesse . FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.320

Soe I was as a man buryed alife FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.321

for many freinds came from farr to see mee FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.322

but were not suffred to come att mee
{COM:4_words_from_"to"_to_"mee"_interlineated} . FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.323

But at last ye governor came under some trouble haveinge sent out a
privateer whoe had taken some shipps y=t= were not enimyes shipps but
there freinds FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.324

& soe came under some trouble . FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.325

And I desired him when hee came to London hee being a parlament man :
y=t= hee woulde speak to Esq Marsh & to Sir ffrancis Dobb & some others
: & tell them y=t= I was a prisoner & for what & howe longe I had layne
in prison . {COM:8_words_from_"&"_to_"prison"_interlineated}
FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.326

And so when hee came doune againe hee tolde mee y=t= Esq: March y=t= was
one of ye kinges esquires of his body : said hee woulde goe 100 miles
barefoote for my liberty hee knew mee soe well : FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.327

& severall others spoake well of mee
{COM:4_words_from_"spoake"_to_"mee"_interlineated} : so y=t= ye governor
was very loveinge FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.328

& after a while John Whiteheade brought an order from ye kinge for my
release . FOX-1674-E3-P1,101.329

<P_102>

For I had written a letter to ye kinge : Concerneinge my bad usage in
prison & y=t= none coulde deliver mee but him . FOX-1674-E3-P1,102.331

1666 FOX-1674-E3-P1,102.332

And so ye governor received ye order : FOX-1674-E3-P1,102.333

& ye officers gathered togeather : FOX-1674-E3-P1,102.334

& discharghed mee FOX-1674-E3-P1,102.335

& gave a certificate as followeth . FOX-1674-E3-P1,102.336

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2}

<P_161>

Soe hee sett us at liberty : seeinge ye informer was gonne :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,161.339

onely tooke our names & places of aboade . FOX-1674-E3-P1,161.340

And as I was goeinge away : I spoake to ye Maior FOX-1674-E3-P1,161.341

& tolde him hee knew in his owne conscience wee was an innocent people &
y=t= y=t= act did not concern us . FOX-1674-E3-P1,161.342

And soe after wee were sett at liberty frends askt mee whether I would
goe FOX-1674-E3-P1,161.343

& I tolde y=m= to Gratious street meetinge againe :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,161.344

& when wee came there ye people was gonne FOX-1674-E3-P1,161.345

onely some people stoode att ye gate . FOX-1674-E3-P1,161.346

And soe wee went Into Gerard Roberts house FOX-1674-E3-P1,161.347

& I sent out to know how all ye meetinges was : FOX-1674-E3-P1,161.348

& some was kept <P_162> out FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.349

& some was taken but sett at liberty againe a few days after
FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.350

& ye Lords power came over all : FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.351

& a glorious time it was for ye Lords everlastinge truth
FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.352

for as fast as some were taken doune y=t= was speakeinge others was
moved of ye Lord to stande uppe & speake to ye admiration of people .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.353

And many baptists & other sectaryes forsooke there meetinges
FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.354

& came to see how ye Quakers woulde stande both in Citty & Country .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.355

And this Informer was soe frightned y=t= there durst hardley any
Informer appear in London for severall yeers after .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.356

And yett this Lord maior after this proved a very great persecutor of
our frendes FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.357

& cast many In to {COM:"to"_interlineated} prison : as you may see in ye
bookes of ye tryalls of Will: Pen & Will: Meade & Tho. Rudyarde
FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.358

& his name became a stinke FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.359

& ye Lord cutt him off . FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.360

And persecution after a time came to asswage againe .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.361

And in ye time of this persecution ye presbyterians & all other
sectaryes generally fled : FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.362

& when ye Constables came to apprehend preist Vincent at Devonsheere
house hee woulde give ye people a psalme & in ye meane time gett away :
& some times aske leave of ye Constables to goe & refresh himselfe & in
ye meane time fly away . FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.363

And att Spitle feildes they had a meetinge : FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.364

& some of ye people said they was comeinge FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.365

they was comeinge : FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.366

& ye preist & people fled away in such hast they had like to have
spoiled one another though it was but a false alaram : given by there
owne watche men {COM:"men"_interlineated} thrugh a mistake .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.367

And these were the presbyterians & {COM:"&"_interlineated} Independants
y=t= had persecuted us when they had power : because wee woulde not
follow there religion which now durst not stande to it y=m= selves .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.368

And after this Tho: Lower: & his wiffe past towards Bristoll & from
thence to Cornewall : FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.369

& Sarah ffell: & Jo: Rouse & his wiffe past doune Into ye North .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.370

And Tho: Lowers wiffe Mary {COM:"Mary"_interlineated} & Sarah ffell went
to ye kinge FOX-1674-E3-P1,162.371

& they gott an order from ye kinge y=t= there mother shoulde not bee
molested nor disquieted in ye enjoyment of her estate nor house which ye
kinge commanded Sir Jo: Ottway : to signify his minde by letter Into ye
Country to <P_163> ye sheriffe & others concerned which hee did :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.372

& they brought it doune Into ye Country with y=m= as may bee seene in ye
foloweinge letter . FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.373

And after yt I had visited freindes & thinges was pretty quiett in ye
citty I past Into ye Country : FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.374

& severall meetinges I had amongst freindes in Midlesex : & in
Buckinghamsheere & Oxfordesheere : though in some places there was much
threatninge : FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.375

& frendes much desired mee : for to come to Readinge where most of
frendes was in prison . FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.376

And some of Readinge ffrendes came to mee to a place caled Turvall heath
where wee had a quiett meetinge though much threatned .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.377

And after I came to Readinge of a 7th day FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.378

& {COM:"&"_interlineated} I went to ye prison FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.379

& diverse frendes came in & sober people FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.380

& I was loath to goe to meetinges in prison FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.381

for I told y=m= I woulde rather bee taken in a publicke meetinge then in
prison . FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.382

And Anne Curtis tolde mee y=t= Jo: Story stayde there a great while &
had many meetinges in prison : FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.383

& I tolde her yt was nothinge to mee . FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.384

Soe ye prisners beinge gathered togeather : & severall other persons
come in : I declared ye worde of life amongst y=m=
FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.385

& encouraged y=m= in ye truth : FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.386

& they were refresht in ye Lords power & presence .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.387

And After ye meetinge was ended : ye goaler understoode y=t= I was there
: FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.388

then frends was troubled as fearinge how to gett mee out free againe .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.389

And after I had stayde with y=m= & suppt with y=m= I went doune ye
stayres FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.390

& ye goaler was {COM:"was"_interlineated} standinge att ye
{COM:"ye"_interlineated} doore FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.391

& {COM:"&"_interlineated} frendes was very fearefull :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.392

soe I putt my hande in my pockett which hee had such an eye unto & ye
hope of some sylver y=t= hee forgott to question mee :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.393

soe I gave him some sylver : FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.394

& bid him bee kinde & civill {COM:"&_civill"_interlineated} to my
freindes in prison whome I came to visitt
{COM:5_words_from_"whome"_to_"visitt"_interlineated}
FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.395

& soe I passed out FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.396

& ye Lords power came over him FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.397

& chained y=m= all . FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.398

But the next y=t= came to visitt y=m= hee stoppt to witt Isaace
Penningeton . FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.399

And ye next mourning I past about 14 mile
{COM:3_words_from_"about"_to_"mile"_interlineated} Into Hampesheere : to
a place caled Bagus : FOX-1674-E3-P1,163.400

& when I came Into ye parish there were some sober people came to us
<P_164> & tolde us y=t= ye preist was an envious man & did threaten us .
FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.401

But when our meetinge was gathered which was very large & Tho: Briggs
had donne speakeinge whoe was with mee ye preist had gott a warrant &
sent ye Constable & officers FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.402

& they came Into ye house : FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.403

but did not come Into ye meetinge roome : FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.404

& soe they past away againe . FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.405

And wee knewe not in ye meetinge y=t= they was come & gonne againe :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.406

soe after Tho: Briggs had donne speakinge I was moved of ye Lord to
stande uppe FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.407

& when I had declared ye word of truth & life to ye people & a pretious
fresh meetinge wee had : & I had donne & stept doune & ended ye meeting
{COM:4_words_from_"&"_to_"meeting"_interlineated} : I hearde a great
clutter in ye yarde . FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.408

And soe after ye meetinge was ended : wee came foorth :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.409

& ye man of ye House tolde us y=t= ye preist had sent ye Constables
againe & his owne servant with y=m= in a great rage :
FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.410

& they had beene in ye house as aforesaid FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.411

but came not in to ye meetinge roome : FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.412

but went there ways FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.413

& thus ye Lords power preserved us : over ye Divelish designe of ye
preist & out of his snare . FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.414

And soe after wee pased away FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.415

& many frends past by ye preists house which sett him in a great
{COM:"great"_interlineated} rage . FOX-1674-E3-P1,164.416

