<BEGIN_friar-1538-e1-p1>

<P_1.2,85>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXXI_THOMAS_DUKE_OF_NORFOLK_AND_SIR_ROGER_TOWNSHEND,_TO_LORD_CROMWELL,_RESPECTING_THE_INTENDED_EXECUTION_OF_A_FRIAR_AT_NORWICH,_FOR_DENYING_THE_KING'S_SUPREMACY>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<P_1.2,86>

My verie good Lord , with harty recommendations , these shal@ @be to
advertise you that upon Thursday laste paste the Justices of Assize came
to me the Duke of Norffolk hither to dynner , in ther way rydyng to the
Assises at Burye , wher they declared unto me that one called Anthony
Browne , somtyme a fryer Observaunte of Grenewiche , and of late takyng
upon hym as an hermyte , was accused of Treason , and so commytted to
warde by me Sir Roger Townsend tofore the commynge of the said Justices
to these parties ; FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,86.6

and so brought before them to Norwiche did write his own confession with
his haunde , whiche ye shall receyve with this . Wherupon , for his
traytors opinions , he was indited of Treason , and so caste and had his
Judgemente accordynglye , yevyng respyte to the Shryfe for his execusyon
x. dayes folowyng ; whiche they shewed me the said Duke they ded for
this consyderation , whiche was , they thought it convenient that a
Sermon sholde be made by the bisshopp of Norwiche , as was by the
bisshopp of Worcestre at th'@ @execusyon of Forreste .
FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,86.7

And in communyng bothe with them and the Shryf I perceyved well they had
herde that som in these partes doubted whether the bisshopp here ded
thorowly meane well , consernyng the opinions of the said Brown or not .
Wherupon I asked ther@ @opinions whether they thought it beste that I
shold send for the said bisshopp to fele his mynd <P_1.2,87> afore I
shold will hym to preache or not ; and also that forasmoche as I ded
perceyve the said fryer had not be {COM:sic} thoroughlye examynd with
whome he hathe had communication , ayde , or comforte in his opinions ,
and of other thyngs that I shold thynke conveniente to examyn hym of ,
whether I wer beste to send for hym hyther to me or not ;
FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,87.8

and ther mynds was that I shold send bothe for the bisshopp and the
fryer , FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,87.9

and so I ded FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,87.10

and becawse that M=er= Townsend is onely of the Kyngs Highnes counsell
in these parties I sente in lykewise for hym to be presente at all the
examynacions . FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,87.11

And this forenowne we so handled the said Fryer that we brought hym to
this poynte that he wold not stycke upon the auctoryte of the bisshopp
of Rome to@ @be suppryme Hed of the Churche , FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,87.12

but in no wyse we cold bryng hym from th'@ @oppinion that the Kyng ought
not to@ @be suppryme Hed of the Churche , sayng that no temperall
{COM:sic} Prynce was <font> capax <$$font> of that name and auctorite .
FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,87.13

I the said Duke had here with me Doctor Call , a gray frier , who
handled hym right honestlye in defendyng the Kyngs Majesties parte as@
@well by reason as scripture : FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,87.14

but all that wold not serve : FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,87.15

and sythe dynner we have be {COM:sic} efte_sones in hand with hym .
FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,87.16

And in our communyng with hym came hither the Bisshopp of Norwiche , who
undoubtedly by scripture handled the matter of sutche sorte that it was
sufficient to have torned th'@ @oppinion of any man that was not yevyn
to wilfulnes as this fole is {to_wilfullness} , who in our opinions is
smally <P_1.2,88> lerned and as litle reasonable ;
FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,88.17

and suerly , to say the trouthe , the bisshopp for his parte , and the
said Call for his , hathe showed themselffs bothe to be lerned men , and
trewe subjects to our M=er= . Wherupon consyderyng that by no meanes we
two can get owt of hym any detection of any person to be of counsell
with him , or of like opinion as he is of , we have delyvered hym to the
Shryf , to be caryed to the gayle , and ther to suffer accordyng to his
folishe doyngs upon Fryday nexte , affore whose dethe the said bisshopp
shall make sutche a Sermon as we truste shal@ @be to the Kyngs Highnes
contentation , and apparaunte to the people <paren> whiche we thynke
wol@ @be ther in great nombre <$$paren> that this unhappy folyshe fryer
is well worthy to suffer , and that his opinions be falls and untrewe .
FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,88.18

My lorde the cause of the sendyng of this man in so great haste unto you
, is , be cause that and the Kyngs majestie and you shall thynke it
convenient to have hym to be brought to the Towre there to be more
streyghtlye examyned and to be put to torture , Ye may dispeache this
berer or som other with commaundemente to the Shryf accordyngly ; so
that the same may@ @be with hym at Norwiche by Fryday x. a cloke ;
FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,88.19

for yf ye shold send to me the said Duke , I know not yet wher I shold
be fownd at that tyme . FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,88.20

And thus our Lord have you in his tuicion . FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,88.21

From Kennyngale this iiij. day of Auguste 1538 at xj. at nyght .
FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,88.22

<P_1.2,89>

After writyng of the premyssis , the Bisshopp was desyrous to speke
eftsones with the fryer , to th'@ @entente he myght have cawsed hym to
have torned his opinions , not for savegarde or prolongyng of his lyf ,
but for the welthe of his Soule ; FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,89.24

and I sir Roger Townsend , beyng presente , sawe the bisshopp handle
hymself very honestlye and clerkely , FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,89.25

but notwithstondyng that dyvers tymes the said fryer was like to have
altred his folishe opinions , yet fynallye he persisted in his errors .
FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,89.26

My Lord , we partly requyre you that yf it shall not be thought to the
Kyngs Majestie that any Sermon shuld be made before th'@ @execution , to
advertyse the Shryf therof afore the tyme before wryten
FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,89.27

Yo=rs= assewredly T. Norfolk FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,89.28

At your Lordshypps comande=t= . FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,89.29

Roger Touneshend . FRIAR-1538-E1-P1,1.2,89.30

