<BEGIN_fryer-1677-e3-p1>

<P_1,193>

And if such be the gasping Strength of the <font> Portugals <$$font> ,
to terrify the Potentest Enemies to Christianity in these Parts , what
was their flourishing Estate ? FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,193.3

Whence it may easily be supposed before now all had bowed to the Cross ,
which yet bend under Heathenism or <font> Mahometism <$$font> , had
<P_1,194> they not been prevented by unhappy Pretenders , that <paren> I
fear <$$paren> too much preferred Merchandize and private Pieques ,
before the welfare of Religion : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,194.4

For it is morally probable , that had not the <font> Dutch <$$font> and
we interrupted them , all might have been Christian in these parts of
the World . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,194.5

Having in a Week's time compleated my Business , returning the same way
, we steered by the <font> South <$$font> side of the Bay , purposely to
touch at <font> Elephanto <$$font> , so called from a monstrous Elephant
cut out of the main Rock , bearing a Young one on its Back ; not far
from it the Effigies of an Horse stuck up to the Belly in the Earth in
the Valley ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,194.6

from thence we clambred up the highest Mountain on the Island , on whose
Summit was a miraculous Piece hewed out of solid Stone :
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,194.7

It is supported with Forty_two <font> Corinthian <$$font> Pillars ,
being a Square , open on all sides but towards the <font> East <$$font>
; where stands a Statue with three Heads , crowned with strange
Hieroglyphicks : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,194.8

At the <font> North <$$font> side in an high <font> Portuco <$$font>
stands an Altar , guarded by Giants , and immured by a Square Wall ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,194.9

all along , the Walls are loaded with huge Giants , some with eight
hands , making their vanquished Knights stoop for mercy .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,194.10

Before this is a <font> Tank <$$font> full of water , and beyond that
another Place with Images . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,194.11

This seems to be of later date than that of <font> Canorein , <$$font>
though defaced by the <font> Portugals <$$font> , who have <P_1,195>
this Island also ; but no Defence upon it , nor any thing else of Note ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,195.12

it may be Ten Miles round , inhabited by the <font> Povo <$$font> , or
Poor : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,195.13

From hence we sailed to the <font> Putachoes <$$font> , a Garden of
Melons <paren> <font> Putacho <$$font> being a Melon <$$paren> were
there not wild Rats that hinder their Growth , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,195.14

and so to <font> Bombaim <$$font> . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,195.15

The Weather now was grown excessive hot , the Earth beginning to gape
for Thirst , the Sun being in its <font> Zenith <$$font> with us ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,195.16

the <font> South <$$font> Winds are set in strong ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,195.17

and the <font> Toddy-Trees <$$font> ferment their Wine over the Vessels
, the <font> Prodromi <$$font> of the ensuing Rains ; which make their
first shew at the first Full Moon in <font> May <$$font> , and continue
a Fortnight , in which space it is unhealthy ; till after a Fortnight's
fair Weather they set in for altogether . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,195.18

This Season makes the <font> Syddy <$$font> retreat hither with his
Fleet , who from a Lord of <font> Duccan <$$font> is promoted to be the
<font> Mogul's <$$font> Admiral ; or truer , driven to distress by
<font> Seva Gi <$$font> , undertakes this Employment , in confidence to
recover his own Dominion on the Sea-Coast , whilst the <font> Mogul's
<$$font> General at Land is to stop his Proceedings on that side :
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,195.19

But <font> Seva Gi <$$font> possessed of his Country , and bidding for
his strong Castle at <font> Dan de Rajapour <$$font> Bay , which he has
been to defend this Summer , derides his Attempts ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,195.20

and is preparing to be install'd <font> Mau Raja , <$$font> or Arch
<font> Raja <$$font> , at his Court at <font> Rairee <$$font> ; for
which an Embassy to keep all right must be dispatch'd .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,195.21

<P_1,196>

In the mean while Nature affords us a pleasant Spectacle for this Season
, as well as Matter for Admiration ; whereby I know not why we should
deny Reason wholly to Animals ; unless it be , Man having so much , they
seem comparatively to have none : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,196.23

For here is a Bird <paren> having its Name from the Tree it chuses for
its Sanctuary , the <font> Toddy-Tree <$$font> <$$paren> that is not
only exquisitely curious in the artificial Composure of its Nest with
Hay , but furnished with Devices and Stratagems to secure its self and
young ones from its deadly Enemy the Squirrel ; as likewise from the
Injury of the Weather ; which being unable to oppose , it eludes with
this Artifice , contriving the Nest like a Steeple-hive , with winding
Meanders ; before which hangs a Penthouse for the Rain to pass , tying
it by so slender a Thread to the Bough of the Tree , that the Squirrel
dare not venture his Body , though his Mouth water at the Eggs and Prey
within ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,196.24

yet it is strong enough to bear the hanging habitation of the Ingenious
Contriver , free from all the Assaults of its Antagonist , and all the
Accidents of Gusts and Storms : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,196.25

Hundreds of these Pendulous Nests may be seen on these Trees .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,196.26

Here is another Tree called <font> Brabb , <$$font> bodied like a Cocoe
, FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,196.27

but the Leaves grow round like a Peacock's Tail set upright , of the
same substance with the Cocoe , only varying in figure ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,196.28

the Fruit of this is less than the Cocoe , and filled with a Gelly ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,196.29

the Wine from this is preferred new , before the other ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,196.30

there is a Tuft at top , cut off and boil'd eats like Colliflowers ; on
which Tree these Birds build also . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,196.31

And now the Rains are set in , all Hostilities and Commerce cease ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,196.32

and every one provides for this time , as the <P_1,197> laborious Ant
for the Winter , here being no stirring out to Sea , or travelling in
the Country ; the best Pastime now being good Fellowship .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,197.33

Thus lies this place afloat , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,197.34

and the Rains and Thunder are violent enough to convince the incredulous
of a possibility of a General Deluge . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,197.35

This holds with little intermission till St. <font> Francis <$$font> 's
Moon , the first Full Moon in <font> August <$$font> ; when our <font>
Europe <$$font> Ships , if they save their Passage about the <font> Cape
<$$font> , venture to make in here , by the directions of the yellow
Bellies of the formerly mentioned Water-Snakes , who are a warning to
them of adventuring too near the Shore , till this open Weather appear .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,197.36

After this Full Moon , the <font> Banyans <$$font> , assisted by their
<font> Brachmins <$$font> , go in Precession to the Sea-shore ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,197.37

and offer Cocoe_Nuts to <font> Neptune <$$font> , that he would restore
them their <font> Mare Pacificum <$$font> ; when they make Preparations
to go to Sea , and about their Business of Trade .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,197.38

By this opportunity our Ambassadors crossed an Arm of the Sea ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,197.39

and returning from <font> Seva Gi <$$font> ; delivered the President
this following Account ; which I the rather insert , because the manner
of dealing with these Princes and Great Men may be the better understood
by this formal Address . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,197.40

<P_1,198>

<heading>

CHAP. IV . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,198.43

<font> A NARRATIVE OF AN EMBASSY TO <$$font> SEVA GI , <font> AND
JOURNEY TO <$$font> RAIREE , <font> THE COURT OF THE <$$font> RAJAH .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,198.44

<$$heading>

The Ambassador having received Instructions , and got all things ready
for his Journey , embark'd on a <font> Bombaim Shebar <$$font> <paren>
together with two <font> English <$$font> Factors , who were appointed
by the Honourable the President to accompany him <$$paren> ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,198.46

and about Nine a Clock at Night arrived at <font> Choul <$$font> , a
<font> Portugal <$$font> City on the Main , into which he could not
enter , the Gates being shut up , and Watch set ; so that they passed
this Night in the Suburbs , in a small Church called St. <font>
Sebastians <$$font> ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,198.47

and the next day about Three in the Afternoon receiving Advice that
<font> Seva Gi <$$font> was returned to <font> Rairee <$$font> from
<font> Chiblone <$$font> , departed thence to Upper <font> Choul
<$$font> , a Town belonging to the <font> Rajah <$$font> , about two
Miles distant from the <font> Portugal <$$font> City ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,198.48

and was in former times a great Mart of all sorts of <font> Duccan
<$$font> commodities ; <P_1,199> but now totally ruined by the late Wars
betwixt the <font> Mogul <$$font> and <font> Seva Gi <$$font> , whose
Arms have plundered and laid it waste . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,199.49

The <font> Subidar <$$font> of this Town being a Person of Quality , who
commands the Countries opposite to <font> Bombaim , as <font> Magatan
<$$font> , <font> Penn <$$font> , and <font> Tull <$$font> , he thought
good to give him a Visit , and to present him with a couple of <font>
Pamerins <$$font> ; and the rather , because he understood by the
Linguist <font> Naran Sinaij <$$font> , he had some Aversion to our
Nation , and might hinder our Proceedings at Court ; from which he was
willing to take him off by all fair means : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,199.50

He received the Visit kindly , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,199.51

and promised all Courtesy that lay in his Power to perform ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,199.52

and after some immaterial Discourse they returned to their Tents .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,199.53

The Day following they took Boat , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,199.54

and sailed up <font> Choul <$$font> River , to a Town called <font>
Esthemy <$$font> , six Leagues distance from <font> Choul <$$font> ,
where they staid till next day ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,199.55

and set forth about six in the Morn from <font> Esthemy <$$font> ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,199.56

and about Sun-set <P_1,200> pitched their Tent in a Plain , six Miles
short of <font> Nishampore <$$font> , where they stayed about an hour to
refresh their <font> Coolies <$$font> , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,200.57

and then set forward for <font> Nishampore <$$font> ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,200.58

and at Nine passing by <font> Nishampore <$$font> , arrived next Morning
at <font> Gongouly <$$font> , a little Village situated on the Bank of a
pleasant Rivulet ; from whence in a fair Day may be discerned the Castle
of <font> Rairee <$$font> : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,200.59

The day after they proceeded on their Journy to <font> Rairee <$$font> ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,200.60

and about Nine of the Clock in the Evening came to <font> Puncharra
<$$font> , a Town at the Foot of the Hill , where they understood that
<font> Seva Gi <$$font> was departed thence to <font> Purtaabgur
<$$font> , to visit the Shrine of <font> Bowany <$$font> , a Pagod of
great esteem with him , and celebrated some Ceremonies there in order to
his Coronation ; having carried with him several Presents , and among
the rest a <font> Lumbrico <$$font> of pure Gold , weighing about one
<font> Maund <$$font> and a quarter , which is Forty_two Pounds , which
he hath dedicated to the said Pagod . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,200.61

In the interim , understanding they could not be admitted into the
Castle till <font> Seva Gi's <$$font> return , they pitched their Tent
in the Plain ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,200.62

and in order to their more speedy dispatch , made {SIC:make} their
Business known to their Procurator <font> Narun Gi Pundit <$$font>
<paren> whose reception was very kind <$$paren>
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,200.63

and delivered him his Honour's Letters ; shewing him the several
Presents they brought for the <font> Rajah <$$font> , and Ministers of
State ; of which he highly approved , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,200.64

and promised <P_1,201> them to help them to the <font> Rajah's <$$font>
presence , as soon as conveniently he could after his return from
Pilgrimage to <font> Purtaabgur <$$font> : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,201.65

And bad them rest content , that his Endeavours should be totally
employed in the Honourable Company's Interest , and procuring them a
speedy dispatch : For which having rendered him Thanks , he presented
him with the Articles which they brought for the <font> Rajah <$$font>
to sign , translated into <font> Moratty <$$font> Language ; which he
said he would peruse , and then give his judgment of them .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,201.66

He then took occasion to discourse with him concerning the Conclusion of
a Peace betwixt the <font> Rajah <$$font> and the <font> Syddy <$$font>
of <font> Danda Rajapore <$$font> ; urging many Arguments to create in
him a belief it would be for the <font> Rajah's <$$font> advantage ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,201.67

but he would not be persuaded it was for his Master's Interest to raise
a Siege which had cost him so much Blood and Treasure ; especially now
he hath such hopes of gaining the Place : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,201.68

And therefore told them , it would be in vain to move it to the <font>
Rajah <$$font> , who was resolved to take in the Castle , let it cost
him what it will : And to that effect was daily sending down more
Ordnance , Ammunition , Men and Money . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,201.69

Our Ambassador replied , The President had no other Design in making
this motion , than that of a good Neighbour ; having observed the
Miseries each Party endured , and the general obstruction of Trade ,
occasioned by the War ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,201.70

but since he desired him to desist mentioning it to the <font> Rajah
<$$font> , he should not trouble him therewith ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,201.71

but what was more consistent with our own and his Interest ; which was
the encouraging Trade and Merchandise in his Country , and opening the
ways to <font> Baligaot <$$font> , that Merchants might with safety
bring down their Goods to Port ; which would be much to the <font>
Rajah's <$$font> Profit , and <P_1,202> encrease of his Treasury :
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,202.72

And this he recommended to his Prudence to persuade the <font> Rajah
<$$font> thereto ; who being a Soldier from his Infancy , it@ @s
possible minded not such concerns . To which he answered , That he
doubted not but it would be effected in a short time ; for that the King
of <font> Visiapour <$$font> , who is Owner of those Countries <paren>
from whence most sorts of Wares come <$$paren> being weary of Wars with
his Master , had sent several Embassies to conclude a peace with him ;
which he thought would be made up in two or three Months ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,202.73

and then the Ways would be free , and the Merchants have Egress and
Regress as formerly . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,202.74

That the <font> Rajah <$$font> , after his Coronation , would act more
like a Prince , by taking care of his Subjects , and endeavouring the
advancement of Commerce in his Dominions ; which he could not attend
before , being in perpetual War with the <font> Great Mogul <$$font> and
King of <font> Visiapour <$$font> . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,202.75

This is the Substance of his Discourse with <font> Narun Gi Pundit
<$$font> who seemed to him to be a Man of Prudence and Esteem with his
Master : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,202.76

So after a little sitting he took his leave of him , having first
presented him with a Diamond Ring , for which he expressed a liking ;
and his Eldest Son a Couple of <font> Pamerins <$$font> , which are fine
Mantles . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,202.77

They continuing under their Tent , found it very hot and incommodious ;
wherefore they were glad when they heard the <font> Rajah <$$font> was
returned from <font> Purtaabgur <$$font> , when the Ambassador solicited
<font> Narun Gi Pundit <$$font> to procure his leave to pass up the Hill
into <font> Rairee <$$font> Castle : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,202.78

The next <P_1,203> day they receiv'd order to ascend the Hill into the
Castle , the <font> Rajah <$$font> having appointed an House for them ;
which they did ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,203.79

leaving <font> Puncharra <$$font> about Three in the Afternoon , they
arrived at the top of that strong Mountain , forsaking the humble Clouds
about Sun-set . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,203.80

It is fortified by Nature more than Art , being of very difficult access
, there being but one Avenue to it , which is guarded by two narrow
Gates , and fortified by a strong Wall exceeding high , and Bastions
thereto : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,203.81

All the other part of the Mountain is a direct Precipice ; so that it@
@'s impregnable , except the Treachery of some in it betray it .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,203.82

On the Mountain are many strong Buildings , as the <font> Rajah's
<$$font> Court , and Houses of other Ministers , to the number of about
300 . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,203.83

It is in length about 2 Miles and an half , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,203.84

but no pleasant Trees , or any sort of Grain grows thereon .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,203.85

Their House was about a Mile from the <font> Rajah's <$$font> Palace ,
into which they retired with no little content .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,203.86

Four days after their ascent , by the sollicitation of <font> Narun Gi
Pundit <$$font> , the <font> Rajah <$$font> gave them Audience , though
busily employed by many other great Affairs , relating to his Coronation
and Marriage . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,203.87

Our Ambassador presented him , and his Son <font> Samba Gi Rajah
<$$font> , with the Particulars appointed for them ; which they took
well <P_1,204> satisfied with them ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,204.88

and the <font> Rajah <$$font> assured them we might trade securely in
all his Countries without the least apprehension of ill from him , for
that the Peace was concluded . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,204.89

Our Ambassadour replied , that was our Intent ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,204.90

and to that intent the President had sent him to this Court to procure
the same Articles and Privileges we enjoyed in <font> Indostan <$$font>
and <font> Persia <$$font> , where we traded .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,204.91

He answered , it is well , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,204.92

and referred our Business to <font> Moro Pundit <$$font> , his <font>
Peshua <$$font> , or Chancellour , to examine our Articles , and give an
account what they were . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,204.93

He and his Son withdrew into their private Apartments , to consult with
the <font> Brachmanes <$$font> about the Ceremonies preparatory to his
Enstalment ; which chiefly consisted in Abstinence and Purifying ; till
which be over , he will hear no farther of Business .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,204.94

They likewise departed to their Lodgings . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,204.95

A day or two after our Ambassador went to <font> Narun Gi Pundit
<$$font> , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,204.96

and took his Advice concerning the presenting of the rest ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,204.97

who told him he might go in Person to <font> Moro Pundit <$$font> , but
to the rest he should send by <font> Naran Sinaij <$$font> what was
intended for them : Declaring likewise if he would have his Work
specially effected , and without any impediment , that it was necessary
to be at some more charge to present Officers with <font> Pamerins
<$$font> , who were not in their list of Presents ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,204.98

to which he assented , considering the time of the Year was so far spent
, and that <P_1,205> if he should be forced to stay the whole Rains out
at <font> Rairee <$$font> , the Honourable Company's Charges would be
greater than the Additional Presents : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,205.99

He answered that two <font> Pamerins <$$font> were not enough for <font>
Moro Pundit <$$font> , that we must present him with four ; and <font>
Peta Gi Pundit Vocanovice <$$font> , or Publick Intelligencer , with the
{COM:sic} Diamond Ring , valued at 125 Rupees . The <font> Dehir
<$$font> , or <font> Persian Escrivan <$$font> , with Four <font>
Pamerins . <$$font> <font> Sam Gi Nan Gi <$$font> , Keeper of the Seal
, with Four . <font> Ab Gi Pundit <$$font> , Four .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,205.100

And then he should not doubt of a speedy Conclusion ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,205.101

otherwise they would raise Objections on purpose to impede the
Negotiation . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,205.102

For every Officer in Court expected something according to their Degree
and Charge . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,1,205.103

<P_2,188>

Hence up Hill and down Hill , through broken Rocks and unsteady Stones ,
through kindled Fires from sulphurious Caverns , and the more raging
effects of the burning Orb , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,188.105

enlightening and enlivening all the World beside ; here it kills and
consumes the un-nurtur'd Plants , leaving them dry and sapless ; as if
these great Heaps of Rocks were made for no other end but to
counterpoize the more Fruitful Part of this Terrestrial Globe ; insomuch
that it had been utterly impossible to have drawn Breath in this Place ,
had not the late unusual Rain something allayed the Fury of the Heats ,
which yet were troublesome enough by reason of the steaming Mists
arising boiling hot with the Sun ; which so late in the Year are by the
most Ancient of this Country esteemed so far out of course , that their
Memory fails them to relate the like . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,188.106

Nor do the Publick Roads deny the Calamity of these <font> Munsels
<$$font> , which are frequently strewed with Bones of labouring Beasts ,
expiring under their Burthens , many of which were fresh Examples of
this Truth , lying reeking <P_2,189> in our Way from <font> Goor
Bazergum <$$font> to <font> Jehun <$$font> , which is but Twelve Miles ,
where we were forced to stay to get more Camels ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,189.107

for Three had failed us in this Conflict ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,189.108

and afterwards with much Pain we measured six Miles more to <font>
Tangedelon <$$font> , where we eased our selves at a <font>
Caravan_Ser_Raw <$$font> , near a Stream of living Water sweetly gliding
through the middle of it , and wash'd the Dust off our sweaty Bodies ,
in a Tank contrived to make a pleasant Bath under the Roof of the <font>
Seraw <$$font> . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,189.109

<font> Tangedelon <$$font> expresses in its Mothers Speech , <font> A
Strait Passage <$$font> , which hits exactly with the following <font>
Munsel <$$font> ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,189.110

for we travelled long under hollowed Mountains , whose lofty Rocks hung
over our Heads , threatning to stop our Career , which after Twenty
Rocky Miles directed us to <font> Cormoot <$$font> , a Town of Dates ,
Cormoot being a Date , {COM:greek_omitted} . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,189.111

Thus far we came directly in a Line ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,189.112

now we wander to and again in the Meanders of the Barren Hills , with
indefatigable Industry , till we descend into a large Plain , <P_2,190>
at the End whereof <font> Sham Zangee <$$font> an <font> Abassin
<$$font> , had built an old Caravan , Twenty Miles from Cormoot ; where
we met a <font> Caphala <$$font> of light Asses going for the Port ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,190.113

and here we were obliged to change more of our Camels , they being quite
tired . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,190.114

In this Plain the Heats increased upon us so , that we could not touch
the Walls FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,190.115

but they were like Fire , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,190.116

the Winds that should refresh us were ready to inflame us ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,190.117

nor was any thing cool but the Water , which they had kept in Earthen
Vessels dipped in their Wells or Tanks , where being drowned they came
up shivering cold , which was all the Comfort we received here ;
wherefore at Sun-set we made for <font> Lhor <$$font> , choaked with
Dust and Heat ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,190.118

half-way , at a new <font> Caravan_Ser_Raw <$$font> , we encountred
three <font> Caphalaes <$$font> laden with Dry Fruit for the Port :
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,190.119

This was founded by the Overseer of the Building of the Long-Bridge over
the Lake leading to the Gulph , who raised himself thereby , and begins
<paren> though covetous in other things <$$paren> to bestow his Mony on
these Works , having laid the Foundation for another at <font> Sham
Zangee . <$$font> FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,190.120

From this Place to <font> Lhor <$$font> the Ground is more Even , and
fit for Cultivation , the Husbandmen having planted their Cottages along
the Valley , on each side of a gliding Brook , here and there beset with
<font> Tamerisk <$$font> Trees . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,190.121

About Nine in the Morning we came to <font> Lhor <$$font> , near Forty
Mile from <font> Sham Zangee <$$font> . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,190.122

The <font> Hollanders <$$font> have here a neat , but small Dwelling ,
whither their Commodore comes sometimes : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,190.123

In this we designed to have worn some <P_2,191> days away ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,191.124

but neither the Heat nor <font> Musquitoes <$$font> would let us rest
long in this City ; wherefore desiring to fly from these , we changed
our Camels for Mules , that we might make better speed than these slow
Animals would endure ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,191.125

for these intemperate Seats were too hot for us , so that the same
Afternoon we mounted , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,191.126

and on Horseback saw the remaining part of the City leading us on our
Way . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,191.127

The Road from <font> Bunder <$$font> to it is spacious and open ,
through a pleasant Campaign for near Twenty Miles , the Mountains
observing a modest distance on that side , although behind it is begirt
with enough for defence ; at {COM:sic} top of which is a notable Seat ,
fit for a Castle , being of difficult Access , from whence those that
approach , may hear the Thundring Cannons roar among the Valleys , which
were most taken from the Portugals in their being beaten out of the
Gulph . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,191.128

<font> Lhor <$$font> is a City of an Ancient Date ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,191.129

and still retains its Name , which for that it was so guarded by Nature
that it could not easily be conquered , held many Ages the Majesty of a
Kingdom ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,191.130

but now it is governed by a Puritanical <font> Caun <$$font> <paren> for
that he has visited <font> Mahomet's <$$font> Tomb <$$paren> under the
<font> Persian <$$font> Emperor ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,191.131

yet still it extends its self far in its Province , reaching almost to
<font> Bunder Abassee <$$font> , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,191.132

and has two eminent Ports tending to the Mouth of <font> Euphrates
<$$font> , viz. <font> Bunder Congo <$$font> and <font> Bunder Reek
<$$font> , with half the Pearl-fishing , divided between the <font> Arab
<$$font> and <font> Persian <$$font> . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,191.133

He is in <P_2,192> such Vogue at Court for his Probity , that his
Neighbour <font> Caun <$$font> was ordered to submit to his Judgment ,
before whose Tribunal he appeared to answer the Crimes objected to him
in his Government . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,192.134

However he is not so great a Bigot as to abstract himself wholly from
the Pleasures of this World , so as to deny himself his Paradise here :
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,192.135

For his Palaces shew not only studious Contrivances ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,192.136

but are Luxurious both for inward Furniture and outward Beauty , with
which Pleasures he oftner indulges himself than he is at Leisure for
Publick Affairs . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,192.137

Before his Palaces a Foursquare Piatzo takes in a large Space of Ground
, with Gates to every Quarter ; over which his loud Musick are placed ,
either to entertain Strangers , or by their Noise to give the Time of
the Day at every Three or Four Hours : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,192.138

At the Gate entring the Palace is a constant Guard :
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,192.139

Within are stately Apartments , with Lakes and Gardens , equal to the
<font> Roman <$$font> Pride in its Age of Wantonness ; but so much the
more to be extoll'd , by how much more this Soil is incompatible with
the <font> Italian <$$font> Mold . {COM:verse_omitted}
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,192.140

<P_2,193>

Besides all these , there is an Exchange , or <font> Burse <$$font> ,
full of Wares , in the Figure of a Cross , reared with polished Stone on
a large Area before the Duke's House . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,193.142

The Water in use for the common People is chiefly Rain ; wherefore the
Cisterns are more costly than in other Places ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,193.143

of the same Figure as at <font> Gombroon <$$font> , only some few are
tubilated and built of Mud . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,193.144

Many Merchants possess Princely Edifices in this Town , it being a Place
of some considerable Trade both Inland , and from the several Ports .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,193.145

The Earth is productive of Sulphur , whose Chymical Spirit is extracted
here , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,193.146

and is preferable to any other , I never having met with more refined
Brimstone ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,193.147

they generally distil it <font> per Campanam <$$font> .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,193.148

The <font> Bezoar <$$font> -Stone is purchased at this Mart , being said
to be found in the Stomach of the Mountain-Goats hereabouts , occasioned
by some Plant they delight to feed on , <P_2,194> to which they
attribute its Growth : On which Subject more may be seen in <font>
Bontius <$$font> Junior's Animadversions on the Second and Sixth
Paragraph of <font> Garcius ab Orta` : Whose Words are to this Effect ;
' This Stone I find not only to be generated in <font> Persia <$$font> ,
but also in other Parts of the World ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.149

and because none as I know of before my self have given the true <font>
Etymon <$$font> or Derivation of this Stone , or how it grows , hear the
Business in a few Words . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.150

' The <font> Persians <$$font> then call this Stone <font> Pazahar
<$$font> , being a Compound of <font> Pa <$$font> and <font> Zahar
<$$font> , the first of which is <font> against <$$font> , the other is
<font> Poyson <$$font> ; as much as {it_would_be} if you should say in
<font> Greek <$$font> , <font> Antidoton , <$$font> in <font> English
<$$font> , Counter-Poyson . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.151

' It grows after this manner ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.152

there is a Place in <font> Persia <$$font> called <font> Stebanon ,
<$$font> as <font> Bontius <$$font> writes , the <font> Persian Shabanat
<$$font> , Three Days Journey beyond <font> Lhor <$$font> , in whose
Fields there springs up an Herb like Saffron and Hermodactyls , on which
the Flocks of Goats <paren> or Sheep <$$paren> feed ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.153

and by their eating thereof these Stones concrete
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.154

and become an hard Substance ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.155

but I suspend my Vote , whether in the Stomach , Reins , or Bladder :
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.156

However , that Belief may be gained for any of these ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.157

seeing them halt and complain as much as Men {COM:would_complain} under
the same distress , would more than incline the most incredulous .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.158

They are not , says he , unlike the <font> Europe <$$font> Goats ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.159

only they have longer and straiter Horns : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.160

They are not of divers Colours , as he affirms ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,194.161

neither go they in Flocks or Herds together ; though I have eaten of
their Flesh more than once , hunted by Greyhounds , being turned loose
from the Mountains , they having much of the Nature of Venison both in
their <P_2,195> Taste and Aspect . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,195.162

Moreover these Creatures <paren> rather Sheep than Goats <$$paren> as
they breed greater or lesser Stones , they discover it by their Gate ,
of which both the crafty <font> Armenian <$$font> as well as <font>
Persian <$$font> are well advised . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,195.163

Other Creatures as well as these are subject to this Distemper , as Cows
, Sheep , and Apes ; which last is reckoned the most excellent <font>
Bezoar <$$font> by more than a few . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,195.164

To the Directions already given , I shall add , That the true <font>
Bezoar <$$font> Stones have a Straw , or something in resemblance
thereof , which never fails but in the Adulterate ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,195.165

and if the upper Coat being shaved off , there succeed not another Round
, as is visible in Onions , till you come to the Straw without doubt it
is Counterfeit . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,195.166

But the following Method will better betray the Cheat , because they
leave nothing unattempted to impose upon the Buyers :
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,195.167

If you rub the Stone with a little Lime , and if in the chafed Part
there appears a Purple Colour , it declares it true and genuine ,
without sophistication . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,195.168

Or if you cast them into a Bason of Water , after an exact Account is
taken of their Weight , and they be taken out Three Hours after , and
weighed again , and it answer the first Account , neither losing nor
gaining by their stay in the Water , then pronounce them right :
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,195.169

But if being rubbed by Lime they chance to crack , or a Flaw be made in
the Trial , or that they alter upon their Immersion in the Water , you
slander them not , if you say they are False .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,195.170

In this Country <font> Assa Foetida <$$font> is gathered at a Place
called <font> Descoon <$$font> ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,195.171

some deliver it to be the juice of a Cane <P_2,196> or Reed inspissated
; others , of a Tree wounded : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,196.172

It differs much from the stinking Stuff called <font> Hing <$$font> , it
being of the Province of <font> Carmania <$$font> :
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,196.173

This latter is that the <font> Indians <$$font> perfume themselves with
, mixing it in all their Pulse , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,196.174

and make it up in Wafers to correct the Windiness of their Food , which
they thunder up in Belchings from the Crudities created in their
Stomachs ; never thinking themselves at ease without this <font>
Thaeriac <$$font> : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,196.175

And this is that they cozen the <font> Europeans <$$font> with instead
of <font> Assa Foetida <$$font> , of which it bears not only the Smell ,
but Colour also , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,196.176

only it is more liquid . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,196.177

It is usual on the News of our Approach to these great Cities , or
Populous Towns , for the Governors or their Deputies to expect the
coming of our Agent a <font> Pharsang <$$font> out of Town , bringing
the Men of Note with him to attend us to our Lodgings , and bring us
with Pomp through their Streets , and at the same time lay in Store for
us and our Horses , ushering in huge Courses of Provisions , both ready
dress'd and undress'd , as also Services of Sweetmeats dried and undried
, sending in Sheep , Goat , and Pullen , Barley , Rice , and the like ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,196.178

and at our departure Present us with <font> Persian <$$font> Steeds for
our Journy : For which we must not stir till we have paid sufficiently ,
by return of our Country Manufactures , as Scarlet , Watches , or
something of greater Value : FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,196.179

<font> Tam cito` in avaritiam excurrit sua humanitas ; quommodo enim
beneficiuun est quod in quaestum mittitur ? cum a` beneficio abesse
debeat negotiatio , &c. <$$font> Senec. lib. 3. de Benefic.
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,196.180

So soon their Humanity is turned to Avarice ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,196.181

for how can that be esteemed a Gift , which is bestowed with an intent
to gain ? Since any manner of Profit , which is sordid ; makes void an
entire Benefaction . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,196.182

<P_2,197>

But being rewarded for their forced Courtesy , upon our mounting they
conducted us on our Way , as far as they waited to bring us in .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,197.184

<heading>

CHAP. III . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,197.186

<font> WE MEASURE THE UTMOST BOUNDS OF THE PROVINCES OF <$$font> LHOR
<font> AND <$$font> GEROM , <font> TO THE CITY OF <$$font> SIRAS .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,197.187

<$$heading>

Being now advanced upon the Mountains , among whose Tops and Turnings we
make our Progress ; fresh instances of the Convulsions which this
Sulphurious Soil is subject to encounter us , as by the Cloven Hills and
Rocks we may be convinced could be effected by no other means than by
terrible Earthquakes from the Bowels of the Earth :
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,197.189

Among these droughty and uncouth Paths , having wearied our Steps for
Three <font> Pharsangs <$$font> , we came to a <font> Caravan_Ser_Raw
<$$font> , by Name <font> Pokutal <$$font> , at the foot of these
Mountains , and the beginning of a spacious Plain , where we found the
first alleviation from the fierce Heats of the Noon of Night , though at
Noon Day we could not think our case much amended .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,197.190

<font> Po <$$font> is interpreted the Basis , <font> Kutal <$$font> of
the Hill ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,197.191

this Inn was a new , strong , square , large Inn ; the first we stabled
, or rather shut our Doors in a-Nights , it being Built after the Best
Form , and Capacious of a great Number , both in the outward Square and
inner Stables ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,197.192

to this belonged Three stately Tanks with a deep Well , some an_Hundred
Fathoms down to the Bottom , with a Pond , either to Water <P_2,198> or
Wash the Cattel in , hard by it ; the perfect proof of our being passed
the Sands , which hold not digging such a depth , this being White Marle
; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,198.193

and the whole Plain promised a more fruitful Clay .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,198.194

Hence to <font> Bury <$$font> metes out Twelve Miles more , where the
best <font> Caravan_Ser_Raw <$$font> is on all the Road , it being not
only well Adorned with White facing Stone , but is both Large and
Convenient , as well as Stately Fabrick . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,198.195

Hard by this is a <font> Peor <$$font> , or Burying-place of one of
their Prophets , being a goodly Monument , with an <font> Arabick
<$$font> School Founded in his Honour , and Endowed with a good Pension
for to maintain the Devotion of their Priests .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,198.196

The next <font> Munsel <$$font> we hardly Went ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,198.197

but Crept onward to {COM:sic} , through almost impassable and dangerous
Precipices , with all the heed imaginable , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,198.198

for a Trip here could not have been retrieved without the loss of our
Lives ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,198.199

but by the Divine Providence we came to <font> Bonaru <$$font> , an
Eight_Cornered <font> Caravan_Ser_Raw <$$font> , Eighteen Miles from
<font> Bury <$$font> ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,198.200

there on an Hill are the remains of a regular Fortification , with a
suppliment of Outworks on every side , without any Avenue , unless on
one side ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,198.201

between this Village and <font> Bury <$$font> , the Inhabitants reckon a
many Castles on the Mountains with large Tanks of Water , and
Store-houses for Provisions <P_2,199> of Corn , Cut out of the main
Rocks with indefatigable Cost and Industry , which Works were they to be
begun now <paren> as they say <$$paren> could not be Finished by the
Expertest Artists in Fifty Years . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,199.202

They yet retain a Warlike Disposition , being still accounted the best
Gunners here of any other places in <font> Persia <$$font> ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,199.203

at the Entrance into this place are unsizable Heads of Mountain-Rams
with their Horns , set up as the Trophies of their Skill in Shooting
them ; and as a farther Argument of the cruel slaughter made among their
Forefathers , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,199.204

for more than Three Days Journy together , the Fields are every where
filled with Graves . FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,199.205

And now we began to be acquainted with the shift they make for Water in
these dry Countries , where there is little Rain , and Rivulets ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,199.206

they Dig for Springs , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,199.207

and when they have found one , they follow the Water-Course which way it
directs under Ground , Hollowing the Ground , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,199.208

and at every Thirty or Forty Yards , cast up a Mole-Hill , where they
make a Pit to Ventilate and let in the Air to Purify the Water , as well
as to Cleanse the Channel , FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,199.209

and this Course holds on many <font> Pharsangs <$$font> together for the
advantage of the Vallies ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,199.210

and this I look upon to be as <P_2,200> much the cause of the Generation
of the <font> Bezoar <$$font> -Stone in the Animals aforesaid , as the
reasons alleged there by <font> Bontius <$$font> for their Production ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,200.211

for by the consent of the Physicians , nothing contributes more to the
Breeding of the Stone in Men , than such things as are Undigested and
create Obstructions ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,200.212

nor can any thing be more Obstructing than such Water as is drawn from
Wells and deep Caverns , where the Sun has little influence , as we may
have occasion to manifest afterwards ; FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,200.213

and therefore we may probably Conjecture , these Unconcocted Waters to
be a main instrument of their production , since where these are in use
, this Accident is more general than in other places .
FRYER-1677-E3-P1,2,200.214

