<BEGIN_gascoigne-1503-e1-p1>

<P_149>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXVI>

<font> To my Uncle Plompton , be thes delivered . <$$font>
GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.4

Uncle Plompton , I comennd me unto you . GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.5

And where I should have bene with you to morow at Selbie , in good fayth
it is so that I was yesterday so crased and sicke that I kept my bedd
all day , GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.6

and this day I am not of power to goe , nor ride as yet .
GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.7

And also there is with me my uncle Ward , Thomas Lawrance , Ralfe Nevell
, and others ; GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.8

but that notwithstanding , if I had my health , I should be with you .
GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.9

And if ye can@ @not conclud tomorrow , appoynt a new day , and I shal@
@be glad to be with you with grace of <font> Jesu <$$font> , who ever
keepe you . GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.10

Scribbled at Gaukthorp , this fryday in hast .
GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.11

Your nepho , William Gascoygne GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.12

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXVII>

<font> To his worshipfull Uncle , Sir Robart Plompton , kt. deliver
these . <$$font> GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.14

Right worshipful Uncle , I comennd me unto you , praying you to send me
all such evidence , as ye have concernyng any lands or tenements in
Tokwith ; so that I may have them at Tadcaster this nyght ,
GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.15

for the matter is in communication there : GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,149.16

and the sayd evidence shal@ @be safly kept for you , as knoweth
Almyghtie <P_150> <font> Jesu <$$font> , who evermore preserve you .
GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,150.17

Written at Tadcaster this fryday . GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,150.18

Your nepho , William Gascoygne GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,150.19

<P_175>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXLI>

<font> To my uncle Sir Robart Plompton , kt. be thes byll delivered in
hast . <$$font> GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.22

Uncle Plompton , I recomannd me unto you as hartely as I can , shewing
you that my lord Archbishop hath sent a letter to my cousin William your
son and a byll closed therin ; which byll and letter I wold ye gave good
heed to , and understand whether it be Kings comandement , or nay .
GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.23

And also John Vavasour of Newton is departed to mercy of God , sence ye
departed from home , GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.24

and I have inquered of the age of his son and heire , which shal@ @be at
full age within a moneth , GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.25

and then I am in a suerte to have the release of him .
GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.26

Also there is a maraige moved betwyxt the sone of Sir John Roklife and
Jane Ughtred , syster to Henry Ughtred , GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.27

and great labour have they made to my lord of Northumberland for the
same , which I have stoped as yet . GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.28

And thus the sayd Sir John Rokclife , Henry Ughtred , and Anthony drawth
all one way ; GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.29

and I understand they will make more labor to my sayd Lord hastely , for
which cause I will goe to Lekinfeld the next weke , where I shall know
further herein of my lords pleasure , which I know is your especiall
good Lord : GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.30

and as I can know furthere , I shall send you wrytting shortly .
GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.31

And also , as I understand , your adversaries will lay a fine against
you , which fine is parcell of Wilbarn Midleton's evidence ,
GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.32

and is the fine of the house in Plompton that was my uncle Ralfe
Gascoygne . GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,175.33

I pray you to send me <P_176> some good tydings , as sone as ye can , of
your good speed in your matters , which , I besech Gude may be to his
pleasure , and your comforth and myne ; GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,176.34

and thus our Lord kepe you . GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,176.35

At Gaukthorpe in hast , the second sunday in Lenten .
GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,176.36

Yore nephew , William Gascon GASCOIGNE-1503-E1-P1,176.37

{COM:19_MAR._1502-3}

