<BEGIN_gawdy-1588-e2-p1>

<P_22>

<heading:edcomment:TO_HIS_FATHER>

Sir , I did not forgett to send to the caryars to vnderstand if I might
have had some intelligence from some good body at Harling ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.4

but I found the labor lost , and my expectation deceived :
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.5

yet the daye before I vnderstood by M=r= Murrell that your welfare was
answerable to my wishe . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.6

And I hoope not to be acquainted with any chaunge therof .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.7

Being at the court vppon Sonday last I sawe the making of ij newe
Knightes S=r= Henry Graye , and S=r= Horatio Paliveseno .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.8

Her Ma=tie= vppon Monday was wonderfull mery to the greate contentement
of all good and true hartes . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.9

She was looked for as this night heare at London GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.10

but her coming is nowe deferred vntill the morning ;
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.11

ther is bothe great preparation for running and also greate expectation
of the same , GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.12

but how it will fall out you shall heare of heareafter .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.13

I have sent yow downe our certificate from the courte which yow shall
fynde to be in the same forme I advertised yow of before .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.14

The Speache of the going of the Ambassadours doth hold likely to prove
very ceirtayne , GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,22.15

and vppon <P_23> Sondaye laste there was a New Commyssioner apoynted by
the Counsell to go with the rest , S=r= Amyas Pawlet .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.16

Ther is in the bill for the Shreves of Norffolk
{COM:preceding_word_"Norffolk"_emended} S=r= Robt. Southwell , M=r=
Clment Paston , and M=r= Gressham , GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.17

it is thought the last nominated will carry it awaye .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.18

ffor Suffolk {COM:preceding_word_"Suffolk"_emended} ther is S=r= William
Walgrave , M=r= Jermy , and M=r= Phillipp Tylney ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.19

it is sayd M=r= Jhon Jermin hath taken a fearme of M=r= Clement Paston .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.20

M=r= Jermy takethe great paynes at the courte GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.21

for surelye lodging may fall out to be bad GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.22

and Richemond grene is not very fayre , GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.23

but it is thought that neither ye scaresety of the one nor the foulnes
of the other will suffer any man to outbydd him .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.24

Well let him have it , GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.25

he that wynnes gold , let him eate gold , GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.26

and yet a man may buy gold to deare . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.27

Yow shall vnderstande of some accydentall newes heare in this towne
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.28

thoughe my self {COM:sic} no wyttnesse thereof , yet I may be bold to
veryfye it for an assured trothe . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.29

My L. Admyrall his men and players having a devyse in ther playe to tye
one of their fellows to a poste and so to shoote him to deathe , having
borrowed their Callyvers one of the players handes swerved his peece
being charged with bullet GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.30

missed the fellowe he aymed at GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.31

and killed a child , and a woman great with child forthwith ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.32

and hurt an other man in the head very soore . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.33

How they will answere it I do not study vnlesse their profession were
better , GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.34

but in chrystyanity I am very sorry for the chaunce
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.35

but God his iudgementes ar not to be searched
{COM:preceding_word_"searched"_emended} nor enquired of at mannes handes
. GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.36

And yet I fynde by this an old proverbe veryfyed GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.37

ther never comes more hurte then commes of fooling .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.38

My Oncle dothe fynde him self reasonably well , whom I do not lett
continually to visitt , GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.39

and meane to be wholly directed by him in any corse that I shall take ,
notwithstanding what tales soever yow shall otherwise heare .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.40

I did twise or thryse meete a silent woman ther called M=rs= Tylney ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.41

she was very troublesome to my Oncle , and muche fallen out with one of
his men . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.42

If she reportethe any newes of trauellers , believe her not bycause her
newes is dire like her self . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,23.43

According to my oncle his commaundment I am to remember his specyall
commendacions <P_24> to your good self vnderstanding very latly of my
sending to yow by letters . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.44

I have sent yow downe your footclothe which I had at my Cosin Woolmer
his chamber . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.45

Much vncerteyne newes touching some trobles out of Spayne , and out of
Scotland , and of some hurt done by some Skottes vppon the borders of
England . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.46

The Skottishe Ambassadour being at the Court vppon Sonday last seemed
{COM:sic_without_negation} to be acquainted with any such thing
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.47

but it is thought that the going of our Commissioners will make some
good end touching some good honorable peace . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.48

My L. of Leycester by a common report is expected for dayly .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.49

S=r= Thomas Gorge is very lately gone over into fflanders ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.50

but vnknowne vppon what cause . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.51

I have a letter in store for my vncle Anthony . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.52

I do meane to report somewhat hereafter to him of the running at tilt
bycause he being a captayne , it is meete that he shold hear of nothing
but of martiall matters . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.53

I wold be remembered to him and to my very good brother , etc.
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.54

xvj=th= of November 1587 . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,24.55

<P_27>

<heading:edcomment:TO_HIS_FATHER>

Sir I have not , nor cold not by any meanes gett so good trees to send
downe by thes present carryars , as I made account to have had to serve
your turne . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.58

Besides Mr. Kyream who shold have bene my cheife helper for the choyse
was so sicke this weeke , as he was not able to go , and directe me with
his Advise therin . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.59

Mr. Hughe Hare I cold not fynd at leisure to vse him , according as yow
commanded me . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.60

I durst not be to bold vppon my self , though I was to see in ii or iii
places , and with the helpe of some others . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.61

And they disliking I had no reason to allowe . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.62

The Shreifes be not yet knowen , GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.63

and some speech that there shold be an alteracion throughout England to
have more sufficient men . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.64

And S=r= Drue Drury was nominated for Norfolk . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.65

Some newes of landing of certyne Spanyardes in Irland and of winning of
a castle wher they shold have taken M=r= Denny a prisoner .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.66

But it is very vnlike to be true , and yet reported in most places , and
in the best places . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.67

There is great preparation for going to the sea , GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.68

and many Lordes and gentlemen meane to take ther parte thereof .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.69

The Quene will remove as it is thought this daye ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.70

but yet no certeyne ground therof . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,27.71

Other newes I do not for this present <P_28> remember .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,28.72

Lastly remembering my humble duty with a continuation of your good favor
towards me I commit yow etc. GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,28.73

London GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,28.74

this first of December 1587 . GAWDY-1588-E2-P1,28.75

