<BEGIN_gcromw-1534-e1-p1>

<P_208>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCCXXXIV_GREGORY_CROMWELL_TO_HIS_FATHER>

<heading:edcomment:THE_KING_LIKELY_TO_COME_TO_LEWES_IN_HIS_PROGRESS>

<heading:edcomment:THE_CONTAGION_OF_THE_PLAGUE_THERE>

My bounde dewtie in most humble wise remembryd , pleasith it your
Lordeshipp to be advertised that a yoman of the garde named Christofer
Chappman beinge sente , as a sercher of the state of the cuntrey , and
gever of knowledge unto those places wherunto the Kings Highnes hath
dyrected the giests of this his Progresse , came the daie of makynge
hereof vnto this your Lordeshipps Hows of Lewes ; viewinge and perusinge
the lodginges and offices of the same , affyrmynge moreover that the
Kyngs Grace wolde here be ; but how longe he wolde remayne or when he
wolde come beynge vncertayne . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,208.6

In consyderation therof , and forasmoche as yo=r= Lordeshipp sholde not
be ignorant in the behalf , I thowght <P_209> it my bownden dewtie to
asserteyne you of his sayde com~ynge . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,209.7

And forcause the contagion of the Plage whiche hath heretofore not a
litell infected this towne is not as yett all whole extincte and
quenched , I have therfore caused hime to have a trewe certificat as
well of oon that this daye disceased in an ynne of the towne , as of all
other suche as hath dyed att any tyme sythens Christemas within the
precyncte of the same . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,209.8

Desirenge therfore that it maye please your Lordeshipp , to geve me
advertisement of your pleasure and com~aundement therin .
GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,209.9

And thus I desyre our Lorde to have you in his moste gratious tuytion .
GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,209.10

At Lewes , GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,209.11

the xxixt=th= daie of June . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,209.12

Your most obedyent sonne , Gregory Crumwell . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,209.13

To his moste honorable father , My Lorde Privey Seale .
GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,209.14

<P_251>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCCLIV_GREGORY_CROMWELL_TO_THE_LADY_HIS_WIFE_FROM_CALAIS>

<heading:edcomment:LADY_ANNE_OF_CLEVES_EXPECTED>

<heading:edcomment:THE_MANNER_OF_HER_TRAVELLING,_AND_THE_PREPARATIONS_FOR_HER_RECEPTION>

<P_253>

Bedfellow , the daie before the makynge herof , we receyued the iuste
newes of my Lady Anne@ @s repayre hither , the same beynge appoynted
vppon Thursdaie nexte comynge , whiche thinge all_thowgh it be nowe
newes , yet I feare that lacke of expedition in the conveyaunce of thies
my lettres shal@ @be occasion the same to be olde before they shal@ @be
of you receyued , forasmoche as suche newes arr more sweftely sette
abrode by tonges then writynge . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,253.20

It is determyned that she shall remayne here Frydaie and Satyrdaye all
daie , and vppon Sondaie , wynde and wether seruynge , take hir passage
into Englande . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,253.21

After she ons entereth the Englishe pale , both she and hir whole treyne
shal@ @be att the Kyngs charge , GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,253.22

thitherto she hath bene att hir owne . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,253.23

There arre in hir companye iij=C=. horsses , wherof one_C. rydeth
before for prouysion , and ij=C=. awayte vppon hir .
GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,253.24

My Lorde Deputie , with all the Speares and Offycers of the towne shall
receyue hir att the English Pale . My Lorde Admyral with all vs
accompanyenge hime a litle withowte the towne . My Lady Lisle with all
the other Ladyes and Gentlewomen att the towne gates .
GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,253.25

I ame , thanks be to God , in healthe , trustinge shortely to here from
you lyke newes , as@ @well of your <P_254> self as also my little boyes
, of whose encreace and towardenes be ye assured I ame nott a litle
desyrous to be aduertised . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,254.26

And thus nott hauynge any other newes to wryte I bydde you moste hartely
well to fare . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,254.27

Att Callays , GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,254.28

the ix=th= of Decemb=r= . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,254.29

Your lovinge bedeffelowe , Gregory Crumwell . GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,254.30

To my right louinge bedfellow , att Ledes Castell in Kent .
GCROMW-1534-E1-P1,254.31

