<BEGIN_gifford-1593-e2-p1>

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_1}

<P_C1R>

<font> M. B. <$$font> Nay then I see you are awrie , if you denie
these things , and say they be but illusions . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.4

They haue bene prooued , and prooued againe , euen by the manifold
confessions of the witches themselves . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.5

I am out of all doubt in these , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.6

and could in manie particulars lay open what hath fallen out .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.7

I did dwell in a village within these five years , where there was a man
of good wealth , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.8

and suddainlie within ten daies space , he had three kine die {SIC:died}
, GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.9

his gelding worth ten pounds fell lame , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.10

he was himself taken with a gret pain in his back ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.11

& a child of seue~ years old died . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.12

He sent to the woman at <font> R. H. <$$font>
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.13

and she said he was plagued by a witch , adding moreouer , that there
were three women witches in that towne , and one man witch : willing him
to look to whom he most suspected : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.14

he suspected one old woman , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.15

and caused her to be caried before a Iustice of the Peace and examined :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.16

with much a_doe at the last shee confessed all : Which was this in
effect : that she had three spirits : one like a cat , which she called
<font> Lightfoot <$$font> , another like a Toad , which she called
<font> Lunch <$$font> , the third like a Weasill , which she called
<font> Makeshift <$$font> . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.17

This <font> Lightfoot <$$font> , she said , one mother <font> Barlie
<$$font> of <font> W. <$$font> solde her aboue fifteene yeares agoe ,
for an ouen cake GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.18

and told her the Cat would doe her good seruice , if she woulde ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.19

she might send her of her errand : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.20

this Cat was with her but a while , but the Weasill and the Toad came
and offered their seruice : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.21

The Cat would kill kine , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.22

the Weasil would kill horses , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.23

the Toade would plague men in their bodies . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.24

She sent them all three <paren> as she confessed <$$paren> against this
man : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.25

She was committed to the prison , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.26

and there shee died before the Assises . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.27

I could tell you of manie such : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.28

I had no minde to dwell in that place any longer .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.29

<font> Dan. <$$font> You mistake me , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.30

I do not meane that the things are not , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1R.31

but my meaning is , that the deuill by such thinges both beguyle and
seduce ignorant men , and lead them into <P_C1V> errours and grieuous
sinnes : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.32

And let us examine euerie parcell of that which you set down in your
speach , and you shall see no lesse . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.33

<font> M. B. <$$font> That is it which I would faine see :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.34

You confesse they haue spirits , some one , some more , and in such
likenesses : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.35

what errour be the people led into by that ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.36

<font> Dan. <$$font> First , co~sider this that ther be multituds &
armies of deuils , as we see in the gospel , y=t= manie deuils wer
entred into one man , & Christ saying , <font> What is thy name ?
<$$font> answer is made , <font> Legion , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.37

for we are manie . Mark 5 <$$font> . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.38

Now , although the deuils be manie , yet they be all caried with such
hatred against God , with such desire to haue him dishonored and
blasphemed , and burne with such bloudy malice and crueltie against men
, that they bend their studie all together , one helping and furthering
another what they can in their worke : in_so_much that the Scripture
doth speake of them , as if they were but one deuill :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.39

for S. Peter sayth , <font> Your aduersarie the deuill goeth about like
a roring lion seeking whom he may devour . 1 Pet. 5. <$$font>
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.40

And in the Reuelation chapter 12. all the deuils make that great red
dragon : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.41

And our Sauiour doth shewe how close they ioyne in one , when he saith ,
<font> If Satan be deuided against Satan , or if Satan cast foorth Satan
, how shall his kingdom endure Matth. 12 <$$font> .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.42

now then , whether the witch deale , as shee supposeth , with one spirit
, or with manie , it commeth all to one effect , thus farre , that one
dealeth not alone , but with the helpe of others . So that he or she
that hath familiaritie with one deuill , it is as much as {it_would_be}
if it wer with an_hundreth . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.43

Moreouer , the deuils be spirits , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.44

they haue no bodily shape or likenesse GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.45

but yet can make an apparance of a shape , as appeareth by the
inchanters before Pharao , when their rods were turned into serpents in
shew . <font> Exod. 7. <$$font> GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.46

And then one deuill can seem to be foure or fiue ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.47

and foure or fiue can seeme to be one : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.48

It is therefore but the craft of Satan , to make shewe of more or lesse
. GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C1V.49

<P_C2R>

<font> M. B. <$$font> Do you not thinke then , that where the more
deuils be , there is the greater power of Satan ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.51

<font> Dan. <$$font> Yes , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.52

but it can not be discerned be his appearing to the witch in shew of
more or lesse : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.53

For one can seeme ten vnto her , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.54

and ten can seeme one . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.55

<font> M. B. <$$font> Well , I doe not mislike al this ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.56

I pray you proceed forward . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.57

<font> Dan. <$$font> Then further marke well howe the holi Scriptures
doe paint out the deuils to bee mightie terrible spirits , full of power
, rage , and crueltie , compared to a great red dragon , Reuel. 12 , to
a greedie or hungrie lion , that roreth after the pray , <font> 1. Pet.
5. <$$font> And called by S. Paul Principalities , and Powers , the
Rulers of the darknesse of this world : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.58

now , when they take vpon them the shapes of such paltrie vermine , as
Cats , Mise , Toads , and Weasils , it is euen of subtiltie to couer and
hide his mightie tyrannie , and power which he exerciseth ouer the
heartes of the wicked . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.59

It is most necessarie for vs all to know , what strong aduersaries we
haue to encounter withall , that we may fly vnto the Lord God , and seek
to bee armed with his power against them . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.60

<font> M. B. <$$font> Well , what will you inferre vpon this ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.61

I can@ @not deny but that the scriptures doe paint out the deuils to be
mightie terrible spirits , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.62

and so they may be , although they appeare but like Cats or weasils .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.63

<font> Dan. <$$font> I doe not say they be not mightie and terrible
because they appeare in such shapes , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.64

but I affirme , that their appearing so , is to couer and hide their
mightinesse and effectuall working , which they exercise in the darke
harts of men . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2R.65

And marke well I pray you , the power of deuils is in the hearts of men
, as to harden the heart , to blinde the eies of the mind , and from the
lustes and concupiscences which are in them , to inflame them vnto wrath
, malice , enuy , and cruell murthers : to puffe them vp in pride ,
arrogancy and vaine_glory : to entice them vnto wantonnesse , <P_C2V>
and whordomes , and all vncleannesse . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.66

And about these things they worke continually , and with such efficacy ,
that without the power of the glorious passion and resurrection of our
Lord Iesus Christ , which we haue by faith , they can@ @not be withstood
, GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.67

and they will seeme to be but meane fellowes , busied about making drink
that it shall not work in the fat , in keeping cheese from running , and
butter from comming , in killing hennes or hogges , or making men lame .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.68

<font> M. B. <$$font> May they not doe both the one and the other ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.69

<font> Dan. <$$font> Yea , but this is my meaning , that while they be
occupied about the greatest things , as in stirring vp Tyrants and
wicked men to persecute , to reproch and blaspheme the Gospell , which
pulleth them downe , to set diuision and warres between kingdomes and
kings , hatred and discord between man and wife , and contention
betweene brethren : yea , to set all in a broyle and confusion : they
would seeme to be busied about trifles , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.70

and about these they busie mens mindes , that they may not obserue and
take heed of them in those other . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.71

<font> M. B. <$$font> I perceiue your meaning ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.72

but yet I doe not conceiue whereunto you chiefly tend :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.73

for do not they which looke vpon these harmes done by witches , confesse
that the deuill doth all those things which you mention ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.74

<font> Dan. <$$font> The ignorant sort , which are so terrified by
witches , do in ways after a sort , confesse so much as you say ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.75

but when it commeth to the matter , they deny it in effect .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.76

For mark this , the deuils continualie compasse the soule of man about ,
to shoot it full of their fierie dartes . <font> Ephes. 6. <$$font>
euen to wound it to death with all wicked sinnes .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.77

<font> The deuill goeth about like a roring lion , seeking whome hee may
deuour . 1. Pet. 5. <$$font> GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C2V.78

And they by this craft which they vse by means of the witches , make the
blind people imagin that they neuer come nigh them , but when the
witches are angrie and doe send them , and that they are easilie driuen
<P_C3R> away when they do come , as by burning some quick thing , as
henne , or hogge , or by beating and drawing bloud vpon the witch .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.79

Such people as can thus driue him away , or by thrusting a spitte
red_hot into their creame , are farre from knowing the spirituall battel
, which we are to warre vnder the banner of Christ against the deuill ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.80

much lesse doe they know how to put on <paren> as S. Paule willeth
<$$paren> the whole armour of God , to resist and ouercome him . <font>
Ephes. 6. <$$font> GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.81

He may deale with their soules euen as he listeth , when they take him
not present but vpon such sending , and where such hurt doth follow in
their bodies or goods . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.82

<font> M. B. <$$font> I doe not denie , but that the deuils seeke
chiefly for to destroy the soules of men . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.83

But <paren> as I tak it <$$paren> you confesse , that they being sent by
the witches , doe also those bodilie harmes : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.84

and as yet I see no reason why they may not seeke remedie against such
harmes , and driue him away by anie good meanes :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.85

doth the worde of God forbid vs to vse meanes ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.86

If I be sicke , shall I not take physicke ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.87

If I be thirstie , shall I not drinke ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.88

Indeed I am of your minde , though I did neuer marke so much before ,
that the deuill dealeth subtillie in this , that by dealing in such
small matters , he couereth himselfe in the greater , as though he came
not neere , nor did not medle but in such maner :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.89

But here standeth the case , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.90

I resist him in those greater , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.91

may I not also vse those helpes which driue him away in the lesser :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.92

I will if I can driue him away in all things .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.93

<font> Dan. <$$font> How the deuils are sent by the witches , and how
they doe those bodily harmes , wee are not yet come vnto ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.94

and there lie two of the chiefe subtilties of the deuill in them , by
which he deceiueth the multitude . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.95

But by occasion we are fallen into the mention of remedie to driue them
away . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.96

Because <paren> I say <$$paren> such as thus driue him away , know not
the spirituall battell , much lesse how to put on the whol armour of God
to ouercome the deuil : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3R.97

Order doth require that we speak first of his sending , and then of
those bodilie <P_C3V> harmes which he doth , & afterward of these meanes
which are vsed to repell him . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.98

Let vs therefore step one step backe againe , if you agree to the rest
which I haue spoken . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.99

<font> M. B. <$$font> With a good will : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.100

for so we shall omit no part . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.101

But I thought we had fullie agreed in this , that the witches do send
their spirits , and doe manie harmes both vnto men and beasts : because
we haue it confirmed by daylie experience : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.102

and vnlesse you will denie that which is manifest , I doubt not but we
shall accorde in these . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.103

<font> Dan. <$$font> I say the witches do send their spirits .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.104

<font> M. B. <$$font> What shal we need then to stand vpon that point
in which we are agreed ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.105

<font> Dan. <$$font> Yes ; GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.106

though we agree that they send them , yet we may dissent in diuers
thinges about this sending . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.107

As first , tell me , whether doe you thinke that the witch or the Deuill
is the seruaunt , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.108

which of them commaundeth , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.109

and which obeyeth ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.110

<font> M. B. <$$font> How can I tell that ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.111

It is thought hee becommeth her seruaunt , and where she is displeased ,
and would be reuenged , she hyreth him for to doe it .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.112

The witches the~selues haue confessed thus much :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.113

and for my part , I think no man can disprooue it .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.114

<font> Dan. <$$font> They that doe the will of God are the children and
seruants of God . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.115

And they which fulfill the lustes of the deuill , and obey him , are his
children & his seruauntes , <font> Ioh. 8. vers. 44. Act. 13.
vers. 10. <$$font> Are they not ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.116

<font> M. B. <$$font> I graunt all this ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.117

<font> Dan. <$$font> The deuilles are the rulers of the darknesse of
this world . <font> Ephes. 6. ver. 12. <$$font>
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.118

<font> M. B. <$$font> The text is plaine . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.119

<font> Dan. <$$font> The darknesse of this world , is not meant of the
darknesse of the night , which is but the shadow of the earth ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.120

but it is the spiritual darknes , which consisteth in the ignoraunce of
God , in infidelitie , and in sinne . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.121

<font> M. B. <$$font> I am of your mind in this also .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C3V.122

<P_C4R>

<font> Dan. <$$font> And doe you not thinke then that the deuill hath
his throne , his dominion and kingdom in the hearts of ignorant blind
infidels ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.124

<font> M. B. <$$font> I must needs thinke he hath ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.125

the word of God doth force me thereunto : seeing he is the Prince of
darknesse . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.126

<font> Dan. <$$font> And is there anie greater infidelitie and
darknesse in anie , than in witches , coniurers , and such as haue
familiaritie with deuils ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.127

<font> M. B. <$$font> I tak it they be the depest ouerwhelmed in
darknesse and infidelitie of all other . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.128

<font> Dan. <$$font> Lay all these thinges together which you confesse
, GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.129

and see whether it doth follow vpon the same , that the witch is the
vassall of the deuill , and not he her seruaunt ;
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.130

he is Lord GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.131

and commaundeth , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.132

and she is his drudge GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.133

and obeyeth . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.134

<font> M. B. <$$font> Yea , although he be Lord , yet he is content to
serue her turne , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.135

and the witches confesse , they call them forth and send them : and that
they hire them to hurt such in their bodies , and in their cattell , as
they bee displeased withall . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.136

<font> Dan. <$$font> I am sorie you are so farre awrie ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.137

it is pitie any man should be in such errour , especiallie a man that
hath learning , and should teach others knowledge .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.138

<font> M. B. <$$font> Nay , I may returne this vpon you ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.139

for if you will deny this , it is but a follie to reason any further :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.140

I will neuer be driuen from that which I knowe :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.141

There was one olde mother <font> W. <$$font> of great <font> T.
<$$font> which had a spirite like a {SIC:a_a} Weasill :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.142

she was offended highlie with one <font> H. M. <$$font>
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.143

home she went , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.144

and called forth her spirite , which lay in a pot of woll vnder her bed
, GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.145

she willed him to goe plague the man : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.146

he required what she would giue him , and he would kill <font> H. M.
<$$font> GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.147

She said she would giue him a cocke , which shee did ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.148

and he went , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.149

and the man fell sicke with a great paine in his bellie ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.150

languished GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.151

and died : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4R.152

the witch was arraigned , <P_C4V> condemned , and hanged ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.153

and did confesse all this . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.154

<font> Dan. <$$font> I told you before that I do not deny these things
, GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.155

but you are deceiued about the doing : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.156

you marke not the cunning sleights of the deuill :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.157

Tel me , is not this the truth which S. Peter speaketh , that <font>
the deuill goeth about like a roaring lion , seeking whom he may deuoure
. 1. Pet. 5. <$$font> GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.158

<font> M. B. <$$font> What then ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.159

<font> Dan. <$$font> What then ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.160

can you be so simple as to imagine that the deuill lieth in a pot of
wooll , soft and warme , and stirreth not , but when he is hired and
sent ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.161

The deuils conspire together in their worke , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.162

they bestirre them , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.163

and neuer take rest night nor day : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.164

they are neuer wearie , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.165

they be not a colde , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.166

they care not for lying soft : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.167

These be fooleries by which hee deceiueth the witches , and bewitcheth
the mindes of many ignorant people : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.168

And whereas you say he is hired , it is but deceit :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.169

for , let me aske you two or three questions or more if need be .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.170

<font> M. B. <$$font> What be your questions ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.171

<font> Dan. <$$font> You say the witch commeth home angrie ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.172

who hath kindled this wrath in her heart but the deuill ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.173

Who inflameth her mind with malice , to be reuenged , and to doe
mischiefe but the deuill ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.174

doth not he rule in her heart ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.175

Tell me what you thinke of this ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.176

<font> M. B. <$$font> I muste needes confesse hee stirreth her vp to
wrath and malice . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.177

<font> Dan. <$$font> Then he lieth not at home in his pot of wool :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.178

nor he is not hyred to this : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.179

hitherto she is his drudge , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.180

and obeyeth him , and not he her , being led by his suggestion .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.181

Then tell me , is not the deuill like a red fierie dragon , <font>
Reuel. 12. <$$font> burning in malice against God , and with all
bloodie and cruell hatred that may be against men ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.182

And is he not farre readier vnto all mischiefe , than anie man or woman
? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.183

<font> M. B. <$$font> The deuill is more fierce than any man or woman
; GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.184

none can deny this . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,C4V.185

<P_D1R>

<font> Dan. <$$font> If none can deny this , and he be the worker of
the wrath and malice in the heart of the witch ; then what needeth he to
be hyred ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.187

he stirreth her vp , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.188

and if he would , he could turn her mind from sending him ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.189

and must he be hyred ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.190

doth he care for a cock or a chicken ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.191

Is he hungry GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.192

or needeth he somewhat to eat ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.193

<font> M. B. <$$font> Nay , but it is thought he taketh those thinges
to witnesse against the witch that she is his .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.194

<font> Dan. <$$font> Let it bee , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.195

there were somewhat in that which you speake ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.196

yet he hath a farre deeper reach , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.197

for the trueth is , hee woulde , and doeth perswade the blind people ,
that he medleth litle , but when he is euen hyred and sent , and that
then his medling is but in such matters : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.198

And hereupon all is on a broyle against old women , which can any wayes
be suspected to be witches , as if they were the very plagues of the
world , and as if all would be well , and safe from such harmes , if
they were rooted out , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.199

and thus they fall a rooting out without all care :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.200

for it is thought that the witch which hath her spirits , is euen lyke a
man which hath curst dogges , which he may set vpon other mens cattell ,
which yet in the nature of dogs , would neuer styre but when they are
bidden : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.201

and so the harmes do come from the man which owneth those dogs .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.202

They think that the country might be ryd of such spirits , if there were
none to hoister them , or to set them a worke .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.203

They imagine that they and their cattell should then go safe .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.204

Alas poore creatures , how they be deluded ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.205

how litle do they vnderstand the high prouidence of almighty God which
is ouer all ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.206

<font> M. B. <$$font> Doe you thinke then that witches ought not to be
rooted out ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.207

or doe you thinke it were not much safety to the country from harmes ,
if it could be rid of them ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.208

<font> Dan. <$$font> For the rooting out of witches , the Scripture is
plaine . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.209

<font> Thou shalt not suffer a witch to liue <$$font> :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.210

but we are not yet come to that poynt . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1R.211

But whether they be to be rooted out that men may be safe from harmes ,
as the people <P_D1V> in fury and blindnesse imagine , that is next .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.212

<font> M. B. <$$font> Men feele the smart and the harmes which they
doe , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.213

and it is no maruell , though {COM:sic} they be earnest to haue them
rooted out , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.214

and a good riddance it were if the whole land could be set free from
them . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.215

<font> Sam. <$$font> Trulie <font> M. B. <$$font> I am of your mind ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.216

I wold they wer all hanged vp one against another :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.217

we should not <paren> I hope <$$paren> stand in such fear of their
spirits . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.218

But I interrupt you too . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.219

<font> The wife . <$$font> They that would not haue them hanged or
burnt , I would they might euen witch them vnto hell .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.220

If I had but one fagot in the world , I would carry it a myle vpon my
shoulders to burne a witch . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.221

<font> Dan. <$$font> Well good woman , spare your fagot a while ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.222

and ease your shoulders , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.223

and let vs reason the matter a little further ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.224

I pray you let me aske you this question , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.225

doth the witch or the deuill the harme vnto men and cattell ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.226

<font> M. B. <$$font> Why , the deuill doth it at their sending though
I confesse it must needs be as you said , that the deuil worketh al in
the mind of the witch , & moueth her to send him .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.227

<font> Dan. <$$font> The deuill hath a kingdome ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.228

but it is in darkenesse and corruption of sinne .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.229

He hath no right nor power ouer Gods creatures , no not so much as to
kill one flye , or to take one eare of corne out of anie mans barne ,
vnlesse power be giuen him . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.230

You know when Christ cast the deuils out of the man possessed , they
aske leaue for to goe into the heard of swine .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.231

Then tell me , who giueth the deuill this power then , when the witch
sendeth him , to kill or to lame man or beast ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.232

doth the witch giue it him ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.233

Do you think he had power to doe harme , but no mind till she mooued him
? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.234

Or doe you take it that her sending giueth him power , which he had not
? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.235

<font> M. B. <$$font> It is a question indeed worth the asking :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.236

For doubtlesse , the deuill hath not power vntill it be giuen him , to
touch any creature , to hurt , or to destroy the body , but onely to
tempt and to lead into sin : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D1V.237

I am also sure that the <P_D2R> witch can@ @not giue him power , but
onlie God aboue . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.238

<font> Dan. <$$font> Lay these two together then , that the deuill only
hurtheth , and that none can giue him power , neither man nor woman ,
but only God , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.239

and tell me whether the people be not wonderfully carried away in a rage
. GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.240

For , when as they should consider , that the deuill is the Lordes
executioner : And then finding that he hath any power giuen him to
molest , to hurt and vexe them in their bodies or goods , to know
certainly it commeth from the Lord , and then gather from thence <paren>
as the trueth is <$$paren> that the Lord is displeased with them for
their offences . And so seeke vnto him , humbly crauing pardon and
deliuerance from this enemy , seeking to be armed with the mighty power
of faith , to cast him foorth , and to resist him , as the Lord willeth
, <font> 1. Pet. 5 <$$font> GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.241

Here is no such matter , no looking so high among the people , but
running deeper into errour , and into sinne , as if the witches did it ,
and that it commeth from their anger and not from their own sinnes and
infidelity , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.242

here is no repentance , no humbling themselues by fasting and prayer ,
but running for help vnto deuilles , vsing meanes which those deuils by
the cunning men & women appoint , searching and clawing , thirsting
often after guiltles blood as raging against those whome they imagine to
be witches , which many times are not , because they imagine , that if
there were no witches , ther should be no such plagues . As if they had
no foule sinnes nor vnbeleefe , or that there remayned not a iust
reuenging God to punish , or as if he had not the deuils still the
executioners of his wrath . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.243

<font> M. B. <$$font> Truly your wordes doe make me affrayd :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.244

for I am euen guiltie of those thinges my selfe ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.245

if they be so grieuous , as you set them out : and {COM:sic} by Gods
grace I wil consider better of the matter : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.246

for I haue counselled manie to seek vnto those cunning folkes , and to
vse such helpe as they prescribe , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.247

and you say , it is to seeke help at deuils .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.248

To see that point we shal come anon : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2R.249

now I wold be resolued <P_D2V> about somewhat in your last speach ; as
namely , doe you cleare the witches , because God , and not they ,
giueth the deuil power , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.250

and doe you thinke that the deuils should kill men and their cattell ,
if they were not sent by witches ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.251

Should the harmes still follow , if there were no witches ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.252

<font> Dan. <$$font> That I say GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.253

God alone , and not the witches , giueth power vnto the deuils to plague
and torment : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.254

it is so euident as that I suppose a man shall hardlie meete with anie
man so grosse but will confesse it . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.255

But this doeth not cleare the witches at all ;
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.256

for their sinne is in dealing with deuils , and that they imagine that
their Spirits do those harmes , requested and hyred by them : when as
indeede the deuill , where he hath power giuen him to hurt , or where he
knoweth death or grieuous diseases will follow either in man or beast ,
setteth the witch in a rage , and moueth her to send him .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.257

Concerning your other question , I say , we shall finde by the
Scriptures , that if there were no witches at all , yet men should be
plagued by the deuils in their bodies and goods .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.258

For touching the godly , the Lord doth vse Satan to afflict them in
their bodies and in their goodes , for to trie their faith and patience
: as the example of holie Iob doeth testifie in ample manner .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.259

It were vile follie and brutish to affirme , that witches did set on the
deuils to kill his children , and to plague his bodie .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.260

And I hold it no smal follie , for anie man to think that the Lord doeth
not nowe scourge his children , at the least some of them , for their
good , by the deuill . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.261

There is no doubt , but the deuil hauing power giuen him to afflict ,
vseth all the craft hee can , and will seek to be sent by the witch ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.262

and so hee will make it knowne , because it may seeme to bee not from
God , but from the anger of a poore woman . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.263

And now touching the wicked , which prouoke God by their wicked sinnes
and vnbeleefe , may we not read in the scriptures that an euill spirite
was sent of God vnto king Saul , which did haunte and vexe him ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.264

Was this spirit sent by a witch ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D2V.265

Or the deuils <P_D3R> in the Gospell , which entred into the hearde of
swine and drowned them ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.266

Did the Lord giue them power , and send them ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.267

and shall we be so sottish as to thinke , that hee sendeth not the
deuill now against vngodly men , to plague and to betray them ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.268

As I said before , here is the deepe craft of Satan , that he will couet
to bee sent by witches , whereas indeed God hath sent him , seeing none
can sende him but God . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.269

Againe , we must consider that there bee naturall causes in the bodies
of men and beastes of grieuous tormentes and diseases , yea euen causes
of death . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.270

Nowe , they can@ @not be so secrete , but the deuill knoweth them , and
euen when they are like to take effect . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.271

Then doth he plie it with the witch , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.272

setteth her in a furie , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.273

she sendeth him , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.274

euen vpon this sending the man or the beast suddainlie and strangely are
tormented , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.275

fall lame , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.276

or die . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.277

Then the witch is suspected , examined , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.278

and confesseth that she killed such a man , or such a mans cattell , or
made them lame . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.279

Here the people are set in a wonderfull maze and astonishment , as if
witches could plague men in their wrath by sending their spirits ,
because they confesse they did it , whe~ their spirits doe lie and had
no power , but the tormentes cam by naturall causes .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.280

And to driue the people into a deeper madnes in this , & to mak them
beleeue , that strange and suddaine torments and languishing diseases
come by witches , he hath his other sort of witches , the cunning men
and women , which tell euen vpon his worde , which you know is to be
trusted , that they be bewitched , that they bee haunted with fayries ,
and that ther be thus many witches therabout , in euerie town some .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.281

<font> M. B. <$$font> That is most true no doubt , which you speake ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.282

I doe not for my part knowe how to gainsay any one point thereof .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3R.283

Only I wonder at the craftinesse of the deuils in these things , that
where they haue power graunted vnto them to hurt , they will be sent by
the witches , as if they did it hired by them , and that you say where
harmes doe follow <P_D3V> men vpon naturall causes , that they can make
shew as though they did them . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.284

But are you of this mind , that there should be as manie or all those
harmes done by deuilles , if there were no witches , as there be now ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.285

Although I must needs confesse , that the witches can giue the deuil no
power , nor he can take none by their sending :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.286

yet may it not bee that God giueth them power oftener because of those
witches dealing with them , than if there were no witches at all ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.287

<font> Dan. <$$font> The craftinesse of deuils is such , as without the
light of Gods worde , the wisest men vnder heauen muste needes be
deceiued thereby . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.288

We see there be some men so deep in subtilties and can carie matters so
close , that men can not discerne them : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.289

how much more the deuilles , which are exceedingly subtill , & craftie
aboue the subtillest men ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.290

the question which you aske is <paren> in my iudgment <$$paren> somwhat
hard : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.291

But this is vndoubted , that if the Lord God do giue vnto the deuils
oftener power to hurt because of the witches , I meane because the
deuils doe deale by such instruments , it is in his heauie iudgment
against the wickednes of the people , which despise the true and
heauenlie light of his word . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.292

As S. Paule <paren> prophecying of the comming of the great Antichrist
<$$paren> sheweth , that because men did not receiue the loue of the
trueth , God gaue the deuill power by Antichrist and his ministers , to
seduce by lying signes and wonders . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.293

Indeed , I will not say that for the witch , the deuill hath power giuen
him , but for the wickednesse of the people , which deserue that by
witches the deuill shoulde haue power to seduce them further .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.294

Here yet we muste take heede of the common errour which a multitude are
caried so hedlong withall , that they can by no means see , that God is
prouoked by their sinnes to giue the deuill such instruments to work
withall , but rage against the witch , euen as if she could do all .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D3V.295

<font> M. B. <$$font> Surelie , I should bee a wretch to deny , that
<P_D4R> God giueth the Deuilles power to plague and to seduce because of
mens wickednes ; GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.296

but yet I would know whether a godly faythfull man or woman may not bee
bewitched ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.297

Wee see the deuill had power giuen him over Iob ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.298

<font> Dan. <$$font> This example of Iob is not fit to prooue that a
godly man may be bewitched , seeing that the deuill is not sayde to
deale by witches against him , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.299

but it doeth prooue , that not only the godlie , but euen the most godly
<paren> as holy Iob , who had none like him vpon earth <$$paren> may for
their triall be giuen into the handes of Satan to be afflicted and
tempted . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.300

And as I said , where Satan hath power granted him of God , to strike
with bodily plagues any of the godly , for the triall of their fayth and
patience , he will couet , if he can bring it about , to bee sent by
some witch , and to haue it knowne that he was sent .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.301

But the faithfull are to turne theyr eies from the witch , and to deale
with God , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.302

for from him the matter commeth . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.303

When they be tried ; the Lord in his good time will deliuer them
depending vpon him , to their great praise and glory , euen as valiant
souldiers . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.304

It is therefore , of no great force , whether Satan come from the witch
against the godlie , or whether he haue no witch to deale by :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.305

ouercome thou the deuill , and thou ouercommest all .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.306

Indeed among the more ignorant sort he preuayleth much , when he
toucheth those which imbrace the liuely word as sent from a witch .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.307

For many nowe doe euen quake and tremble , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.308

and their faith doth stagger . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.309

Hath hee power <paren> thinke they <$$paren> ouer such as be cunning in
the scriptures , then what are they the better for their profession ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.310

the witch is on their bones as well as vpon others .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.311

By this it might seeme , and so they take it , that other helpes and
remedies are to be sought than by the scriptures .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.312

And so they run GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.313

and seeke help where they ought not . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.314

<font> M. B. <$$font> Then I pray you , though I be already perswaded
it is naught to seeke to these cunning men for help against witches ,
yet let vs conferre a little of that . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4R.315

There <P_D4V> be diuers things which haue persuaded me to thinke
marueilous well of them , and euen as of such as God hath giuen wisedome
and skill vnto , euen for to doe much good . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.316

For we see many receiue help by them , and are deliuered from the
plagues which come by deuils . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.317

And first , I wold know how they can bee so earnest against witches , if
they deale with the deuill , and so be indeed witches themselues ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.318

how can they haue any mind in charity to doe good , to take pitie vpon
such as be in misery ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.319

Or how will Satan driue forth Satan ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.320

For they no doubt , driue deuilles out of some .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.321

<font> Dan. <$$font> I would come to aunswere your questions touching
the seeking help at the hands of cunning men or women ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.322

but tell me firste , are you resolued touching the sending of the
spirits , and touching the harms that are done ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.323

Me think you slip too suddainly from these points ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.324

<font> M. B. <$$font> I can@ @not tell whether I vnderstand your
meaning in euery thing , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.325

but sure , I haue bene in error greatly I must needs confesse .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.326

And if you please , we may stande somewhat longer in these questions .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,D4V.327

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2_here}

<P_E4V>

<font> Dan. <$$font> I doe verilie thinke that manie of the people are
so perswaded : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.330

but what reason is there for it ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.331

Doeth God by his Spirit tell where the thing is which is lost , or
stolen ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.332

Is it an Angell from heauen , or the soule of some man that is dead ,
which appeareth in the Chrystall , or in the glasse , and sheweth the
image of the partie which hath stollen , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.333

or is that a witch ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.334

<font> M. B. <$$font> I had rather heare what you thinke touching
these things , than shew what I haue thought .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.335

<font> Dan. <$$font> The deuils did make the heathen people beleeue
that they were goddes , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.336

and so procured that they shoulde worship them with diuine worship .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.337

Through their craftines they had many wayes to establish this :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.338

they conueied themselues into images , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.339

and out of them gaue answeres , when they wer demanded ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.340

herein they vsed great craft , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.341

for wheareas they could not tell what should fall out , they framed the
oracle in such sort as it was doubtfull , and might be taken both waies
: GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.342

and so looke which part it fell out on , that seemed and was taken to be
the meaning of the gods . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.343

If they did know how things would fal out indeed , as they did know
sundry things touchyng the kingdomes and monarchies of the world , by
the writings of the Prophetes , and diuers things by coniectures , as
the deuill could tell Saul should be slaine , because he saw God had
cast him off , and the hearts of the Israelites fainted , and the
Philistines were full of courage , those they would tell plainelie .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.344

Also they did conuey themselues into the bodies of men and women , and
vtter thinges which seemed very diuine , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.345

such <paren> as I am perswaded <$$paren> were the Prophetisses the
<font> Sibylles <$$font> among the heathen . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.346

Such was the maide at Philippos , which is mentioned in the Actes of the
Apostles , which brought great gain to her maisters by deuining , out of
whom Paule cast the deuill . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.347

This maide could tell of things lost , of things stollen , and such like
, GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,E4V.348

and great resort there was vnto her , as men had neede , or desired to
<P_F1R> see the strangenesse of the matter . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.349

<font> M. B. <$$font> Let me interrupt you a litle .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.350

The deuill can not be in all places at once : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.351

how could he then , remaining in the maide , tell what was done in
places farre off ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.352

howe can the deuill tel where the thing lost or stolen is , which is not
only farre off , but hidden ? GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.353

how can he shewe the image of the thiefe or witch ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.354

Can he sit and behold all thinges a_farre off , and in secrete ?
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.355

<font> Dan. <$$font> We may not ascribe vnto Deuils that they can be in
all places at once , or sit in one place and beholde all things done
a_farre off . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.356

But they ioyne together in this speciall worke , to set vp their
kingdome , and to drawe the people after them , to seeke helpe at their
handes , and so to worship them . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.357

Some of them be in one place , and some in another ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.358

and from all places doe stir vp the faithlesse people to run for helpe
to those cunning men , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.359

and then they make the relation , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.360

for they goe thither also , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.361

they know the thiefe whome they moued to the theft ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.362

and can make resemblaunce of his face and apparell :
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.363

they can tell where things be that are hid , hauing had a finger in the
matter . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.364

And thus one spirite , as it doeth seeme , telleth things spoken and
done farre off , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.365

but it is otherwise , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.366

there be manie that doe it , which resort from all the places where the
things are done . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.367

<font> M. B. <$$font> I am satisfied touching this point .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.368

You were shewing howe the deuils did deale among the heathen out of the
Fools , and out of men and women . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.369

<font> Dan. <$$font> Yea , and they haue subtillie wound themselues in
againe among Christians . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.370

For vsing witches as their instruments , they make them beleeue that
they doe manie harmes sent by them , which they do not ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.371

and whereas they haue power giuen them by God to afflict , they will
seeme to doe it at the wrath and displeasure of the witch ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.372

she must send him , GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.373

the matter must one way or the other appeare ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1R.374

eyther he will seeme euen compelled by force of such as do adiure
<P_F1V> him , to confesse that such a woman or such a man sent him ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1V.375

or els the witch must confesse so much . GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1V.376

Then the people deuise how they may be safe against the witch ,
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1V.377

there is running to the wisardes to learne what they should doe to
withstand the furie of the witch , that she send not to them , or if she
haue sent , how they may expell her spirit , and keep her from sending
him againe : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1V.378

this is it which the deuill would haue : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1V.379

for now he vttereth all his wares : GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1V.380

he teacheth by these cunning men and women , many horrible abhominations
, and foule abuses of the name of God , by which they are made {COM:sic}
beleeue , that they haue remedie against the deuils sent by the witches
, and that they are cured from their harmes .
GIFFORD-1693-E2-P1,F1V.381

