<BEGIN_harleyedw-1638-e2-p1>

<P_7>

<heading:edcomment:IX>

<heading>

To my deare sonne M=r= Edward Harley . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.5

<$$heading>

Good Need - I hope thease lines will finde you well at Oxford .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.7

I longe to reseaue the ashurance of your comeing well to your iournyes
end . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.8

We haue had faire weather sence you went , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.9

and I hope it was so with you , which made it more pleaseing to me .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.10

You are now in a place of more varietyes then when you weare at home ;
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.11

thearefore take heede it take not vp your thoughtes so much as to
neglect that constant saruis you owe to your God .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.12

When I liued abroode , I tasted something of thos willes :
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.13

thearefore I may the more experimentally giue you warneing .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.14

Remember me to your tutor , in home I hope you will finde dayly more and
more cause to love and respect . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.15

I thanke God my coolde is something better then when you left me .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.16

I pray God blles you , and giue you of those saueing grasess which will
make you happy heare and for ever heareafter .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.17

Your most affectinat mother , Brilliana Harley .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.18

<font> Oct. <$$font> 25 , 1638 . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,7.19

<P_8>

<heading:edcomment:X>

<heading>

To my deare sonne M=r= Edward Harley . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.23

<$$heading>

Good Need - I was dublly glad to reseaue your letter , bothe for the
asshureanc of your comeing weell to Oxford , and that I reseued it by
your fathers hand , whoo , I thanke God , came well home yesterday ,
aboute foore a cloke . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.25

I am glad you like Oxford ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.26

it is true it is to be liked , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.27

and happy are we , when we like both places and condistions that we must
be in . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.28

If we could be so wise , we should finde much more swetness in our lifes
then we do : HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.29

for sartainely theare is some good in all condistions <paren> but that
of sinn <$$paren> , if we had the arte to distract the sweet and leaue
the rest . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.30

Nowe I ernestly desire you may haue that wisdome , that from all the
flowers of learneing you may drawe the hunny and leaufe the rest .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.31

I am glad you finde any that are good , wheare you are .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.32

I belleue that theare are but feawe nobellmens sonne in Oxford ;
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.33

for now , for the most part , they send theaire sonnes into France ,
when they are very yonge , theaire to be breed .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.34

Send me word wheather my brother Bray doo send to you , and wheather
S=r= Robert Tracy did come to see you , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.35

for he toold your father he would ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.36

and let me knowe howe sheawes you any kindenes , when you haue a fitte
opertuenity . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.37

Comend my saruis to Mrs. Willkeson HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.38

and tell her I thanke her , for her fauor to you .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.39

I may well say , you are my well-beloved chilld ;
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.40

thearefore I cane not but tell you I mise you .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.41

I thanke God I am somethinge better with my coold then I was ;
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.42

your brother Robine has had no fite sence the Munday before you went
away ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.43

the rest of your sisters and brother , I thanke God , are well .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.44

Remember me to your tutor . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.45

If you would haue any thinge , let me knowe it .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.46

Bee not forgetfull to rwit to me ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.47

and the Lord in mercy blles you , both with grase in your soule and the
good things of this life . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.48

Your most affectinat mother till death , Brilliana Harley .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.49

Be carefull to keepe the Sabath . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.50

<font> Nov. <$$font> 2 , 1638 . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,8.51

<P_9>

<heading:edcomment:XI>

<heading>

To my deare sonne Mr. Edward Harley , in Magdeline Halle in Oxford .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.55

<$$heading>

Good Ned - I beceach the Lord to blles you with those choys bllesings of
his Spirit , which none but his deare ellect are partakers of ; so that
{SIC:that_so} you may taste that sweetness in Gods saruis which indeed
is in it : HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.57

but the men of this world can not perseaue it .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.58

Thinke it not strange , if I tell you , I think it longe sence I hard
from you ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.59

but my hope is that you are well , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.60

and my prayers are that you may be so . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.61

As you say you haue founde your tutor kinde and carefull of you , so I
hope he will be still . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.62

If you wante any thinge , let me knowe it . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.63

On Saterday last I hard from your aunte Pelham :
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.64

shee and all hers are well . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.65

I beleeue you haue all the inteligence of the Quene mothers arriuall and
entertainement , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.66

thearefore I will omite it . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.67

Your father , I thanke God , is well ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.68

and for meself , I haue not yet shaked off my could .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.69

Your brother Roberd by Gods mercy to him has bine yet free from his
fitts , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.70

and goos to scoule carefully ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.71

and I hope he is now so wise to see his stubborneness was not the way to
gaine any thinge but reproufe . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.72

I purpos , if pleas God , to send the next weeke to see you .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.73

Your father prays God to blles you . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.74

Remember me to your tutor , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.75

and I beceach the Lord to keepe you from all euil .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.76

I haue sent you some juce of licorich , which you may keepe to make vse
of , if you should haue a coold . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.77

So I rest , Your most affectinat mother , Brilliana Harley .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.78

<font> Bromton , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.79

Nove. <$$font> 13 , 1638 . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.80

<heading:edcomment:XII>

<heading>

To my deare sonne Mr. Edward Harley . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.83

<$$heading>

Good Need - This day I reseued a letter from you , in which you rwite me
, that you had rwit to me the weake before ; which letter I haue not
reseued , so that I thought it longe sence I hard from you .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.85

It is my ioye that you are well , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,9.86

and I beceach the Lord to continue your health , and aboue all to giue
you that <P_10> grase in your soule which may make you haue a healthfull
soule , sounde without erors , actiue in all that is good , industrious
in all the ways in which good is to be gained .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.87

I am glad you finde a wante of that ministry you did inioye :
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.88

labor to keepe a fresch desire affter the sincere milke of the word ,
and then in good time you shall inioye that bllesing againe .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.89

The Lord has promised to giue his Spirit to his chillderen , which shall
leade them in the truth . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.90

Begge that bllesed Spirit , and then errors will but make the truth more
bright , as the foile dous a dioment . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.91

My deare Ned , as you haue bine carefull to chuse your company , be so
still , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.92

for piche will not easely be tuched without leaufeing some spot .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.93

I had not hard of Duke Roberts and my Lord Crauens being taken .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.94

I hope the nwes of the Sweeds is not true ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.95

but in all theas things we must remember the warneing , which our
Sauiour has giuen us , when he had toold his decipels that theare must
be wars and rumers of wars ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.96

<paren> but he saith , let not your harts be trubled ; in my aprehention
, as if Christ had saide <$$paren> greate trubells and wars must be ,
both to purg his chruch of ipocrits , and that his enimies at the last
may be utterly distroyed , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.97

but you my saruants be not carefull for your selfs ,
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.98

you are my jewells , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.99

and the days of trubbell are the days when I take care of jewells :
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.100

and , my deare Ned , tho I fermely beleeue theare will be great trubells
, yet I looke with ioy beyond those days of trubell , considering the
glory that the Lord will bring his chruch to ;
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.101

and happy are they that shall liue to see it , which I hope you will doo
. HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.102

I hard that theare was a cardenalls cape brought to the Custome Howes ,
valued at a high rate , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.103

but none would owne it ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.104

and , to requete your inteligence , I let you knowe what I heare .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.105

The Scoch buisness is not yet ended . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.106

Theare is lately come to the court a frech {COM:sic} duke with two or
three other gentellmen or nobell men , being fleed from the French
king's army , for some vnfiting words they used of the French kinge .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.107

The Quene mother was so transported with joy , as they say , at the
sight of the quene , that shee was in a trance .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,10.108

This day I hard it confermed from Lounddoun that the Palsgrave in
besceachgeing a towne in WestPhalia {COM:sic} was <P_11> raised and most
of his army defeated , and his brother taken prisner ;
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.109

but this is our comfort , that the rod of the wicked shall not allways
rest on Gods peopell . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.110

I haue sent Hall purposly to see you ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.111

for , sence I can not speake with you , nor see you so offten as I
desire , I am willing to make make {TEXT:"make"_repeated_in_edition}
theas paper mesengers my depuety . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.112

I hope I shall heare from you by this mesenger ;
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.113

I thanke God your father is well , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.114

and your brother Robert has had no fitte sence you went .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.115

He goos to scoule HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.116

and eates his meate well ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.117

and I hope the Lord will spare him . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.118

You must rwit to him ; HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.119

you know he is apte to aprehend unkindness .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.120

When you rwite by the carrier , rwite nothing but what any may see ,
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.121

for many times the letters miscarry . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.122

My deare Ned , you may see how willing I am to discourse with you , that
have spoune out my letter to this lentghe . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.123

I thanke God my coold is goon . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.124

I beceach the Lord to blles you , as I desire my owne soule should be
bllesed : HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.125

Your most affectinat mother , Brilliana Harley .
HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.126

I haue sent you a cake , which I hope you will eate in mory
{COM:sic;_best_guess} of Bromton . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.127

<font> Bromton , HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.128

Nove. <$$font> 17 , 1638 . HARLEYEDW-1638-E2-P1,11.129

