<BEGIN_harman-1568-e1-p1>

<P_57>

<heading>

A DOMMERAR . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,57.4

CAP. 12 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,57.5

<$$heading>

These Dommerars are leud and most subtyll people :
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,57.7

the moste part of these are Walch men , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,57.8

and wyll neuer speake , vnlesse they haue extreame punishment ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,57.9

but wyll gape , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,57.10

and with a maruelous force wyll hold downe their toungs doubled ,
groning for your charyty , and holding vp their handes full pitiously ,
so that with their de'epe dissimulation they get very much .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,57.11

There are of these many , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,57.12

and but one that I vnderstand of hath lost his toung in dede .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,57.13

Hauing on a time occasion to ride to Dartforde , to speake with a priest
there , who maketh all kinde of conserues very well , and vseth stilling
of waters ; And repayringe to his house , I founde a Dommerar at his
doore , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,57.14

and the priest him selfe perusinge his lycence , vnder the seales and
hands of certayne worshypfull men , had thought the same to be good and
effectuall . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,57.15

I taking the same writing , and <P_58> reading it ouer , and noting the
seales , founde one of the seales like vnto a seale that I had aboute me
, which seale I bought besides Charing crosse , that I was out of doubte
it was none of those Gentlemens seales that had subscribed
{COM:preceding_word_"subscribed"_emended} . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.16

And hauing vnderstanding before of their peuish practises , made me to
conceaue that all was forged and nought . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.17

I made the more hast home ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.18

for well I wyst that he would and must of force passe through the parysh
where I dwelt ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.19

for there was no other waye for hym . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.20

And comminge homewarde , I found them in the towne , accordinge to my
expectation , where they were staid ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.21

for there was a Pallyarde associate with the Dommerar and partaker of
his gaynes , whyche Pallyarde I sawe not at Dartford .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.22

The stayers of them was a gentleman called <font> Chayne <$$font> ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.23

and a seruant of my Lord Keepers , cald <font> Wostestowe <$$font> ,
which was the chiefe causer of the staying of them , being a Surgien ,
and cunning in his science , had seene the lyke practises ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.24

and , as he sayde , hadde caused one to speake afore that was dome .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.25

It was my chaunce to come at the begynning of the matter .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.26

" Syr , " <paren> quoth this Surgien <$$paren> " I am bold here to vtter
some part of my cunning . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.27

I trust " <paren> quoth he <$$paren> " you shall se a myracle wrought
anon . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.28

For I once " <paren> quoth he <$$paren> " made a dumme man to speake .
" HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.29

Quoth I , " you are wel met , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.30

and somwhat you haue preuented me ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.31

for I had thought to have done no lesse or they hadde passed this towne
. HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.32

For I well knowe their writing is feyned , and they depe dissemblers .
" HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.33

The Surgien made hym gape , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.34

and we could see but halfe a toung . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.35

I required the Surgien to put hys fynger in his mouth , and to pull out
his toung , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.36

and so he dyd , not_withstanding he held strongly a prety whyle ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.37

at the length he pluckt out the same , to the great admiration of many
that stode by . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.38

Yet when we saw his tounge , he'e would neither speake
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.39

nor yet could heare . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.40

Quoth I to the Surgien , " knit two of his fyngers to_gether ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.41

and thrust a stycke betwene them , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.42

and rubbe the same vp and downe a lytle whyle , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.43

and for my lyfe hee speaketh by and by . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.44

" Sir , " quoth this Surgien , " I praye you let me practise an
{SIC:and} other waye . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.45

I was well contented to see the same . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.46

He had him into a house , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.47

and tyed a halter aboute the wrestes of his handes ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.48

and hoysed him vp over a beame , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,58.49

and <P_59> there dyd let him hang a good while : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.50

at the length , for very paine he required for Gods sake to let him down
. HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.51

So he that was both deafe and dome coulde in short tyme both heare and
speake . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.52

Then I tooke that money I could find in his pursse ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.53

and distributed the same to the poore people dwelling there , whiche was
xv. pence halfepeny , being all that we coulde finde .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.54

That done , and this merry myracle madly made , I sent them with my
seruaunt to the next Iusticer , where they preached on the Pyllery for
want of a Pulpet , and were well whypped , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.55

and none dyd bewayle them . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.56

<heading>

A DRONKEN TINCKAR . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.58

CAP. 13 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.59

<$$heading>

These dronken Tynckers , called also Prygges , be beastly people ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.61

and these yong knaves be the worst . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.62

These never go with_out their Doxes , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.63

and yf their women haue any thing about them , as apparell or lynnen ,
that is worth the selling , they laye the same to gage , or sell it
out_right , for bene bowse {COM:sic} at their bowsing ken {COM:sic} .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.64

And full sone wyll they bee wearye of them , and have a newe .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.65

When they happen one woorke at any good house , their Doxes lynger alofe
, HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.66

and tarry for them in some corner ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.67

and yf he taryeth longe from her , then she knoweth he hath worke ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.68

and walketh neare , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.69

and sitteth downe by him . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.70

For besydes money , he looketh for meate and drinke for doinge his dame
pleasure . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.71

For yf she have thre'e or foure holes in a pan , hee wyll make as many
more for spedy gaine . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.72

And if he se any old ketle , chafer , or pewter dish abroad in the yard
where he worketh , hee quicklye snappeth the same vp ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.73

and in to the booget it goeth round . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.74

Thus they lyue with deceite . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.75

I was crediblye informed , by such as could well tell , that one of
these tipling Tinckers with his dogge robbed by the high way iiij.
Pallyards and two Roges , six persons together , and tooke from them
aboue foure pound in ready money , and hide him after in a thicke woode
a daye or two , and so escaped vntaken . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.76

Thus with picking and stealing , mingled with a lytle worke for a
coulour , they passe their time . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,59.77

<P_60>

<heading>

A SWADDER , OR PEDLER . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.80

CAP. 14 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.81

<$$heading>

These Swadders and Pedlers bee not all euyll , but of an indifferent
behauiour . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.83

These stand in great awe of the upright men , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.84

for they have often both wares and money of them .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.85

But for_as_much as they se'eke gayne unlawfully against the lawes and
statutes of this noble realme , they are well worthy to be registred
among the number of vacabonds ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.86

and undoubtedly I haue hadde some of them brought before me , when I was
in commission of the peace , as malefactors , for bryberinge and
stealinge . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.87

And nowe of late it is a greate practes of the upright man , when he
hath gotten a botye , to bestowe the same upon a packefull of wares ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.88

and so goeth a time for his pleasure , because he would lyue with_out
suspition . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.89

<heading>

A IARKE_MAN , AND A PATRICO . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.91

CAP. 15 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.92

<$$heading>

For_as_much {COM:previous_word_"For_,_as_much"_emended} as these two
names , a Iarkeman and a Patrico , be'e in the old briefe of vacabonds ,
and set forth as two kyndes of euil doers , you shall vnderstande that a
Iarkeman hathe his name of a Iarke , which is a seale in their Language
, as one should make writinges and set seales for lycences and pasporte
. HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.94

And for trouth there is none that goeth aboute the countrey of them that
can eyther wryte so good and fayre a hand , either indite so learnedly ,
as I haue sene <font> and <$$font> handeled a number of them :
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.95

but haue the same made in good townes where they come , as what can not
be hadde for money , as the prouerbe sayth <paren> " <font> Omnia
venalia Rome <$$font> " <$$paren> , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.96

and manye hath confessed the same to me . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.97

Now , also , there is a Patrico , and not a Patriarcho , whiche in their
language is a priest that should make mariages tyll death dyd depart ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.98

but they haue none such , I am well assured ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.99

for I put you out of doubt that not one amongest
{COM:preceding_word_"amongest"_emended} a_hundreth of them are maried ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.100

for they take lechery for no sinne , but naturall fellowshyp and
good_lyking loue : so that I wyll not blot my boke with these two that
be not . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,60.101

<P_61>

<heading>

A DEMAUNDER FOR GLYMMAR . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.104

CAP. 16 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.105

<$$heading>

These Demaunders for glymmar be for the moste parte wemen ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.107

for glymmar , in their language , is fyre . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.108

These goe with fayned lycences and counterfayted wrytings , hauing the
hands and seales of suche gentlemen as dwelleth nere to the place ,
where they fayne them selues to have bene burnt , and their goods
consumed with fyre . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.109

They wyll most lamentable demaunde your charitie ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.110

and wyll quicklye shed salte teares , they be so tender_harted .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.111

They wyll neuer begge in that Shiere where their losses <paren> as they
say <$$paren> was . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.112

Some of these goe with slates at their backes , which is a she'ete to
lye in a nightes . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.113

The vpright men be very familiare with these kynde of wemen ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.114

and one of them helpes an other . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.115

A Demaunder for glymmar came vnto a good towne in Kente , to aske the
charitie of the people , hauinge a fayned lycens aboute her that
declared her misfortune by fyre , donne in Somerset shyre , walkinge
with a wallet on her shoulders , where in she'e put the deuotion of
suche as hadde no money to geue her ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.116

that is to saye , Malte , woll , baken , bread , and cheese ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.117

and alwayes , as the same was full , so was it redye money to her , when
she emptyed the same , where so euer shee trauelede :
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.118

thys harlot was , as they terme it , snowte fayre ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.119

and had an vpright man or two alwayes attendinge on her watche <paren>
whyche is on her parson <$$paren> , and yet so circumspecte , that they
woulde neuer bee se'ene in her company in any good towne , vnlesse it
were in smale vyllages where typling houses weare , eyther trauelinge
to_gether by the hygh wayes ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.120

but the troth is , by report , she would wekely be worth vi. or seuen
shyllinges with her begging and bycherye . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.121

This glimmering Morte , repayringe to an Ine in the sayde towne where
dwelt a wydow of fyftie wynter olde of good welth ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.122

but she had an vnthryftye sonne , whom she vsed as a chamberlaine to
attend gestes when they repared to her house : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.123

this amerous man , be_holdinge with ardante eyes thys glymmeringe
glauncer , was presentlye pyteouslye persed to the hart ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.124

and lewdlye longed to bee clothed under her lyuerye ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,61.125

and bestowinge a <P_62> fewe fonde wordes with her , vnderstode strayte
that she woulde be easlye perswaded to lykinge lechery ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.126

and as a man mased , mused howe to attayne to his purpose ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.127

for he hadde no money . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.128

Yet consideringe wyth hym selfe that wares woulde bee welcome , where
money wanted , hee went with a wannion to his mothers chamber ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.129

and there sekinge aboute for odde endes , at length founde a lytle
whystell of syluer that his mother dyd vse customablye to weare on , and
had forgot the same for haste that morninge , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.130

and offeres the same closely to this manerly marian , that yf she would
mete hym on the backesyde of the towne and curteously kys him with_out
constraynt , she shoulde bee mystres thereof , and it weare much better
. HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.131

" Well , " sayth she , " you are a wanton ; " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.132

and beholdinge the whystell , was farther in loue there with then
rauysht wyth his person , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.133

and agred to mete him presently , and to accomplyshe his fonde fancy : -
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.134

to be short , and not tedyous , a quarter of a myle from the towne , he
merely toke measure of her vnder a bawdye bushe ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.135

so she gaue hym that she had not , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.136

and he receiued that he coulde not ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.137

and taking leue of eche other with a curteous kysse , she plesantly
passed forth one her iornaye , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.138

and this vntoward lycorous chamberlayne repayred home warde .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.139

But or these two tortylles tooke there leue , the good wyfe myssed her
whystell , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.140

and sent one of her maydenes in to her chamber for the same ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.141

and being long sawght for , none coulde be founde ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.142

her mystres hering that , diligent search was made for the same ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.143

and that it was taken awaye , began to suspecte her vnblessed babe ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.144

and demaunded of her maydens whether none of them sawe her sonne in her
chamber that morning , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.145

and one of them aunswered that she sawe him not there , but comming from
thens : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.146

then had she ynough , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.147

for well she wyste that he had the same , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.148

and sent for him , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.149

but he could not be founde . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.150

Then she caused her hosteler , in whome she had better affyaunce in for
his trouth , - and yet not one amongst twenty of them but haue well left
there honesty , <paren> As I here a great sorte saye <$$paren> - to come
vnto her , whiche attended to knowe her pleasure .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.151

" Goo , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.152

seke out , " saythe she , " my vntowarde sonne ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.153

and byd hym come speake with me . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,62.154

" I sawe him go out , " saythe he , " halfe an houre <P_63> sithens one
the backesyde . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.155

I hadde thought you hadde sent him of your arrante . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.156

" I sent him not , " quoth she ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.157

" goo , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.158

loke him out . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.159

This hollowe hosteler toke his staffe in his necke ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.160

and trudged out apace that waye he sawe him before go ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.161

and had some vnderstanding , by one of the maydens , that his mistres
had her whistell stolen and suspected her sonne ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.162

and he had not gone farre but that he espyed him comming homeward alone
, HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.163

and , meting him , axed where he had ben . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.164

" Where haue I bene ? " quoth he , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.165

and began to smyle . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.166

" Now , by the mas , thou hast bene at some baudy banquet . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.167

" Thou hast euen tolde trouth , " quoth thys chamberlayne .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.168

" Sewerly , " quoth this hosteler , " thou haddest the same woman that
begged at our house , to_day , for the harmes she had by fyre :
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.169

where is she ? " quoth he . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.170

" She is almost a myle by this tyme , " quoth this chamberlayne .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.171

" Where is my mystres whystell ? " quoth this hosteler ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.172

" for I am well assured that thou haddest it , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.173

and I feare me thou hast geuen it to that harlot . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.174

" Why ! is it myssed ? " quoth this chamberlayne .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.175

" Yea , " quoth this hosteler , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.176

and shewed him all the hole circumstaunce , what was both sayde and
thought on him for the thing . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.177

" Well , I wyl tell the , " quoth this Chamberlayne .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.178

" I wyl@ @be playne with the . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.179

I had it in dede , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.180

and haue geuen the same to this woman , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.181

and I praye the make the best of it , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.182

and helpe nowe to excuse the matter , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.183

and yet surely and thou wouldest take so much payne for the as to
ouer_take her , <paren> for she goeth but softly , and is not yet farre
of <$$paren> and take the same from her , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.184

and I am euer thyne assured fre'ende . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.185

" Why , then , go with me , " quoth this hostler .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.186

" Nay , in faythe , " quoth this Chamberlayne ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.187

what is frear then gift ? HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.188

and I hadde prety pastime for the same , " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.189

" Hadest thou so ? " quoth this hosteler ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.190

" nowe , by the masse , and I wyll have some to ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.191

or I wyll lye in the duste or I come agayne . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.192

Passing with hast to ouer_take this paramoure , within a myle from the
place where he departed he ouertoke her , hauing an upright man in her
company , a stronge and a sturdye vacabond HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.193

some what amased was this hosteler to se one familiarly in her company ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.194

for he had well hopped to haue had some delycate dalyance , as his
fellowe hadde ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,63.195

but , seinge the matter so fall out {SIC:fallout} , and being of <P_64>
good corage , and thinking to him selfe that one true man was better
then two false knaues , and being on the high way , thought vpon helpe ,
if nede had bene , by such as had passed to and fro , Demaunded fersely
the whistell that she had euen nowe of his fellowe .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.196

" Why , husband , " quoth she , " can you suffer this wretche to
slaunder your wyfe ? " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.197

A_vaunt verlet {COM:sic} , " quoth this vpright man ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.198

and letes dryue with all his force at this hosteler ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.199

and after halfe_a_dosen blowes , he strycks his staffe out of his hande
, HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.200

and as this hosteler stept backe to haue taken vp his staffe agayne ,
his glymmeringe Morte flinges a great stone at him ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.201

and strake him one the heade that downe hee fales , wyth the bloud about
his eares , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.202

and whyle he'e laye thus {TEXT:this} amased , the vpright man snatches
awaye his pursse , where in hee hadde money of his mystresses as well as
of his owne , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.203

and there let him lye , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.204

and went a_waye with spede that they were neuer harde of more .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.205

When this drye beaten hosteler was come to him selfe , he'e fayntlye
wandereth home , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.206

and crepethe in to hys couche , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.207

and restes his ydle heade : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.208

his mystres harde that he'e was come in , and layde him downe on his
beade , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.209

repayred straight vnto him , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.210

and aske hym what he ayled , and what the cause was of his so sudden
lying one his bed . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.211

" What is the cause ? " quoth this hosteler ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.212

" your whystell , your whistel , " speaking the same pyteouslye thre or
foure tymes . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.213

" Why , fole , " quoth his mystrisse , " take no care for that ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.214

for I doe not greatly waye it ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.215

it was worth but three shyllinges foure pens . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.216

" I would it had bene burnt for foure yeares agon . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.217

" I praye the why so , " quoth his mystres ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.218

" I think thou art mad . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.219

" Nay , not yet , " quoth this hosteler , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.220

" but I haue bene madly handlyd . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.221

" Why , what is the matter ? " quoth his mystres ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.222

and was more desirous to know the case . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.223

" And you wyl for_geue my fellowe and me , I wyll shewe you ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.224

or els I wyll neuer doe it . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.225

She'e made hym presently faithfull promisse that she'e woulde .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.226

" Then , " saythe he , " sende for your sonne home agayne , whyche is
ashamed to loke you in the face . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.227

" I agre there to , " sayth she'e . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.228

" Well , then , " quoth this hosteler , " youre sonne hathe geuen the
same Morte that begged here , for the burninge of her house , a whystell
, HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.229

and you haue geuen her v. shyllinges in money ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,64.230

<P_65>

and I haue geuen her ten shyllinges of my owne . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.232

" Why , howe so ? " quoth she . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.233

Then he sadly showed her of his myshap , with all the circumstaunce that
you haue harde before , and howe hys purse was taken awaye , and xv.
shyllinges in the same , where of v. shyllinges was her money and v.
shyllinges his owne money . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.234

" Is this true ? " quoth his mystres . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.235

" I , by my trouth , " quoth this hosteler , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.236

" and nothing greues me so much , neyther my beating , neither the losse
of my money , as doth my euell and wreched lucke . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.237

" Why what is the matter ? " quoth his mystres .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.238

" Your sonne , " saythe this hosteler , " had some chere and pastyme for
that whystell , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.239

for he laye with her , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.240

and I haue bene well beaten , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.241

and haue had my pursse taken from me , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.242

and you knowe your sonne is merrye and pleasaunt , and can kepe no great
councell ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.243

and then shall I be@ @mocked and loughed {COM:sic} to skorne in all
places when they shall here howe I have bene serued . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.244

" Nowe , out vpon you knaues both , " quoth his mystres ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.245

and laughes oute the matter ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.246

for she well sawe it would not other wyse preuayle .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.247

<heading>

A BAWDY BASKET . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.249

CAP. 17 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.250

<$$heading>

These Bawdy baskets be also wemen , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.252

and go with baskets and Capcases on their armes , where in they haue
laces , pynnes , nedles , white ynkell , and round sylke gyrdles of al
coulours . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.253

These wyl bye conneyskins , and steale linen clothes of on hedges .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.254

And for their trifles they wil procure of mayden seruants , when their
mystres or dame is oute of the waye , either some good peece of be'efe ,
baken , or che'ese , that shal@ @be worth xij. pens , for ii. pens of
their toyes . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.255

And as they walke by the waye , they often gaine some money with their
instrument , by such as they sodaynely mete withall .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.256

The vpright men haue good acquayntance with these ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.257

and will helpe and relieue them when they want .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.258

Thus they trade their lyues in lewed lothsome lechery .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.259

Amongest them all is but one honest woman , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.260

and she is of good yeares ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.261

her name is Ione Messenger . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.262

I haue had good proofe of her , as I haue learned by the true report of
diuers . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,65.263

<P_66>

There came to my gate the last sommer , Anno Domini .1566 , a very
miserable man , and much deformed , as burnt in the face , blere_eyde ,
and lame of one of his legges that he went with a crouche .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.265

I axed him wher he was borne , and where he dwelt last ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.266

and shewed him that thether he must repaire and be releued , and not to
range aboute the countrey ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.267

and seing some cause of cherytie , I caused him to haue meate and drinke
, HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.268

and when he had dronke , I demaunded of him whether he was neuer spoyled
of the vpright man or Roge . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.269

" Yes , that I haue , " quoth he , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.270

" and not this seuen yeres , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.271

for so long I haue gon abroad , I had not so much taken from me , and so
euyll handeled , as I was within these iiij. dayes . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.272

" Why , how so ? " quoth I . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.273

" In good fayth , sir , " quoth he'e , " I chaunced to mete with one of
these bawdy baskets which had an upright man in her company ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.274

and as I would haue passed quietly by her , ' man , ' sayth she vnto
{SIC:vnto_vnto} her make , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.275

' do you not se this ylfauored , windshaken knaue ? '
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.276

' Yes , ' quoth the vpright man ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.277

' what saye you to him ? ' HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.278

' this knaue oweth me ii. shyllings for wares that he had of me , halfe
a yere a_go , I think it well . ' HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.279

Sayth this upright man , ' syra , ' sayth he , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.280

' paye your dets . ' HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.281

Sayth this poore man , ' I owe her none , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.282

nether dyd I euer bargane with her for any thinge ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.283

and I {COM:preceding_word_"I"_emended} am
{COM:preceding_word_"am"_emended} {COM:edit._1573} aduysed I neuer sawe
her before in all my lyfe . ' HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.284

' Mercy , god ! ' quoth she , ' what a lyinge knave is this ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.285

and he wil not paye you , husband , beat him suerly , '
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.286

and the vpright man gaue me thre or foure blowes on my backe and
shoulders , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.287

and would haue beat me worsse and I had not geuen hym all the money in
my pursse , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.288

and in good fayth , for very feare , I was fayne to geue him xiiij.
pens , which was all the money that I had . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.289

' Why , ' sayth this bawdy basket , ' hast thou no more ?
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.290

then thou owest me ten pens styll ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.291

and , be well assured that I wyll bee payde the next tyme I meete with
the'e . ' HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.292

And so they let me passe by them . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.293

I praye god saue and blesse me , and al other in my case , from such
wycked persons , " quoth this poore man . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.294

" Why , whether went they then ? " quoth I . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.295

" Into east Kent , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.296

for I mete with them thys@ @syde of Rochester .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.297

I haue dyuers tymes bene attempted , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,66.298

but <P_67> I neuer loste much before . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.299

I thanke god , there came styll company by a_fore this unhappy time . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.300

" Well , " quoth I , " thanke God of all , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.301

and repaire home into thy natyue countrey . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.302

<heading>

A AUTEM_MORT . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.304

CAP. 18 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.305

<$$heading>

These Autem_Mortes be maried wemen , as there be but a fewe .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.307

For Autem in their Language is a Churche ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.308

so she is a wyfe maried at the Church , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.309

and they be as chaste as a Cowe I haue , that goeth to Bull euery moone
, with what Bull she careth not . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.310

These walke most times from their husbands companye a moneth and more
to_gether , being asociate with another as honest as her selfe .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.311

These wyll pylfar clothes of hedges : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.312

some of them go with children of ten or xii. yeares of age ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.313

yf tyme and place serve for their purpose , they wyll send them into
some house , at the window , to steale and robbe , which they call in
their language , Milling of the ken ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.314

and wil go with wallets on their shoulders , and slates at their backes
. HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.315

There is one of these Autem_Mortes , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.316

she is now a widow , of fyfty yeres old ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.317

her name is Alice Milson : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.318

she goeth about with a couple of great boyes , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.319

the yongest of them is fast vpon xx. yeares of age ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.320

and these two do lye with her euery night , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.321

and she lyeth in the middes : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.322

she sayth that they be her children , that beteled be babes borne of
such abhominable bellye . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,67.323

<P_73>

<heading>

A DOXE . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,73.326

CAP. 20 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,73.327

<$$heading>

These Doxes be broken and spoyled of their maydenhead by the vpright men
, HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,73.329

and then they haue their name of Doxes , and not afore .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,73.330

And afterwarde she is common and indifferent for any that wyll vse her ,
as <font> homo <$$font> is a common name to all men .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,73.331

Such <P_74> as be fayre and some what handsome , kepe company with the
walkinge Mortes , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.332

and are redye alwayes for the vpright men , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.333

and are cheifely mayntayned by them ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.334

for others shal@ @be spoyled for their sakes : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.335

the other , inferior , sort wyll resorte to noble mens places , and
gentlemens houses , standing at the gate , eyther lurkinge on the
backesyde about backe houses , eyther in hedge rowes , or some other
thycket , expectinge their praye , which is for the vncomely company of
some curteous gest , of whome they be refreshed with meate and some
money , where exchange is made , ware for ware :
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.336

this bread and meate they vse to carrye in their greate hosen ; so that
these beastlye brybinge breeches serue manye tymes for bawdye purposes .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.337

I chaunced , not longe sithens , familiarly to commen with a Doxe that
came to my gate , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.338

and surelye a pleasant harlot , and not so pleasant as wytty , and not
so wytty as voyd of all grace and goodnes . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.339

I founde , by her talke , that she'e hadde passed her tyme lewdlye
eyghttene yeares in walkinge aboute . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.340

I thoughte this a necessary instrument to attayne some knowledge by ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.341

and before I woulde grope her mynde , I made her both to eate and drynke
well ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.342

that done , I made her faythfull promisse to geue her some money , yf
she would open and dyscouer to me such questions as I woulde demaunde of
her , and neuer to be'e_wraye her , neither to disclose her name .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.343

" And you shoulde , " sayth she , " I were vndon : "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.344

" feare not that , " quoth I , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.345

" but , I praye the , " quoth I , " say nothing but trouth . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.346

" I wyll not , " sayth she'e . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.347

" Then , first tell me , " quoth I , " how many vpright men and Roges
dost thou knowe , or hast thou knowne and , byn conuersaunt with , and
what their names be ? " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.348

She paused a whyle , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.349

and sayd , " why do you aske me , or wherefore ? "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.350

" For nothinge els , " as I sayde , " but that I woulde knowe them when
they came to my gate . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.351

" Nowe , by my trouth " <paren> quoth she <$$paren> " then are yea neuer
the neare , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.352

for all myne acquayntaunce , for the moste parte , are deade . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.353

" Dead ! " quoth I , " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.354

howe dyed they , for wante of cherishinge , or of paynefull diseases ?
" HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.355

Then she sighed , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.356

and sayde they were hanged . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.357

" What , all ? " quoth I , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.358

" and so manye walke abroade , as I dayelye see ? "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,74.359

" By my trouth , " quoth she , " I <P_75> knowe not paste six or seuen
by their names , " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.360

and named the same to me . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.361

" When were they hanged ? " quoth I . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.362

" Some seuen yeares a_gone , some thre'e yeares , and some within this
fortnight , " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.363

and declared the place where they weare executed , which I knewe well to
bee true , by the report of others . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.364

" Why " <paren> quoth I <$$paren> " dyd not this sorrowfull and
fearefull sight much greue the , and for thy tyme , longe and euyll
spent ? " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.365

" I was sory , " quoth shee , " by the Masse ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.366

for some of them were good louing men . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.367

For I lackt not when they had it , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.368

and they wanted not when I had it , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.369

and diuers of them I neuer dyd forsake , vntyll the Gallowes departed vs
. " HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.370

" O , mercyfull God ! " quoth I , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.371

and began to blesse me . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.372

" Why blesse ye ? " quoth she . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.373

" Alas ! good gentleman , euery one muste haue a lyuinge . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.374

Other matters I talked of ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.375

but this nowe maye suffice to shewe the Reader , as it weare in a glasse
, the bolde beastly lyfe of these Doxes . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.376

For suche as hath gone anye tyme abroade , wyll neuer forsake their
trade , to dye therefore . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.377

I haue hadde good profe thereof . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.378

There is one , a notorious harlot , of this affinitye , called Besse
Bottomelye ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.379

she hath but one hande , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.380

and she hath murthered two children at the least .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.381

<heading>

A DELL . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.383

CAP. 21 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.384

<$$heading>

A Dell is a yonge wenche , able for generation , and not yet knowen or
broken by the vpright man . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.386

These go abroade yong , eyther by the death of their parentes , and no
bodye to looke vnto them , or els by some sharpe mystres that they serue
, do runne away out of seruice ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.387

eyther she is naturally borne one , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.388

and then she is a wyld Dell : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.389

these are broken verye yonge ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.390

when they haue be'ene lyen with_all by the vpright man , then they be
Doxes , and no Dels . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.391

These wylde dels , beinge traded vp with their monstrous mothers , must
of necessytie be as euill , or worsse , then their parents ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.392

for neither we gather grapes from gre'ene bryars , neither fygs from
Thystels . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.393

But such buds , such blosoms , such euyll sede sowen , wel worsse beinge
growen . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,75.394

<P_76>

<heading>

A KYNCHIN MORTE HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.397

CAP. 22 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.398

<$$heading>

A Kynching Morte is a lytle Gyrle : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.400

the Mortes their mothers carries them at their backes in their slates ,
whiche is their shetes , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.401

and bryngs them vp sauagely , tyll they growe to be rype , and soone
rype , soone rotten . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.402

<heading>

A KYNCHEN CO HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.404

CAP. 23 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.405

<$$heading>

A Kynchen Co is a young boye , traden vp to suche peuishe purposes as
you haue harde of other young ympes before , that when he groweth vnto
yeres , he is better to hang then to drawe forth .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.407

<heading>

THEIR VSAGE IN THE NIGHT . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.409

CAP. 24 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.410

<$$heading>

Now I thinke it not unnecessary to make the Reader vnderstand how and in
what maner they lodge a nights in barnes or backe houses , and of their
vsage there , for_asmuch as I haue acquaynted them with their order and
practises a day times . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.412

The arche and chiefe walkers that hath walked a long time , whose
experience is great , because of their continuinge practise ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.413

I meane all Mortes and Doxes , for their handsomnes and diligence for
making of their couches . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.414

The men neuer trouble them selues with that thing ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.415

but takes the same to be the dutye of the wyfe .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.416

And she shuffels vp a quayntitye of strawe or haye into some pretye
carner of the barns where she maye conuenientlye lye ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.417

and well shakethe the same , makinge the heads some what hye ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.418

and dryues the same vpon the sydes and fete lyke a bed :
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.419

then she layeth her wallet , or some other lytle pack of ragges or
scrype under her heade in the strawe , to beare vp the same ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.420

and layethe her petycote or cloke vpon and over the strawe , so made
lyke a bedde , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.421

and that serueth for the blancket . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.422

Then she layeth her slate , which is her sheete , vpon that ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.423

and she have no she'ete , as fewe of them goe without , then she
spreddeth some large cloutes or rags ouer the same ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.424

and maketh her ready , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.425

and layeth her drouselye downe . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.426

Many wyll plucke of their smockes , and laye the same vpon them in stede
of their upper sheets , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,76.427

and all her other pelte and <P_77> trashe upon her also ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.428

and many lyeth in their smockes . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.429

And if the rest of her clothes in colde weather be not sufficient to
kepe her warme , then she taketh strawe or haye to performe the matter .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.430

The other sorts , that haue not slates , but toumble downe and couche a
hogshead in their clothes , these bee styll lousye ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.431

and shall neuer be with_out vermyn , vnlesse they put of theire clothes
, and lye as is a_boue sayde . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.432

If the upright man come in where they lye , he hath his choyse ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.433

and crepeth in close by his Doxe : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.434

the Roge hath his leauings . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.435

If the Morts or Doxes lye or be lodged in some Farmers barne , and the
dore be ether locked or made fast to them , then wyl not the upright man
presse to come in , Vnles it be in barnes and oute_houses standinge
alone , or some distance from houses , which be commonly knowne to them
, As saint Quintens , thre'e Cranes of the vintrey , Saynt Tybbes , and
Knapsbery . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.436

These foure be with_in one myle compasse neare unto London .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.437

Then have you iiij. more in Middlesex , drawe the pudding out of the
fyre in Harrow on the hyll parish , the Cross Keyes in Cranford parish ,
Saynt Iulyans in Thystell worth parish the house of pyty in Northhall
parysh . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.438

These are their chiefe houses neare about London , where commonly they
resorte unto for Lodgings , and maye repaire thether freelye at all
tymes . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.439

Sometyme shall come in some Roge , some pyckinge knave , a nymble Prygge
; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.440

he walketh in softly a nightes , when they be at their rest ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.441

and plucketh of as many garmentes as be ought worth that he maye come by
, and worth money and maye easely cary the same ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.442

and runneth a_waye with the same with great seleritye ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.443

and maketh porte sale at some convenient place of theirs , that some be
soone ready in the morning , for want of their Casters and Togemans .
Where in ste'ede of blessinge is cursing ; in place of praying ,
pestelent prating with odious othes and terrible threatninges .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.444

The upright men have geuen all these nycke_names to the places above
sayde . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.445

Yet {COM:preceding_word_"Yet"_emended} have we two notable places in
Kent , not fare from London : HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.446

the one is betwene Detforde and Rothered , called the Kynges barns ,
standing alone , that they haunt commonly ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.447

the other is Ketbroke , standinge by blacke heath , halfe a myle from
anye house . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,77.448

There wyll they boldlye drawe the latche of the doore , and <P_78> go in
when the good man with hys famyly be at supper , and syt downe without
leaue , and eate and drinke with them , and either lye in the hall by
the fyre all night , or in the barne , if there be no rome in the house
for them . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,78.449

If the doore be eyther bolted or lockt , if it be not opened vnto them
when they wyl , they wyl breake the same open to his farther cost .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,78.450

And in this barne sometyme do lye xl. vpright men with their Doxes
together at one time . HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,78.451

And this must the poore Farmer suffer , HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,78.452

or els they threaten him to burne him , and all that he hath .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P1,78.453

