<BEGIN_hatcher-1580-e2-p1>

<P_1.3,32>

My bounden duty remembred , with most humble recommendations
HATCHER-1580-E2-P1,1.3,32.3

whereas it hath pleased your honor to recommend unto me , and the Heads
of the University , my Lord of Oxenford his Players , that they might
shew their cunning in several Plays already practised by them before the
Queen's Majesty . I did speedily council with the Heads and others ,
viz. Dr. Still , Dr. Howland , Dr. Binge , Dr. Legge , &c.
HATCHER-1580-E2-P1,1.3,32.4

and considering and pondering that the seed , the cause , and the fear
of the Pestilence is not yet vanished and gone this hot time of the year
; this Midsummer Fair time having confluence out of all countries , as
well of infected as not ; the Commencement time at hand , which
requireth rather diligence in study , than dissoluteness in plays ; and
also that of late we denied that like to the right honorable the Lord
Leicester his servants ; and especially that all Assemblies in open
places be expressly forbidden in this University and Town , or within
five miles in compass , by her Majesty's Council's Letters to the
Vice_chancellor , 30=th= Octob. 1575 ; our trust is that your honor ,
our most clear loving Chancellor , will take our Answers made unto them
in good part ; HATCHER-1580-E2-P1,1.3,32.5

and being willing to impart something from the liberality of the
University to them , I could not obtain sufficient assent thereto ,
HATCHER-1580-E2-P1,1.3,32.6

and therefore I delivered them but xx =s=. towards their charges .
HATCHER-1580-E2-P1,1.3,32.7

Also they brought Letters from the right honorable the Lord Chancellor ,
and the right honorable the Lord of Sussex , to the Vice-Chancellors of
Cambridge and Oxford ; HATCHER-1580-E2-P1,1.3,32.8

I trust their Honors will accept their Answers .
HATCHER-1580-E2-P1,1.3,32.9

Thus leaving to trouble your honor with my rude writing , I take my
leave . HATCHER-1580-E2-P1,1.3,32.10

Your Lordships humble and unworthy deputy John Hatcher , Vice_Can.
HATCHER-1580-E2-P1,1.3,32.11

Cambridge HATCHER-1580-E2-P1,1.3,32.12

the xxi. of June 1580 . HATCHER-1580-E2-P1,1.3,32.13

