<BEGIN_hayward-1612-e2-p1>

<P_1>

<heading>

THE FIRST YEAR . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,1.4

<$$heading>

The last sicknesse of Queene Mary was both exceeding sharpe and of long
continuance , her body being wearyed , and almost wasted , with the
violence of her disease ; her minde anguished with thoughts , no lesse
strange for variety , then strong for the great importance they drewe ,
whereof some <paren> doubtlesse <$$paren> were secret and singular .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,1.6

And whilest she lay thus languishing under the heavy hand of death ,
many false rumours were spreade abroade that shee was deade : whereupon
a notable example might have been seene how in a royall State the surety
of the common people dependes much upon the life and safety of their
Prince . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,1.7

For every man's mynd was then travayled with a strange confusione of
conceits , all things being immoderately eyther dreaded or desired .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,1.8

Every report was greedily both inquired and received , all truthes
suspected , diverse tales beleeved , many improbable conjectures hatched
and nourished . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,1.9

Invasione of strangeres , civill dissentione , the doubtfull
dispositione of the succeeding Prince , were cast in every man's
conceite as present perills ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,1.10

but noe man did buysy {COM:sic} his witts in contriving remedyes .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,1.11

They who held themselves in dangere , <P_2> seemed to desire nothing but
safety : HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,2.12

they who apprehended any opinione of safety , did rise into unreasonable
desire of liberty ; wherein they were as various as in any thing beside
, as well for the particulars , as for the limitts of that which they
desired . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,2.13

In this medley of thoughts , some thought to serve themselves by
adherents , some {COM:thought_to_serve_themselves} by adjoyning to those
whoe had more to lose than themselves ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,2.14

some stood upon their proper strength , either for their owne
preservation , or for abating of such as they esteemed too great .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,2.15

Generally , the rich were fearefull , the wise carefull , the honestly-@
@disposed doubtfull , the discontented and the desperate , and all such
whose desires were both immoderate and evill , joyfull , as wishing
trouble , the gate of spoyle . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,2.16

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_1}

<P_11>

This place was prepared for her aboade , both with furniture and
officers of assurance and credite ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,11.19

with the Lievetenaunt of the Tower two of trust were joyned in
Commission , one skilfull to put the house in order , the other to make
provision of diett . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,11.20

Soe shee remained here untill the fift day of December ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,11.21

and then remooved , by barge , to Somerset-howse , in the Strand .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,11.22

In the meane tyme certaine Commissioners were appoynted for the Funerall
of the deceased Queene , others for the Coronatione that was to ensue .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,11.23

New Commissiones were sent into Walles , and the Marches of the North .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,11.24

Thomas Earle of Sussex was {COM:preceding_word_"was"_emended} appointed
{COM:preceding_word_"appointed"_emended} for
{COM:preceding_word_"for"_emended} Ireland
{COM:preceding_word_"Ireland"_emended} ,
{COM:preceding_word_","_emended} who {COM:preceding_word_"who"_emended}
with a garrison of three_hundred_twenty horse , and eight_hundred_sixty
foote , kept that country eyther in obedience , or awe .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,11.25

New Commissions were made to the Judges of the Law , to continue only
untill the end of that Terme ; but with exceptione , that they should
not in the meane time bestow any offices . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,11.26

All the Counsellers in the State who had served Queene Mary , and
favoured the Religeone then established , were againe admitted to their
proper places . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,11.27

To these were adjoyned William Parre , Marquesse of Northampton ,
Francis <P_12> Russell , Earle of Bedford , Thomas Parre , Edward
Rogeres , Ambrose Cave , Francis Knolles , and William Cecill , and ,
soon after , Nicholas Bacon , men of assured understanding and truth ,
and well affected to the Protestant Relligeon .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.28

All these the Queene ruled with such moderation , as shee was never
obnoxious to any of them , and all devoted and addicted to her .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.29

New Justices and Sheriffes were appoynted in every shire ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.30

and Writs went foorth to summon a Parliament , agaynst the time of
Coronation . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.31

Ambassadours were appoynted to the Pope , to the Emperour , and other
Princes of Germany , to the French King , to the King of Spaine , to the
King of Denmarke , and to the State of Venice , to renue leagues , to
remove all prejudice that might be conceived , to performe unto them
openly all ceremonyes of State , and secretly to search into their
inclinationes . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.32

The Ambassadour into Spain had further in charge , to make a thankfull
acknowledgement in the name of the Queene , of all the honourable
offices which the King did unto her whilest hee was married to Queene
Mary her sister . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.33

The Ambassadour into Rome interteyned many treaties with the Pope .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.34

The Pope desired above all things , that Relligeon should not be changed
in England , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.35

This did not the Ambassadour eyther obstinately deny , or any wayes
grant ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.36

but it could not bee assured he said , unlesse the Pope would first
declare to his Catholickes , that the marriage of the Queene's mother
with King Henry was lawfull . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.37

This crosse_request so stumbled the Conclave , that they made choyse
rather to doe nothing , than to doe that which they were not assured
they should not repent . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.38

Uppon the thirteenth of December the body of Queene Mary was honorably
conveyed from Saint Jeames , where she died , to the Abbey of
Westminster , and there placed under a rich Herse , where it remayned
that night . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,12.39

The next daye , after a Masse of Requiem , and a Sermon , preached by
Doctor White , Bishop of Winchester , shee was buried on the North side
of the Chappell , <P_13> built by King Henry the Seventh .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,13.40

Upon the foure_and_twentieth December a solemne obsequie was kept in the
same Abbey , Queene Maryes Herse yet standing covered with a rich
pall-cloth of gold , for Charles the fift , Emperour , who dyed in
September next before ; in which solemnity the Emperors Ambassadour was
cheife mourner . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,13.41

All this tyme no change was made , none attempted , in matters of
Relligeone , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,13.42

only a preparatione thereto was made , by changing some officers both in
Houshold and in State . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,13.43

Among these , Doctor Heath , Archbishopp of Yorke , was removed from
being Lord Chancelour of England , a man of most eminent and generous
simplicity , who esteemed any thing privately unlawfull , which was not
publicklye beneficiall and good . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,13.44

But as it is noe new thing for merchants to breake , for saylers to be
drowned , for soldiers to be slayn ; so is it not for men in authority
to fall . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,13.45

Hee was the last cleargie man , who during the Queenes life did beare
the honour of that place . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,13.46

In his steade Sir Nicholas Bacon , Knight , was made Lord Keepour of the
great seale of England , a man of greate diligence and ability in his
place , whose goodnesse preserved his greatnesse from suspicion , envye
and hate . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,13.47

But , upon the last of December , Proclamatione was published , that in
all Churches the Letany , the Epistle and the Gospell , should be reade
in the English tongue , according as it was used in the Queenes Chappell
; which , the daye following , being Sundaye , was done in all the
Churches within London , and neere unto it . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,13.48

And , as this was the first act of the alternatione which ensued , soe
was it most plausible to the people . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,13.49

The common people at that time conceived a hard opinione against the
Clergy <paren> howsoever , blinded with selfe-love , they perswaded
themselves that they wer loved <$$paren> HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,13.50

and charged them with <P_14> many imputationes , mens tongues being
alwayes prone to taunt their superiores ; and the worst speaking worst ,
hoping to shadow themselves under the blemishes of their betters .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,14.51

Some charged them with cruelty , in persecuting more to death for the
cause of Relligeone , in five yeres during Queene Maryes reigne , then
had bene executed in thirty-seven yeares under King Henry the eight .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,14.52

Some taxed them with covetousnesse , some with pride ; vices happily
observed in some , and maliciously extended to all .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,14.53

But all men were heard to murmurre and complayne , that not onely the
Scriptures , but the publick prayeres were concealed from their
understanding , as if thereby they were excluded <paren> almost
<$$paren> from the condition of beeing Christianes , in that they wer
not permitted to heare God by the one , nor to speake to him by the
other . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,14.54

And , as in other countryes thes had bene the principall pretenses of
defection from the Church of Rome , soe here this first morsell of
Prayer and Scripture in the English toungue was not only most sweetly
swallowed by the common people , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,14.55

but also served for a preparatione to the further change which
afterwardes ensued . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,14.56

Upon the twelfth of January the Queene removed by water from Westminster
to the Tower , attended with the Mayor , Aldermen , and other Cytizens
in their Barges , adorned with Scutchions , and Banners of their
Mysteryes , and sounding lowd musick all the way .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,14.57

Shee passed under the Bridge about one of the clocke in the afternoone ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,14.58

and landed upon the privy stayres at the Tower , from whence the Mayor
and his Company returned to the Three Craynes in the Vine-tree .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,14.59

The day following , Sir William Parre , Knight , was created Marquesse
of Northampton , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,14.60

Edward Seymour <P_15> was made Viscount Beauchampe , and Earle of
Hartford , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,15.61

Lord Thomas Howard was made Viscount of Bindon , Sir Oliver Saint John ,
Knight , Lord Saint John of Bletso , Sir Henry Carew , Knight , Lord
Carew of Hunsden . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,15.62

Assuredly , as this Queene was not prodigall in any thing , soe was shee
most sparing in distributione of honor , whereby shee advanced it to a
very high valuatione with all men . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,15.63

Upon the fourteenth day of January , in the afternoon , shee passed from
the Tower through the City of London to Westminster , most royally
furnished , both for her persone and for her trayne , knowing right well
that in pompous ceremonies a secret of government doth much consist ,
for that the people are naturally both taken and held with exteriour
shewes . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,15.64

The Nobility and Gentlemen wer very many , and noe lesse honourably
furnished . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,15.65

The rich attire , the ornaments , the beauty of Ladyes , did add
particular graces to the solemnity , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,15.66

and held the eyes and hearts of men dazeled betweene contentment and
admiratione . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,15.67

When shee <P_16> tooke her coach within the Tower , she made a solemne
thanksgiving to God , that he had delivered her noe lesse mercifully ,
noe lesse mightily from her imprisonment in that place , then he had
delivered Daniell from the lyones denne : that hee had preserved her
from those dangers wherwith shee was both invironed and overwhelmed , to
bring her to the joye and honour of that daye .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,16.68

As shee passed through the City , nothing was omitted to doe her the
highest honours , which the Citizens <paren> whoe could procure good use
both of purses and inventiones <$$paren> were able to perfourme .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,16.69

It were the part of an idle orator , to describe the Pageants , the
Arkes , and other well devised honoures done unto her ; the order , the
beauty , the majestie of this actione , the high joye of some , the
silence and reverence of other , the constant contentment of all ; their
untired patience never spent , eyther with long expecting <paren> some
of them from a good part of the night before <$$paren> or with
unsatiable beholding the Ceremonies of that day .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,16.70

The Queene was not negligent on her part to descend to all pleasing
behavior , which seemed to proceede from a naturall gentleness of
disposition , and not from any strayned desire of popularity or
insinuatione . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,16.71

Shee gave due respect to all sorts of persones , wherin the quicknesse
of her spirit did worke more actively than did her eyes .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,16.72

When the people made the ayre ring with praying to God for her
prosperity , shee thanked them with exceeding livelinesse both of
countenance and voyce , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,16.73

and wished neither prosperity nor safety to her selfe , which might not
bee for their common good . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,16.74

As she passed by the Companyes of the City , standing in their liveryes
, shee tooke particular knowledge of them , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,16.75

and graced them with many witty formalityes of speech .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,16.76

Shee diligently both observed and commended such devises as were
presented unto her , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,16.77

and to that end sometimes caused her coach to <P_17> stand still ,
sometimes to be removed to places of best advantage for hearing and for
sight ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.78

and in the mean time fairely intreated the people to be silent .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.79

And when shee understoode not the meaning of any representatione , or
could not perfectly heare some speeches that wer made , shee caused the
same to be declared unto her . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.80

When the Recorder of the City presented to her a purse of crimson sattin
, very richly and curiously wrought , and therein a_thousand markes in
gold , with request that shee would continue a gracious Mistris to the
City ; Shee answered , That shee was bound in a naturall obligatione so
to doe , not soe much for ther gold , as for ther good wills : that as
they had beene at great expence of treasure that daye , to honour her
passage , so all the dayes of her life shee would be ready to expend not
only her treasure , but the dearest dropps of her bloode , to maintayne
and increase ther flourishing estate . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.81

When shee espyed a Pageant at the Little Conduite in Cheape , shee
demanded <paren> as it was her custome in the rest <$$paren> what should
be represented therein : HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.82

Answeare was made , that Time did there attend for her :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.83

" Time ? <paren> sayd she <$$paren> HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.84

How is that possible , seeing it is tyme that hath brought mee hither ?
" HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.85

Here a Bible in English richly covered was let downe unto her by a silk
lace from a child that represented Truth . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.86

Shee kissed both her hands , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.87

with both her hands shee received it , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.88

then shee kissed it : HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.89

afterwardes applyed it to her brest : HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.90

and lastly held it up , thanking the City especially for that gift , and
promising to be a diligent reader thereof . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.91

When any good wishes were cast forth for her vertuous and religious
government , shee would lift up her hands towards Heaven , and desire
the people to answer , Amen . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.92

When it was told her that an auncient Citizen turned his heade backe and
wept : " I warrant you " <paren> said she <$$paren> " it is for joy ; "
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.93

and so in very deede it was . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,17.94

Shee cheerfully received not <P_18> only rich giftes from persons of
worth , but Nosegayes , Floweres , Rose-marie branches , and such like
presents , offered unto her from very meane persones , insomuch as it
may truly be saide , that there was neyther courtesy nor cost cast away
that daye uppon her . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.95

It is incredible how often shee caused her coach to staye , when any
made offer to approach unto her , whither to make petitione , or whither
to manifest their loving affectiones . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.96

Hereby the people , to whom no musicke is soe sweete as the affability
of ther Prince , were so strongly stirred to love and joye , that all
men contended how they might most effectually testify the same ; some
with plausible acclamations , some with sober prayers , and many with
silent and true-hearted teares , which were then seen to melt from their
eyes . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.97

And afterwardes , departing home , they so stretched every thing to the
highest streyne , that they inflamed the like affectiones in otheres .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.98

It is certaine , that thes high humilities , joyned to justice , are of
greater power to winne the hearts of people than any , than all other
vertues beside . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.99

All other vertues are expedient for a Prince , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.100

all are advised , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.101

but thes are necessary , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.102

thes are enjoyned ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.103

without many other a Prince may stand , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.104

but without thes upon every occasione he standes in danger .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.105

The day following , being Sundaye , shee was , with all accustomed
ceremonyes , crowned in the Abbey Church at Westminster ; having made
demonstration of soe many Princely vertues before , that all men were of
opinione that one crowne was not sufficent to adorne them .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.106

The Coronation ended , shee passed in greate state to Westminster Hall ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.107

and ther dined . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,18.108

<P_19>

During thes tymes a Parliament had bene summoned to begin at Westminster
upon the twenty-fifth day of this month of January .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,19.110

And now wer certaine Divines returned from beyond the Seas , who in the
tyme of Queene Mary forsooke the Realme upoon conscience for Relligione
, and <paren> with no lesse magnanimity despising honours , then others
did affect them , <$$paren> remained voluntarie exiles untill the tyme
of her death , some distressed with dangeres , others assured by
obscurity and contempt , none of them wanting abundance of want .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,19.111

These were exceedingly both favoured and followed by the common people ,
who , having litle knowledge to judge of knowledge , did out of
affectione immoderately extoll their learning and vertue , supposing
that for the one they could not err themselves , and for the other they
would not seduce others . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,19.112

Between thes and the Prelates of the Realme a publicke conference was
agreed to be held concerning poynts of controversie in Religione .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,19.113

By the Prelates nine persones were appointed , five Bishopps and fowre
Doctores , men for the most part mellowed in contemplacione , a glorious
title to shadow sloath . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,19.114

On the other side were apointed , Doctor Scory , Doctor Coxe , Doctor
Sands , Master Whitehead , Master Grindall , Master Horne , Master Guest
, Master Elmer , and Master Jewell , men esteemed the more worthy of
advancement , because they seemed nothing to desire it ; of most of whom
somewhat <P_20> shall be said in particular hereafter .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,20.115

The place was prepared in Westminster Church , where a table was sett
for the Bishopps and their associates uppon one side of the Quire , and
another table for the opposites on the other side .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,20.116

At the upper end a table was placed whereat the Queenes Councell should
sit . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,20.117

The residue of the Nobility and others of the Parliament were appoynted
to bee present , for satisfactione of their consciences and for
directione of the judgments <paren> as it was sayde <$$paren> touching
such poyntes of Religeone as were to be treated and concluded in the
Parliament . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,20.118

The Articles propounded agaynst the Bishopps and ther adherents were
these : HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,20.119

1 . That it is against the word of God , and the custome of the
auncient Church , to use a toungue unknowen to the people in Common
Prayer , and in the administratione of the Sacraments .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,20.120

2 . That every Church hath authority to appoynt , take awaye , and
change Ceremonyes and Ecclesiasticall Rites , soe the same be to
edificatione . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,20.121

3 . That it can@ @not be proved by the Word of God , that there is in
the Masse offered upp a Sacrifice Propitiatory for the living and the
deade . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,20.122

Now for the manner of this conference , the Bishoppes requested that it
might be perfourmed in writing . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,20.123

This was easily yeelded unto , for that in disputatione by words ,
besides confusiones , besides digressiones , which are often occasioned
, the truth many tymes , eyther by boldnesse of spirit , or by
nimblenesse of wit , or by strength , or by readinesse , or smoothnesse
of speech , or else by some pleasing gesture and behaviour , is eyther
altogether overborne or much obscured . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,20.124

Hereupon the Apostle sayth , To contend with words is profitable to
nothing but onely to the subversione of the hearers .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,20.125

Soe it was ordered , that the Bishopps , because they were superioures
in dignity , should first declare ther opiniones , and the reasones of
them in writing , and that their opposites <P_21> the same daye should
doe the like : That eyther party should deliver a coppy of ther writing
to the other ; That yf they would make any answeare thereto agaynst
another daye , which should bee appoynted , they should prepare the same
in writing : that all this should be perfourmed in the English toungue .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.126

Upon the first day of ther meeting , which was Fridaye the last of March
, in the foorenoone , both parties appeared HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.127

and tooke their place ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.128

but the Bishopps brought nothing in writing . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.129

This did greatly displease the heareres , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.130

and mooved many to breake forth into open shew of discontentment .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.131

The Bishopps excused themselves that they had mistaken the order ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.132

but they wer ready to dispute <paren> they sayde <$$paren>
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.133

and , for that time , came to declare their myndes by speech .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.134

The Lords of the Councell wer much vexed at this variatione ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.135

yet their wisdome held their thoughts so well repressed , that the
Bishopps might rather suspect than discerne that they were offended .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.136

At the last , they wer permitted , without any greate reproofe , to
declare by speach what they had to say touching the first Article ,
under promise that they should reduce their speech into writing , and ,
according to the first order , deliver the same to the other party .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.137

Then Doctor Cole , Deane of Paules , made a large declaratione
concerning the first poynt ; partly by speech onely , and partly by
reading authorities , which he had written . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.138

He spent so much speech in commending divers persones , in insisting
upon former generall determinationes of the same doubts , and uppon
other circumstances of winning favour , and so sleightly slipped over
the substance of the cause , that many compared him to men unwisely
liberall , more forward to give presents then to pay debts .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.139

When he had ended , the Lords of the Councell demanded if any of them
had more to saye : whereto answeare was returned , " Noe . "
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,21.140

Then the other party , after a short prayer , with a protestation to
stand to the doctrine of the Catholique Church , <P_22> grounded uppon
the Scriptures , exhibited a written booke which was distinctly read by
Master Horne , sometyme Deane of Duresme . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,22.141

This done , some of the Bishoppes began to affirme , that they had much
more to say to the first Article . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,22.142

Hereuppon it was ordered , that uppon Mundaye then next ensuing both
parties should bring in writing what they thought fitt touching the
second Article , and the third , if they could , which , being openly
reade , either party should deliver the same writings to the other :
That in the meane time they should put that into writing which Doctor
Cole had spoken that day and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended}
whatsoever {COM:preceding_word_"whatsoever"_emended} they
{COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} thought
{COM:preceding_word_"thought"_emended} fit
{COM:preceding_word_"fit"_emended} to {COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended}
adde {COM:preceding_word_"adde"_emended} thereto
{COM:preceding_word_"thereto"_emended} : that they should send the same
forthwith to the other partie , and should againe receive of them that
which Master Horne had read : that at the next meeting a daye should bee
appoynted to exhibite answeares touching the first Article .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,22.143

To these orderes both sides agreed , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,22.144

and soe the assembly dissolved for that tyme .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,22.145

Mundaye being come , and the place of assembly both with Actors and
Auditores fully furnished , the Bishopps <paren> for what cause they
would not discover , and therefore was it conjectured at the worst ,
<$$paren> refused eyther to reade , or exhibit , any thing in writing
touching the second Article , as it had beene appoynted :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,22.146

but sayd , that they would reade onely to the first , pretending , that
albeit they had spoken to that question the daye before , yet they
should bee disadvantaged if they should not reade also that which they
had conceived in writing . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,22.147

This was granted , upon conditione , that when they had done , they
should also proceede to the second question : HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,22.148

but then they refused to begin to any Article , pretending that their
adversaries maintained the affirmative , and that it was contrary to the
order of schooles , that they who maintayned the negative should beginne
. HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,22.149

The Lord Keeper did , first with wordes of amity and office , fayrely
intreate , then earnestly , and , at the last , sharpely require <P_23>
them , not to stand upon the order of Schooles , but to performe that
order whereunto both they had consented , and were injoyned .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.150

This they absolutely refused , with such high behavior , such vayne
surmises and evasiones , as they seemed litle to regard eyther the
honourable presence , or their owne reputatione , or the creditt of the
cause . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.151

The Lords pressed them to declare the reasones of their refusall , least
happely they should be taken to be worse then they wer .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.152

The Bishops afirmed that they did it for many reasones ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.153

but not expressing any one , they condemned themselves by their owne
silence , eyther that they had noe reasones at all , or that they feared
to have them disclosed . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.154

Thus the assembly was dissolved , the expectatione frustrated , the
purpose disappointed . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.155

The Lord Keeper at his departure said , " Seeing you are not willing
that we should heare you , it is likely that shortly you shall heare of
us . " HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.156

The people discoursed diversly hereof , disagreeing noe lesse in fancy
than in face . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.157

Some disallowed disputationes in this cause , where the victory is
carried by the swaye of the state ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.158

others disliked the manner of the disputatione , that men should meete
together to contend by writing . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.159

But most of all condemned the Bishopps , who first desired , then
approved , and , in the end , resisted , this manner of disputing .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.160

And the more obscure the causes wer the greater did they seeme , and the
more strange constructiones were made of them , their silence being
imputed by most men rather to pride then eyther modesty or feare .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.161

It is very probable that the Bishopps could eyther not be provided in
soe short a time , their myndes being somewhat clogged with former
pleasures and present cares ; or else , that they discerned such an
inclinatione against them that all their hopes did playnely vanish .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.162

And , beeing men noe more able to indure adversity then they had been to
moderate prosperity <paren> both which proceede from the same strength
of mynd <$$paren> , they weakely yielded , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.163

and , abandoning both their creditt and cause , gave full way to their
owne ruine . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,23.164

<P_24>

Afterwards the Bishoppes of Winchester and of Lincolne , who behaved
themselves <paren> especially Lincolne <$$paren> more indiscreetly than
otheres , wer , for this contempt , committed to the Tower .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,24.166

All the residue , except the Abbot of Westminster <paren> who was more
respective and appliable then the rest <$$paren> stoode bound to make
their personall appearance before the Lords of the Councell , and not to
depart the City of London and Westminster untill farther order should be
taken with them . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,24.167

Many of the common sorte were well pleased with this disgrace , not soe
much for any particular grievaunces , not soe much for the publicke
cause of difference in relligeone , as out of a weakenesse and
hastenesse of mynd , which joyeth to see any hard happ happen to them
whoe are extreme happy . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,24.168

After this the parliament proceeded , the patience of the multitude
beeing wearyed , and almost spent , with the expectatione of some change
. HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,24.169

And now the Catholicke party was much weakened , partly by the restraint
of some Bishopps , mentioned before , and by the death of other , which
was a mayne mayme to that side , and , partly , by suspending of
certayne greate officeres from the executione of their places , for
qualificatione whereof a proclamatione was published that ther was no
meaning to displace them , but onelye to examine ther abuses , whereof
some should be judged in the parliament , other reserved to inferiour
courtes , and some very like to be pardoned . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,24.170

But on the Protestants' party the assembly was made strong , as well by
the electione of Knights and Burgesses as by creating certayne Barones
whose devotione was that waye setled . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,24.171

And yet there wanted neyther will , nor industrious indeavour , in many
, to reteyne still the forme of religeone which in Queene <P_25> Maryes
tyme had beene observed . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,25.172

Among other Doctor Story shewed himself soe bould , yea rash , yea
furious and madd , that it was sufficient to have discredited a good
cause ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,25.173

for , beeing charged with some cruell severity , which he had used for
matters of religione , he denyed it not , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,25.174

but affirmed , playnly , that he had done nothing which as well his
conscience as his commissione did not both warrant and discharge ; that
he was noe lesse ready at that tyme to doe the like , in case he had the
like authority ; that he was soe farr from beeing ashamed for any thing
he had done , that he was sorry he had done noe more ; that the fault
thereof was not in him but in otheres , whom he much blamed for the same
; that they laboured onely in lopping small twigges , but his advice was
, to strike at the roote ; that as a March sunne is of sufficient force
to rayse stormes , but altogether unable to dispell them , soe their
tepidities did onely serve to stirre uncivill humores , but was too
feeble to consume them ; that he had beene at the burning of an earewigg
at Uxbridge <paren> for soe he tearmed one Denby who had ther suffered
death <$$paren> and that he threw a fagott at his face , as he was
singing of a psalme , and sett a bush of thornes at his feete , a litle
to pricke him , but this was nothing avayleable to the cause ; that his
advise was to plucke at men of higher degree ; that this had beene
wisely and well done indeede ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,25.175

this might have kept downe the contrary factione ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,25.176

this might have secured the cause . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,25.177

These speaches and other of the same temper wer by some adjudged to
proceede from zeale , by other from frenzy , both which I deeme to be
true , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,25.178

for zeale without discretione is nothing else but a degree or
resemblance of frenzy . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,25.179

On the other side many invectives wer made , both against the Clergy ,
and the Councell whoe guided affayres in the time of Queene Mary ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,25.180

and , namely , for misapplying and diminishing the revenues of the
Crowne ; for continuall exactiones fruitlessly <P_26> expended ; for
dividing among themselves the possessiones and offices of the Kingdome ,
especially during the sicknesse of Queene Mary ; for seeking the
destructione of Queene Elizabeth , at leaste to defeate her of
successione ; for bringing the Spaniard into the realme , whereby
rebelliones wer occasioned , to the overthrow of many men both of
nobility and worth , whereby the realme was spoyled of many sowles , and
spent much upon his intertainment , whereby it was much ingaged in his
warres , spent therein millions of treasure , and lost Callice , the
glory of England . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,26.181

After many like contentiones , not without violence , and sharpenesse of
humor , after much debatement alsoe among the Protestantes themselves ,
a forme of publicke prayers , and of administratione of the sacraments ,
in the English tongue , was agreed uppon , and authorized to be used in
churches , not much varying from that which had been used in the tyme of
King Edward the Sixt . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,26.182

All persones were enjoyned to resort unto theire parish church uppon
Sundayes and holy-dayes , during the time this common-prayer should be
used , and greate penaltyes injoyned for such as should eyther deprave ,
or not observe , the orderes prescribed in that booke .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,26.183

Likewise the nominatione of Bishoppes , and the first fruites and
tenthes of Ecclesiasticall livings , wer agayne restored to the Crowne .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,26.184

The supreame authoritie over Ecclesiasticall persones and affayres
within the realme , which Queene Mary had resigned to the pope , was
agayne annexed to the Crowne ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,26.185

for it was held to derogate from sovereigne Majestie , to infeeble both
the dignity and authority of a royall state , if the consciences and
soules of a prince's subjects should be commanded by a forreine prince .
Because , by commanding their consciences and soules , he might <P_27>
easily command both ther bodyes and estates to what endes he pleased .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,27.186

Hereuppon the Archbishop of York , the Bishop of London , and diverse
otheres , to the number of xiij or xiiij , wer shortly after called
before the Queenes Councell , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,27.187

and , because they refused to take the oath which was established for
acknowledgment of this supremacy in the Queene , they wer removed from
ther dignityes , and some of them committted to prison .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,27.188

And , with thes , diverse others of the Clergy , for the same cause ,
wer deprived . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,27.189

And soe , in place of Cardinall Poole , succeeded Matthew Parker , in
the sea of Canterbury . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,27.190

In place of Doctor Heath succeeded Doctor Yonge , in the sea of Yorke .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,27.191

In steade of Bonner , Edmund Grindall was made Bishopp of London :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,27.192

for Hopton , Thurleby , Tunstall , Pates , Christopherson , Peto ,
Coates , Morgan , Feasy , White , Oglethorpe , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,27.193

Doctor Parkhurst was placed in Norwich , Doctor Coxe in Elie , Jewell in
Salisburie , Doctor Pilkington in Duresme , Sandes in Worcester , Bentom
in Coventrie and Lichfield , David in Saint Davies , Ally in Excester ,
Horne in Winchester , Scory in Hereford , Beast in Carlile , Bullingham
in Lincolne , Scamler in Peterborough , Bartlet in Bath , Gest in
Rochester , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,27.194

and other dignityes alsoe by otheres wer supplied .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,27.195

<P_28>

Further , the landes , and other possessiones , of all religious houses
which had bene dissolved under the reigne of King Henry the VIII=th=.
and of Edward the Sixth , were confirmed to the Queene .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,28.197

And those houses which had been eyther erected , or else restored , and
repayred , by Queene Mary ; as the Priory of Saint John of Jerusalem ,
by Smythfeild ; the Nunnes and Bretheren of Sion , or Sheene ; the
Blackfryers , in Smithfeild ; and the Fryeres , at Greenwich ; wer
agayne suppressed . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,28.198

In stead of the Abbot and Monkes at Westminster it was ordeyned that a
Deane , Prebendes , and Canonnes should ther be placed , under the name
of the Colledge of Westminster . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,28.199

Lastly , certayne articles wer published towching matteres of religione
, and Commissioneres <paren> for whose authority a speciall acte was
made <$$paren> to visitt every diocesse in the realme , and to establish
religione according to the same articles . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,28.200

The orderes which the Commissioneres sett wer both imbraced and executed
with greate fervency of the common people ; especially in beating downe
, breakinge , and burning images , which had been erected in the
churches , declaring themselves noe lesse disorder'd in defacing of them
then they had been immoderate and excessive in adoring them before ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,28.201

yea , in many places , walls wer rased , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,28.202

windowes wer dashed downe , because images <paren> little regarding what
<$$paren> were paynted on them . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,28.203

And not onely images , but rood-loftes , relickes , sepulchres , bookes
, banneres , coopes , vestments , altar-cloathes wer , in diverse places
, committed to the fire , and that with such shouting , and applause of
the vulgar sort , as if it had beene the sacking of some hostile city .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,28.204

Soe difficult it is when men runn out of one extreeme not to runn into
the other , but to make a stable staye in the meane .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,28.205

The extreemes in religion are superstione and prophanitie
{COM:preceding_word_"prophanitie"_emended} , eyther negligence , or
<P_29> contempt : betweene which extreames it is extreamly hard to hold
the meane . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,29.206

Not many dayes after this fyring of images and church ornaments in
London , a mightie tempest did rise , which continued about three howres
; in the end whereof a thunder clapp and flash of lightening brake
foorth more feareful then any that wer before ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,29.207

and , at the very same instant , one of the South doors , and alsoe the
vestrie doore , of Saint Dionyse Church , in Fanchurch Streete , wer
beaten thorough and brooken . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,29.208

Likewise the spire of Allhallow church , in Breed Streete , being then
of stone , was smitten aboute ten foote beneath the topp , from which
place a stone was strucke that slew a dogg and overthrew a man with whom
the dogg played . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,29.209

The accident was at that time esteemed prodigious by some whose
affections rann with a bias , onely because it ensued soe greate
actiones of change . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P1,29.210

