<BEGIN_henry-1524-e1-p1>

<P_34,H>

<heading:edcomment:3_HENRY_VIII_TO_THE_TENTH_LORD_CLIFFORD,_18_MAY>

{COM:1520}

To our right trustie and welbeloved the lord Clifforde . Henricus Rex
By the Kinge HENRY-1524-E1-P1,34,H.5

Right trustie and welbeloved wee greete you well .
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,34,H.6

And where as we at this time have written as@ @well to the sheriffe of
that our shire <paren> as shall appeare unto you
{COM:preceding_word_"you"_emended} by the coppie of the same writtinge
here inclosed <$$paren> as also to the justices of our peace
{COM:fo._10v} within our said shire whereof yee bee one <paren> as in
likewise shall appeare to you by our lettres to you and them addressed
<$$paren> , comaundinge and straitly chargeinge that as well the said
sheriffe as the said justices endeavor them for the keepinge of our
peace and entertainment of our subjectes in good quiet and restfullnes
dureinge the time of our jorney into the partes beyond the sea to the
which wee intend to dispose us aboute the latter end of this present
month of May . And forasmuch also as wee have for your great ease
spared you of your attendance uppon us in our said jorney and left you
at home to doe us service in the keepinge of our peace and good rule and
order amongstes our said subjectes , wee will therfore and comaunde you
that dureinge the time of our said absence out of this our realme yee
have a speciall oversight , regarde and respecte as@ @well to the said
sheriffe as the said justices how and with what diligence they doe and
execute our comaundmentes comprised in our said lettres . And that yee
also from time to time as yee shall see neede , quickly and sharply call
uppon them in our name for the execution of our said commaundmentes .
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,34,H.7

And if yee shall find any of them remisse or negligent in that behalf ,
we will that yee lay it sharply to theire charge , advertiseinge them
that in case they amende not theire default , yee will thereof advertise
our counsaile attendinge upon our deerest daughter the Princesse
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,34,H.8

and so wee charge you to doe indeed . HENRY-1524-E1-P1,34,H.9

And if our said sheriffe or justices or any other sheriffe or justices
of any other shire next to you uppon any side adjoyninge shall need and
require your assistance for the execution of our said comaundementes ,
wee will and desire you that with the best power that yee can make of
our subjectes in harneis , yee be to them aidinge and assistinge from
tyme to time as the case shall require , not faileinge hereof as yee
intend to please us and as wee singularly trust you .
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,34,H.10

Yeven under our signett at our mannor of Greenewich the xviijth day of
May . HENRY-1524-E1-P1,34,H.11

<P_1.1,269,E>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_XCII_KING_HENRY_THE_EIGHTH_TO_CARDINAL_WOLSEY>

{COM:c1525}

Myne awne good Cardinall , I recomande me unto you with all my hart ,
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,1.1,269,E.15

and thanke yow for the grette payne and labour that yow do dayly take in
my bysynes and maters , desyryng yow <paren> that wen {COM:sic} yow have
well establyshyd them <$$paren> to take summe pastyme and comfort , to
the intent yow may the longer endure to serve us ;
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,1.1,269,E.16

for allways payne can nott be induryd . HENRY-1524-E1-P1,1.1,269,E.17

Surly yow have so substancyally orderyd oure maters bothe off thys syde
the See and byonde that in myne oppynyon lityll or nothyng can be addyd
; HENRY-1524-E1-P1,1.1,269,E.18

nevertheles , accordyng <P_1.1,270,E> to your desyre , I do send yow
myne oppynyon by thys berar , the refformacion whereoff I do remytte to
yow and the remnante off our trusty consellers , whyche I am sure wyll
substantyally loke on hyt . HENRY-1524-E1-P1,1.1,270,E.19

As tochyng the mater that Syr Wyllyam Says broght answar off I am well
contentyd with what order so ever yow do take in itt .
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,1.1,270,E.20

The Quene my wyff hath desyryd me to make har most harty recommendations
to yow , as to hym that she lovethe very well ,
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,1.1,270,E.21

and both she and I wolde knowe fayne when yow wyll repayre to us .
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,1.1,270,E.22

No more to yow att thys tyme bot that with God's helpe I trust we shall
dysspoynte oure enymys off theyre intendyd purpose .
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,1.1,270,E.23

Wryttyn with the hand of your lovyng master Henry , R. To My Lorde
Cardinall . HENRY-1524-E1-P1,1.1,270,E.24

<P_35,H>

<heading:edcomment:4_HENRY_VIII_TO_THE_FIRST_EARL_OF_CUMBERLAND,_7_SEPTEMBER>

{COM:1525}

To our right trustie and right welbeloved cousin th@ @erle of Cumberland
. HENRY-1524-E1-P1,35,H.28

Henricus Rex By the Kinge HENRY-1524-E1-P1,35,H.29

Right trustie and right welbeloved cousin wee greete you well .
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,35,H.30

And forasmuch as wee understand that the late lord Clifford , your
Father deceassed <paren> whose soule God pardon <$$paren> by his
sufficient writtinge granted and let to farme to our trustie and
welbeloved servant Edward Gouldsbrough the mannor and lordshipp of
Gouldsbrough with the appurtenances in our countie of Yorke , to have
and to hold the same to our said servant dureinge the nonage of Thomas
Goldsbrough , sonne and heire of Richard Goldsbrough deceased ,
yeildinge and payinge therfore yearly like rent and ferme as in the said
writinge is specified more at large . Wee therefore desire and pray you
cousin to permitt and suffer our said servant peaceably and quietly to
enjoy and occupy the said mannor dureinge the nonage of the said Thomas
Goldsbrough accordinge to the effect and purporte of your said Fathers
grante without any interruption to the contrary .
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,35,H.31

And in your so doeinge yee shall administer unto us full good pleasure
to be remembred accordingly hereafter . HENRY-1524-E1-P1,35,H.32

Yeven under our signett att our towene of Stratford the vijth day of
September . HENRY-1524-E1-P1,35,H.33

<P_36,H>

<heading:edcomment:5_HENRY_VIII_TO_THE_FIRST_EARL_OF_CUMBERLAND,_27_NOVEMBER_1528>

To our right trusty and right welbeloved cousin th@ @erle of Cumberland
. HENRY-1524-E1-P1,36,H.36

Henricus Rex By the Kinge HENRY-1524-E1-P1,36,H.37

Right trustie and right welbeloved cousin , wee greete you well .
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,36,H.38

And understand that one Dicke of the Woodfoote otherwise called Richard
<P_37,H> Urwen , Scottishman and a simple person who hath committed
felony within this our realme upon our subjectes on our borders of
Scottland is taken and in ward with you under your charge with our
castle of Carlisle . And that also our trusty subject Gefferey
Middelton squire is taken in Scotland by the Urwens and delivered to the
Armestronges , outlawes there , as hee was goeinge in his pilgrimage
unto Saint Trewnym {COM:sic} and so is kept with the said Armestrongs in
duresie and shall not be delivered without restoringe of the said Dicke
of the Woodfoote otherwise called Richard Urwen , beinge in ward with
you . Wherefore , wee in consideracion thereof will and commaunde you ,
that yee forthwith upon the sight hereof , deliver or cause to bee
delivered the said Dicke of the Woodfoote otherwise called Richard Urwen
unto the said Gefferey Middelton for to bee convaiede into Scotland for
redeemeinge and pledgeinge of the same Gefferey out of the handes of the
said Armestronges , without faileinge thus to doe as wee trust you , and
as yee tender our pleasure . HENRY-1524-E1-P1,37,H.39

And these our letters shal@ @be your sufficient warrant and discharge in
this behalfe att all times hereafter . HENRY-1524-E1-P1,37,H.40

Yeven under our signett att our mannor of Bridwell the xxvijth day of
November , the xxth yeare of our raigne {COM:1528} .
HENRY-1524-E1-P1,37,H.41

