<BEGIN_hooker-b-1614-e2-p1>

<P_31>

Having otherwhere spoken of the words of <font> Saint Iude <$$font> ,
going next before , concerning <font> Mockers <$$font> , which should
come in the last time , & backsliders , which even then fell away from
the faith of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ ; I am now by the aide of
almighty God , and through the assistance of his good spirit , to lay
before you the words of exhortation , which I haue read . 2 Wherein
first of all , whosoever hath an eie to see , let him open it , and he
shall wel perceiue , how carefull the Lord is for his children , how
desirous to see them profit and growe vp to a manly stature in Christ ,
how loath to haue them any way mislead , either by examples of the
wicked , or by enticements of <P_32> the world , and by provocation of
the flesh , or by any other meanes forcible to deceaue them , and likely
to estrange their heart from God . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.3

For God is not at that point with vs , that hee careth not whether wee
sinke or swimme . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.4

No , he hath written our names in the palme of his hand ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.5

in the signet vpon his finger are we graven , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.6

in sentences not onely of mercy , but of iudgement also we are remembred
. HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.7

He never denou~ceth iudgements against the wicked ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.8

but hee maketh some <font> Proviso <$$font> for his children , as it
were for some certaine priviledged persons , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.9

<font> Touch not mine annointed , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.10

do my Prophets no harme , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.11

hurt not the earth , nor the sea , nor the trees , till wee haue sealed
the servants of God in their foreheads . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.12

Hee never speaketh of godlesse men , but he adioineth words of comfort ,
or admonition , or exhortation , whereby wee are moued to rest and
settle our hearts on him . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.13

In the second Tim. the 3. Chap <font> Evill men <$$font> , saith the
Appostle , <font> and deceiuers shal waxe worse and worse , deceiuing
and being deceiued . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.14

But continue thou in the things , which thou hast learned . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.15

And in the first to Tim. the 6. Chap. <font> Some men lusting after
money haue erred from the faith , & pierced themselues through with many
sorrowes . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.16

But thou , o` man of God , fly these things , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.17

and follow after righteousness , godlines , loue , patience , meeknesse
. HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.18

In the second to the Thessalonians , the second Chap. <font> They that
haue not receiued the loue of the truth , that they might bee saued ,
God shal send them strong delusions , that they may beleeue lies .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,32.19

But we ought to giue thanks alway to God for you , brethren , beloued of
the Lord , because God hath from the beginning <P_33> chosen you to
salvation through sanctification of the spirit , and faith in the truth
. <$$font> HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.20

And in this Epistle of <font> S. Iude , There shall come mockers in the
last time , walking after their owne vngodly lusts .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.21

Eat , beloued , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.22

edifie yee your selues in your most holy faith . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.23

3

These sweet exhortations , which God putteth every where in the mouthes
of the Prophets & Apostles of Iesus Christ , are evident tokens , that
God sitteth not in heaven careless and vnmindfull of our estate .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.25

Can a mother forget her child ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.26

Surely a mother will hardly forget her child .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.27

But if a mother bee happily found vnnaturall , and doe forget the fruit
of her owne wombe , yet Gods iudgements shew plainly , that he can@ @not
forget , the man whose heart hee hath framed and fashioned a_new in
simplicity and truth to serue and feare him . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.28

For when the wickednesse of man was so great , and the earth so filled
with crueltie , that it could not stand with the righteousnes of God any
longer to forbeare , wrathfull sentences brake out from him like wine
from a vessell that hath no vent . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.29

<font> My spirit <$$font> , saith he , <font> can struggle and striue no
longer , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.30

an end of all flesh is come before me <$$font> .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.31

Yet then did <font> Noah finde grace in the eies of the Lord ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.32

I will establish my covena~t with thee , <$$font> saith God ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.33

<font> thou shalt goe into the arke , thou , and thy sonnes , and thy
wife , and thy sonnes wiues with thee . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.34

4 . Doe we not see what shift God doth make for <font> Lot <$$font> ,
and for his familie in the 19. of Genesis , least the fierie
destruction of the wicked should overtake him ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,33.35

Over night the Angels make enquiry , what sons <P_34> or daughters , or
sonnes in law , what wealth and substance he had .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.36

They charge him to carie out al , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.37

<font> whatsoever thou hast in the citie , bring it out . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.38

God seemeth to stand in a kind of feare , least something or other would
be left behind . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.39

And his will was that nothing of that which he had , not an hoofe of any
beast , not a threed of any garment should bee singed with that fire .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.40

In the morning the angels fayle not to call him vp , and to hasten him
forward , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.41

<font> Arise , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.42

take thy wife , & thy daughters which are here , that they be not
destroyed in the punishment of the Citie . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.43

The Angels hauing spoken againe and againe , <font> Lot <$$font> for all
this , lingereth out the time still , till at the length they were
forced to take <font> both him , and his wife , and his daughters by the
armes <paren> the Lord being mercifull vnto him <$$paren> <$$font> and
to cary them forth and set them without the citie .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.44

5

Was there ever any father thus carefull to saue his child from the flame
? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.46

A man would thinke , that now being spoken vnto to escape for his life ,
and not to looke behinde him , or to tarry in the plaine , but to hasten
to the mountaine & there to saue himselfe , he should do it gladly .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.47

Yet behold , now he is so farre off from a chearefull & willing hart to
do whatsoever is commanded him for his owne weale , that he beginneth to
reason the matter , as if God had mistaken one place for another ,
sending him to the hill when salvation was in the Citie .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.48

<font> Not so , my Lord , I beseech thee . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.49

Behold , thy servant hath found grace in thy sight ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.50

and thou hast magnified thy mercy which thou haste shewed vnto me in
saving my life . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,34.51

I can@ @not escape in the <P_35> mountaine , least some evil take me and
I die . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.52

Here is a Citty hard by , a small thing . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.53

O let me escape thither HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.54

<paren> is it not a small thing ? <$$paren> HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.55

and my soule shall liue . <$$font> HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.56

Well , God is contented to yeeld to any conditions .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.57

<font> Behold I haue received thy request concerning this thing also .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.58

I will spare this City , for which thou has spoken ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.59

hast thee ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.60

saue thee there . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.61

For I can do nothing till thou come thither . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.62

6

Hee could doe nothing ! HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.64

Not because of the weaknesse of his strength <paren> for who is like
vnto the Lord in power ? <$$paren> but because of the greatnesse of his
mercy which would not suffer him to lift vp his arme against that city ,
nor to power out his wrath vpon that place , where his righteous servant
had a fancie to remaine , and a desire to dwell .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.65

O the depth of the riches of the mercy and loue of {TEXT:missing_"of"}
God ! HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.66

God is afraide to offend vs which are not afraid to displease him !
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.67

God can do nothing till he haue saved vs , which can finde in our harts
rather to do any thing then to serue him . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.68

It contenteth him not to exempt vs , when the pit is digged for the
wicked ; to comfort vs at every mention which is made of reprobates and
godlesse men ; to saue vs as the apple of his owne eie when fire commeth
downe from heaven to consume the inhabitants of the earth , except every
Prophet and every Apostle , and every servant , whom he sendeth forth ,
doe come loaden with these and the like exhortations ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.69

<font> O beloved , edifie your selues in your most holy faith .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.70

Giue your selues to praier in the spirit , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.71

keep your selues in the loue of God . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.72

Looke for the mercie of our Lord Iesus Christ vnto eternall life .
<$$font> HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,35.73

{COM:insert_helsinki_here}

<P_45>

20

Consider this people , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.77

and learne , what it is to <font> build your selues in faith . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.78

They were the Lords vine : HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.79

he brought it out of Egypt , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.80

he threwe out the heathen from their places , that it might be planted ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.81

hee made roome for it , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.82

and caused it to take roote , till it had filled the earth ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.83

the mountaines were covered with the shadowe of it ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.84

and the boughs thereof were as the goodly Cedars .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.85

She stretched out her branches vnto the sea and her boughs vnto the
river . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.86

But when God hauing sent both his servants and his sonne to visite this
vine , they neither spared the one , nor receiued the other , but stoned
the Prophets , and crucified the Lord of glory which came vnto them ,
then beganne the curse of God to come vpon them , even the curse whereof
the Prophet <font> David <$$font> hath spoken , saying , <font> Let
their table be made a snare , and a net , and stumbling blocke , even
for a recompense vnto them , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.87

let their eies bee darkned , that they doe not see ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.88

bow down their backs forever <$$font> , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.89

keepe them downe . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.90

And sithens the houre , that the measure of their infidelitie was first
made vp , they haue beene spoiled with warres , eate~ vp with plagues
spent with hunger and famine : HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.91

they wander fro~ place to place , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.92

and are become the most base and contemptible people that are vnder the
sunne . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,45.93

Ephraim , which before was a terrour vnto nations , & they trembled
<P_46> at his voice , is now by infidelitie so vile that he seemeth as a
thing cast out to bee trampled vnder mens feet .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.94

In the midst of these desolations they cry , <font> Returne we beseech
thee , o` God of hosts , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.95

looke down from heaven , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.96

behold and visit this vine <$$font> : HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.97

but their very prayers are turned into sinne , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.98

and their cryes are no better then the lowing of beasts before him .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.99

<font> Well <$$font> , saith the Apostle , <font> by their vnbeleefe
they are broken of , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.100

and thou doest stand by thy faith . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.101

Behold therefore the bountifulnesse , and severitie of God , towards
them HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.102

severitie , because they haue fallen , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.103

bountifulnesse towards thee , if thou continue in his bountifulnesse ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.104

or else thou shalt be cut off . <$$font> HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.105

If they forsake their vnbeleefe , and be grafted in againe , and we at
any time for the hardnesse of our hearts be broken off , it will be such
a iudgement , as will amaze all the powers and principalities which are
aboue . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.106

Who hath searched the counsell of God concerning this secret ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.107

and who doth not see that <font> infidelitie <$$font> doth threaten
<font> Lo-ammi <$$font> vnto the Gentiles , as it hath brought <font> Lo
ruchama <$$font> vpon the Iewes ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.108

It may bee that these wordes seeme darke vnto you .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.109

But the words of the Apostle in the eleventh to the <font> Romans
<$$font> , are plaine enough , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.110

<font> If God haue not spared the naturall branches , take heed <$$font>
, take heed , <font> least he spare not thee . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.111

Build thy selfe in faith . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.112

Thus much of the thing which is prescribed , and wherein we are exhorted
to edifie our selues . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.113

Now consider the <font> conditions <$$font> and <font> properties
<$$font> , which are in this place annexed vnto faith .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.114

The former of them <paren> for there are but two <$$paren> is this ,
<font> Edifie your selues in your faith . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,46.115

21

A strange , and a strong delusion it is where <P_47> with the <font> man
of sinne <$$font> hath bewitched the world ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.117

a forcible spirit of errour it must needs be , which hath brought men to
such a senseless & vnreasonable perswasion as this is , not only that
men cloathed with mortalitie and sinne as we our selues are , can doe
God so much service , as shall be able to take a full and perfect
satisfaction before the Tribunall seate of God for their owne sinnes ,
yea a great deale more , then is sufficient for themselues ; But also
that a man at the hands of a Bishop or a Pope , for such or such a price
, may buie the <font> overplus <$$font> of other mens merits , purchase
the fruits of other mens labours , and build his soule by another mans
faith . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.118

Is not this man drowned in the gall of bitternesse ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.119

Is his heart right in the sight of God ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.120

Can he haue any part of felloswhip with <font> Peter <$$font> , and with
the <font> successours <$$font> of <font> Peter <$$font> , which
thinketh so vilely of building the pretious temples of the holy Ghost ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.121

Let his money perish with him , and he {COM:sic} with it , because he
iudgeth that the gift of God may bee sold for money .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.122

22

But , Beloued in the Lord , deceaue not your selues ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.124

neither suffer ye your selues to be deceaued ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.125

ye ca~ receiue no more ease nor comfort for your soules by an other mans
faith , then {COM:ye_can_receive} warmth for your bodies by an other
mans cloathes , or sustenance by the bread which another doeth eate .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.126

The iust shall liue by his <font> owne faith .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.127

Let a saint , yea a Martyr conte~t himselfe , that he hath clensed
himselfe of his owne sinnes <$$font> , saith <font> Tertullian <$$font>
. HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.128

No <font> saint <$$font> or <font> Martyr <$$font> can cleanse himselfe
of his owne sins . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,47.129

But if so be a <font> saint <$$font> or a <font> martyr <$$font> can
cleanse <P_48> himselfe of his owne sinnes , it is sufficient that he
can doe it for himselfe . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.130

Did euer any man by his death deliuer another man from death , except
onely the son of God ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.131

He indeed was able to <font> Safe-conduct <$$font> a Theefe from the
Crosse to Paradise : HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.132

for to this end he came , that being himselfe pure from sinne , hee
might obey for sinners . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.133

Thou which thinkest to doe the like , and supposest , that thou canst
iustifie another by thy righteousnesse , if thou be without sinne , then
lay downe thy life for thy brother ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.134

die for me . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.135

But if thou be a sinner , even as I am a sinner , how can the oyle of
thy lampe be sufficient both for thee , and for me ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.136

<font> Virgins , <$$font> that are wise , get yee oyle , while yee haue
day , into your owne lamps . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.137

For out of all peradventure , others , though they would , can neither
giue nor sell . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.138

Edifie your selues in your <font> owne <$$font> most holy faith .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.139

And let this be observed for the first <font> propertie <$$font> of that
, wherein we ought to edifie our selues . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.140

23

Our faith being such , is that indeed , which S. <font> Iude <$$font>
doth here terme <font> Faith <$$font> , namely a thing most <font> holy
<$$font> . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.142

The reason is this . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.143

We are iustified by <font> Faith . <$$font> HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.144

For <font> Abraham <$$font> beleeued , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.145

and this was imputed vnto him for righteousnesse .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.146

Being iustiifed , all our iniquities are covered .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.147

God beholdeth vs in the righteousnesse which is imputed , and not in the
sinnes which wee haue committed . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.148

24

It is true , wee are full of sinne both <font> originall <$$font> , and
<font> actuall <$$font> ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.150

whosoever denieth it is a double sinner , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.151

for he is both a <font> sinner <$$font> , and a <font> lyer <$$font> .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,48.152

To denie sinne , is most plainely and cleerely to proue it , because he
that <P_49> saith , he hath no sinne , lyeth , and by lying proueth that
he hath sinne . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.153

25

But <font> imputation <$$font> of righteousnesse hath covered the sinnes
of every soule which beleeveth ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.155

God by pardoning our sinne hath taken it away : so that now although our
transgression be multiplied aboue the haires of our head , yet being
iustified wee are as free , and as cleere , as if there were no one spot
, or staine of any vncleanesse in vs . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.156

For it is God that iustifieth , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.157

and who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen ? saith the
Apostle in the 8. ch. to the Romans . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.158

26

Now sinne being taken away , wee are made the righteousness of God in
Christ . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.160

For <font> David <$$font> speaking of this righteousness , saith ,
<font> Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiuen . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.161

No man is blessed but in the righteousnesse of God .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.162

Every man , whose sinne is taken away is blessed .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.163

Therefore every man , whose sinne is covered is made the righteousnesse
of God in Christ . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.164

The righteousnes doth make vs to appeare most holy , most pure , most
vnblamable before him . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.165

27

This then is the summ of that which I say , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.167

faith doth iusitifie : HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.168

iustification washeth away sin : HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.169

sin remoued , we are cloathed with the righteousnes which is of God :
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.170

The righteousnes of God maketh vs most holy .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.171

Every of these I haue proved by the testimony of Gods owne mouth .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.172

Therefore I conclude , that faith is that which maketh vs most holy , in
consideration whereof it is called in this place , <font> Our most holy
faith <$$font> . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P1,49.173

