<BEGIN_hooker-a-1614-e2-p1>

{COM:insert_helsinki_1}

<P_10>

7 . Remember therefore that which is spoken of by the Apostles . Whose
words if the children of this world doe not regard , is it any marvaile
? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,10.4

They are the Apostles of our Lord Iesus ; not of their Lord but of our .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,10.5

It is true which one hath said in a certaine place , <font> Apostolicam
fidem seculi homo non capit <$$font> , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,10.6

a ma~ sworne to the world , is not capable of that faith which the
Apostles doe teach . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,10.7

What meane the children of this world then to tread in the courts of our
God ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,10.8

What should your bodies doe at <font> Bethel <$$font> , whose hearts are
at <font> Bethaven <$$font> ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,10.9

The God of this world , whom yee serue , hath provided Apostles and
teachers for you , <font> Chaldeans , Wisards , Southsayers ,
Astrologers <$$font> , and such like : HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,10.10

Heare them . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,10.11

Tell not us that yee will sacrifice to the Lord our God if wee will
sacrifice to <font> Ashteroth <$$font> or <font> Melcom <$$font> ; that
yee will read our Scriptures , if wee will listen to your traditions ;
that if yee may haue a Masse by permission , wee shall haue a Communion
with good leaue and liking ; that yee will admit the things that are
spoken of by the Apostles of our Lord Iesus , if your Lord and Master
may haue his ordinances observed , and his statutes kept .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,10.12

<font> Solomon <$$font> took it <paren> as well he might <$$paren> for
an evident proofe , that she did not bear a motherly affection to her
child , which yeelded to haue it cut in diverse parts .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,10.13

He can@ @not loue the Lord <P_11> Iesus with his heart , which lendeth
one eare to his Apostles , and another eare to false Apostles : which
can brooke to see a mingle_mangle of religion and superstition ,
Ministers and Massingpriests , light & darknesse , truth and errour ,
traditions and Scriptures . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.14

No ; we haue no Lord but Iesus ; no doctorine but the Gospell , no
teachers but his Apostles . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.15

Were it reason to require at the hand of an English subiect , obedience
to the lawes and edicts of the Spaniard ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.16

I doe marvaile that any man bearing the name of a servant of the
servants of Iesus Christ , will goe about to drawe vs from our
allegeance . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.17

Wee are his sworne subiects ; HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.18

it is not lawful for vs to heare the things , that are not told vs by
his Apostles . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.19

They haue told vs that in the last daies there shall be mockers ;
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.20

therefore wee beleeue it : <font> Credimus quia legimus <$$font> ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.21

we are so perswaded because we read it must be so .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.22

If we did not read it , we would not teach it :
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.23

<font> Nam quae libro legis non continentur , ea nec nosse debemus
<$$font> , saith <font> Hilary <$$font> , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.24

those things that are not written in the booke of the law , wee ought
not so much as to be acquainted with them . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.25

<font> Remember the words which were spoken of before of the Apostles of
our Lord Iesus Christ . <$$font> HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.26

8

The third thing to be considered in the description of these men of whom
wee speake is the time , wherin they should be manifested to the world .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.28

They told you there should bee mockers in the last time .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.29

<font> Noah <$$font> at the commaundement of God built an Arke ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.30

and there were in it beasts of all sorts , cleane & vncleane .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.31

A husbandman planteth a vineyard HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,11.32

and looketh <P_12> for grapes , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,12.33

but when they come to the gathering , behold togither with grapes there
are found also wilde grapes . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,12.34

A rich man prepareth a great supper HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,12.35

and biddeth many , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,12.36

but when hee sitteth him down he findeth amongst his friends here and
there a man whom he knoweth not . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,12.37

This hath beene the state of the Church sithe~ce the beginning .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,12.38

God alwaies hath mingled his Saints with faithlesse and godlesse persons
; as it were the cleane with the vncleane , grapes with sowre grapes ,
his friends and children with aliens and strangers .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,12.39

Mervaile not the~ , if in the last daies also yee see the men , with
whom you liue and walke arme in arme , laugh at your religion and
blaspheme that glorious name whereof you are called .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,12.40

Thus it was in the daies of the patriarckes & prophets ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,12.41

and are we better then our fathers ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,12.42

Albeit we suppose {COM:preceding_word_"suppose"_emended} that the
blessed Apostles in foreshewing what manner of men were set out for the
last daies , meant to note a calamity speciall and peculiar to the ages
and generations which were to come . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,12.43

As if he should haue said ; As God hath apointed a time of seed for the
sower , and a time of harvest for him that reapeth , as he hath give~
vnto every hearb & every tree his own fruit , and his own season , not
the season or the fruit of another , <paren> for no man looketh to
gather figs in the winter , because the Sommer is the season for them ,
nor grapes of thistles , because grapes are the fruite of the Vine ,
<$$paren> so the same God hath appointed sundrie for every generation of
men , other men for other times , and for the last times the worst men ,
as may <P_13> appeare by their properties , which is the fourth point to
be considered of in this description . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,13.44

9

They told you that there should be <font> Mockers <$$font> .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,13.46

He meaneth men that shall vse religion as a cloake to put off , and on ,
as the weather serveth ; such as shall with <font> Herod <$$font> heare
the preaching of <font> Iohn Baptist <$$font> to day , and to_morrow
condescende to haue him beheaded ; or with the other <font> Herod
<$$font> say , they will worship Christ when they purpose a massacre in
their hearts , kisse Christ with <font> Iudas <$$font> , and betray
Christ with <font> Iudas <$$font> . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,13.47

These are mockers . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,13.48

For as <font> Ishmael <$$font> the sonne of <font> Hagar <$$font>
laughed at <font> Isaak <$$font> , which was heir of the promise ; so
shall these men laugh at you as the maddest people vnder the sunne , if
yee be like <font> Moses <$$font> , choosing rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God , then to enioy the pleasures of sin for a season
. HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,13.49

And why ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,13.50

God hath not given them eies to see , nor harts to co~ceiue that
exceding recompence of your rewarde . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,13.51

The promises of salvatio~ made to you are matters , wherein they can
take no pleasure , even as <font> Ishmael <$$font> tooke no pleasure in
that promise , wherein God had said vnto <font> Abraham : In Isaac shall
thy seed be called <$$font> , because the promise concerned not him but
<font> Isaac <$$font> . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,13.52

They are tearmed for their impiety towards God , <font> mockers <$$font>
, and for the impurity of their life and conversation , <font> walkers
after their owne vngodly lusts . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,13.53

S. Peter <$$font> in his second epistle and 3 chapter soundeth the very
depth of their impiety : shewing <font> first <$$font> , how they shall
not shame at the length to professe themselues prophane , and
irreligious , by flat denying the gospell of Iesus Christ , <P_14> and
deriding the sweet and comfortable promises of his appearing : <font>
secondly <$$font> , that they shall not be only deriders of all religion
, but also disputers against God , vsing truth to subvert the truth ;
yea scriptures themselues to disproue scriptures .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,14.54

Being in this sort <font> mockers <$$font> , they must needs be also
followers of <font> their owne vngodly lusts <$$font> .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,14.55

Being Atheists in perswasion , can they choose but be beasts in
conversation~ ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,14.56

For why remoue they quite from them the feare of {TEXT:missing_"of"} God
? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,14.57

Why take they such paines to abandon and put out from their harts all
sense , all tast , all feeling of religion ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,14.58

but only to this end and purpose , that they may without inward remorse
and grudging of conscience giue over themselues to all vncleanenes .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,14.59

Surely the state of these me~ is more lamentable , then is the condition
of Pagans and Turkes . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,14.60

For at the bare beholding of heaven and earth the infidels heart by and
by doth giue him , that there is an eternal , infinite , immortal , and
everliving God ; whose hands haue fashioned and framed the world ;
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,14.61

hee knoweth that every house is builded of some man , though he see not
the man which built the house , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,14.62

and he considereth , that it must be God which hath built and created
all things ; although because the number of his daies be few he could
not see whe~ God disposed his workes of old , when he caused the light
of his clowdes first to shine , when he laid the corner stone of the
earth and swadled it with banks of water and darknes ; when he caused
the morning star to know his place , & made barres and doores to shut vp
the sea within his house , saying <font> hitherto shalt thou <P_15> come
but no farther : <$$font> HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.63

he hath no eie witnesse of these things . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.64

Yet the light of natural reason hath put this wisdome in his reines ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.65

and hath given his heart thus much vnderstanding .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.66

Bring a pagan to the schooles of the prophets of God ; prophecie to an
infidell , rebuke him , lay the iudgements of God before him , make the
secret sinnes of his heart manifest , and he shall fall downe and
worship God . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.67

They that crucified the Lord of glory were not so far past recovery ,
but that the preaching of the Apostles was able to moue their hearts and
to bring them to this , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.68

<font> Men & brethren what shall we doe ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.69

Agrippa , <$$font> that sate in iudgement against <font> Paule <$$font>
for preaching , yeelded notwithstanding thus farre vnto him , <font>
almost thou perswadest me to become a Christian <$$font> .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.70

Although the Iewes for want of knowledge haue not submitted themselues
to the righteousnesse of God ; yet I beare them record , saith the
Apostle , <font> that they haue a zeale <$$font> .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.71

The <font> Athenians <$$font> , a people hauing neither zeale nor
knowledge , yet of them also the same Apostle beareth witnesse ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.72

<font> yee men of Athens I perceaue yee are {COM:greek_omitted} <$$font>
some way religious . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.73

But mockers , walking after their owne vngodly lusts , they haue
smothered every sparke of that heavenly light ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.74

they haue stiflled even their very naturall vnderstanding .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.75

O Lord , thy mercy is over al thy workes , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.76

thou savest man and beast ! HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.77

yet a happy case it had beene for these men if they had never beene
borne : HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.78

and so I leaue them . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,15.79

10

<font> S=t= Iude <$$font> hauing his mind exercised in the doctrine of
the Apostles of Iesus Christ concerning <P_16> things to come in the
last time , became a man of a wise and staid iudgement .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.81

<font> Grieued <$$font> hee was , to see the departure of many , and
their falling away from the faith , which before they did professe :
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.82

<font> grieved <$$font> , but not <font> dismayed <$$font> .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.83

With the simpler and weaker sort it was otherwise :
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.84

Their countenance began by and by to change , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.85

they were halfe in doubt they had deceiued themselues in giuing credit
to the Gospell of Iesus Christ . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.86

S=t= <font> Iude <$$font> to comfort & refresh these silly lambs taketh
them vp in his armes , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.87

and sheweth them the men at whom they were offended .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.88

Look vpon them that forsake this blessed professio~ wherein you stand :
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.89

They are now before your eyes ; HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.90

view them , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.91

marke them , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.92

are they not carnal ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.93

are they not like to noysome carrion cast out vpon the earth ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.94

is there that spirit in them , which cryeth <font> Abba <$$font> father
in your bosomes ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.95

Why should any man be discomforted ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.96

haue you not heard that there should be <font> mockers <$$font> in the
last time ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.97

These verily are they , that now doe seperate themselues .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.98

11

For your better vnderstanding , what this severing and separating of
themselues doth meane , we must knowe , that the multitude of them which
truly beleeue <paren> howsoever they be dispersed farre and wide each
from other <$$paren> is all <font> one body <$$font> , whereof the head
is Christ , <font> one building <$$font> , whereof he is the corner
stone , in whom they as the me~bers of the body being knit , & as the
stones of the building , being coupled , grow vp to a man of perfect
stature , and rise to an holy te~ple in the Lord .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,16.100

That which linketh Christ to vs is his <P_17> meere mercy and loue
towards vs . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,17.101

That which tieth vs to him is our faith in the promised salvation
revealed in the word of truth . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,17.102

That which vniteth and ioyneth vs amongst our selues , in such sort that
wee are now as if we had but one heart and one soule , is our loue .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,17.103

Who be inwardly in heart the liuely members of this body , and the
polished stones of this building , coupled and ioined to Christ , as
flesh of his flesh and bones of his bones by the mutuall bond of his
vnspeakable loue towards them , & their vnfained faith in him , thus
linked and fastned each to other by a sprituall , sincere , and hartie
affection of loue without any manner of simulation , who be Iewes within
, and what their names be , none can tell , saue he whose eies doe
behold the secret disposition of all mens harts .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,17.104

We , whose eies are too dimme to behold the inward man , must leaue the
secret iudgement of every servant to his owne Lord , accounting and
vsing all men as brethren both neere and deare vnto vs , supposing
Christ to loue them tenderly , so as they keep the profession of the
Gospell and ioyne in the outward communion of Saints . Whereof the one
doth warrantize vnto vs their faith , the other their loue , till they
fall away and forsake either the one , or the other , or both ;
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,17.105

and then it is no iniurie to tearme them as they are .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,17.106

When they separate themselues they , {COM:sic} are {COM:greek_omitted} ,
not iudged by vs , but by their owne doings .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,17.107

Men do separate the~selues either by heresie , schisme , or apostasie .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,17.108

If they loose the bond of faith , which then they are iustly supposed to
doe , when they frowardly <P_18> oppugne any principall point of
Christian doctrine , this is to separate themselues by <font> Heresie
<$$font> . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,18.109

If they breake the bond of vnitie , whereby the body of the Church is
coupled and knit in one , as they doe , which willfully forsake al
externall communion with Saints in holy exercises purely & orderly
established in the Church , this is to separate themselues by <font>
schisme <$$font> . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,18.110

If they willingly cast of and vtterly forsake both profession of Christ
, & communion with Christians , taking their leaue of all religion ,
this is to separate themselues by plaine <font> Apostasie <$$font> .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,18.111

And <font> Saint Iude <$$font> , to expresse the manner of their
departure , which by <font> Apostasie <$$font> fell away fro~ the faith
of Christ , saith they separated themselues : noting thereby , that it
was not constraint of others , which forced them to depart , it was not
infirmitie and weaknes in themselues , it was not feare of persecution
to come vpo~ them , whereat their hearts did faile ; it was not griefe
of torments , whereof they had tasted , and were not able any longer to
endure them . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,18.112

No , they voluntarily did separate themselues with a fully setled , and
altogether determined purpose never to name the Lord Iesus any more ,
nor to haue any fellowship with his Saints but to bend all their
counsell and all their strength to raze out their memoriall from amongst
men . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,18.113

12

Now because that by such examples , not only the hearts of Infidels were
hardned against the truth , but the mindes of weake brethren also much
troubled , the holy Ghost hath given sentence of these backsliders ,
that they were carnall men , and had not <P_19> the spirit of Christ
Iesus , least any man hauing an overweening of their persons should be
overmuch amazed and offended at their fall . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,19.115

For simple men not able to discerne their spirits , were brought by
their apostasie thus to reason with themselues ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,19.116

If Christ be the sonne of the liuing god , if hee haue the words of
eternall life , if he be able to bring salvation to all men that come
vnto him , what meaneth this Apostasie and vnconstrained departure ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,19.117

Why doe his servants so willingly forsake him ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,19.118

Babes be not deceived , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,19.119

his servants forsake him not . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,19.120

They that separate themselues were amongst his servants ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,19.121

but if they had been of his servants , they had not separated themselues
. HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,19.122

They were amongst vs , not of vs , saith <font> Saint Iohn : <$$font>
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,19.123

and <font> Saint Iude <$$font> proveth it , because they were carnall ,
and had not the spirit . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P1,19.124

