<BEGIN_hooke-1665-e3-p1>

<P_100>

<heading>

OBSERV. XVI . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,100.4

OF CHARCOAL , OR BURNT VEGETABLES HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,100.5

<$$heading>

Charcoal , or a Vegetable burnt black , affords an object no less
pleasant than instructive ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,100.7

for if you take a small round Charcoal , and break it short with your
fingers , you may perceive it to break with a very smooth and sleek
surface , almost like the surface of black sealing Wax ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,100.8

this surface , if it be look'd on with an ordinary <font> Microscope
<$$font> , does manifest abundance of those pores which are also visible
to the eye in many kinds of <font> Wood <$$font> , rang'd round the pith
, both in a {SIC:a_in} kind of circular order , and a radiant one .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,100.9

Of these there are a multitude in the substance of the Coal , every
where almost perforating and drilling it from end to end ; by <P_101>
means of which , be the Coal never so long , you may easily blow through
it ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.10

and this you may presently find , by wetting one end of it with Spittle
, and blowing at the other . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.11

But this is not all , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.12

for besides those many great and conspicuous irregular spots or pores ,
if a better <font> Microscope <$$font> be made use of , there will
appear an infinite company of exceedingly small , and very regular pores
, so thick and so orderly set , and so close to one another , that they
leave very little room or space between them to be fill'd with a solid
body , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.13

for the apparent <font> interstitia , <$$font> or separating sides of
these pores seem so thin in some places , that the texture of a
Honey-comb can@ @not be more porous . Though this be not every where so
, the intercurrent partitions in some places being very much thicker in
proportion to the holes . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.14

Most of these small pores seem'd to be pretty round ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.15

and were rang'd in rows that radiated from the pith to the bark ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.16

they all of them seem'd to be continued open pores , running the whole
length of the Stick ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.17

and that they were all perforated , I try'd by breaking off a very thin
sliver of the coal cross-ways , and then with my <font> Microscope
<$$font> , diligently surveying them against the light ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.18

for by that means I was able to see quite through them .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.19

These pores were so exceeding small and thick , that in a line of them ,
1$$18 of an Inch long , I found by numbring them no less then 150.
small pores ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.20

and therefore in a line of them an Inch long , must be no less then
2700. pores , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.21

and in a circular <font> area <$$font> of an Inch diameter , must be
about 5725350. of the like pores ; so that a Stick of an Inch Diameter
, may containe no less then seven_hundred_and_twenty_five_thousand ,
besides 5 Millions of pores , which would , I doubt not , seem even
incredible , were not every one left to believe his own eyes .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.22

Nay , having since examin'd <font> Cocus , black and green Ebony ,
Lignum Vitae , <$$font> &c. I found , that all these Woods have their
pores , abundantly smaller then those of soft light Wood ; in_so_much ,
that those of <font> Guajacum <$$font> seem'd not above an eighth part
of the bigness of the pores of Beech , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.23

but then the <font> Interstitia <$$font> were thicker ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.24

so prodigiously curious are the contrivances , pipes , or sluces by
which the <font> Succus nutritius <$$font> , or Juyce of a Vegetable is
convey'd from place to place . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.25

This <font> Observation <$$font> seems to afford us the true reason of
several <font> Phaenomena <$$font> of Coals ; as First , why they look
black ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.26

and for this we need go no further then the <font> Scheme <$$font> ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.27

for certainly , a body that has so many pores in it as this is
discover'd to have , from each of which no light is reflected , must
necessarily look black , especially , when the pores are somewhat bigger
in proportion to the intervals then they are cut in the <font> Scheme
<$$font> , black being nothing else but a privation of Light , or a want
of reflection ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.28

and wheresoever this reflecting quality is deficient , there does that
part look black , whether it be from a porousness of the body , as in
this Instance , or in a deadning and dulling quality , such as I have
observ'd in the <font> Scoria <$$font> of Lead , Tin , Silver , Copper ,
&c. HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.29

Next , we may also as plainly see the reason of its shining quality
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,101.30

<P_102>

and that is from the even breaking off of the stick ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.32

the solid <font> interstitia <$$font> having a regular termination or
surface , and having a pretty strong reflecting quality , the many small
reflections become united to the naked eye , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.33

and make a very pretty shining surface . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.34

Thirdly , the reason of its hardness and brittleness seems evident ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.35

for since all the watery or liquid substance that moistn'd and toughn'd
those <font> Interstitia <$$font> of the more solid parts , are
evaporated and remov'd , that which is left behind becomes of the nature
almost of a stone , which will not at all , or very little , bend
without a <font> divulsion <$$font> or <font> solution <$$font> of its
<font> continuity <$$font> . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.36

It is not my design at present , to examine the use and <font>
Mechanisme <$$font> of these parts of Wood , that being more proper to
another Enquiry ; but rather to hint , that from this Experiment we may
learn , First , what is the cause of the blackness of many burnt bodies
, which we may find to be nothing else but this ; that the heat of the
fire agitating and rarifying the waterish , transparent , and volatile
water that is contain'd in them , by the continuation of that action ,
does so totally expel and drive away all that which before fill'd the
pores , and was dispers'd also through the solid mass of it , and
thereby caus'd an universal kind of transparency , that it not onely
leaves all the pores empty , but all the <font> Interstitia <$$font>
also so dry and <font> opacous <$$font> , and perhaps also yet further
perforated , that the light onely is reflected back which falls upon the
very outward edges of the pores , all they that enter into the pores of
the body , never returning , but being lost in it .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.37

Now , that the Charring or coaling of a body is nothing else , may be
easily believ'd by one that shall consider the means of its production ,
which may be done after this , or any such manner .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.38

The body to be charr'd or coal'd , may be put into a <font> Crucible
<$$font> , Pot , or any other Vessel that will endure to be made red-hot
in the Fire without breaking , and then cover'd over with Sand , so as
no part of it be suffer'd to be open to the Air , then set into a good
Fire , and there kept till the Sand has continu'd red_hot for a quarter
, half , an hour or two , or more , according to the nature and bigness
of the body to be coald or charr'd , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.39

then taking it out of the fire , and letting it stand till it be quite
cold , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.40

the body may be taken out of the Sand well charr'd and cleans'd of its
waterish parts ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.41

but in the taking of it out , care must be had that the Sand be very
neer cold , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.42

for else , when it comes into the free air , it will take fire , and
readily burn away . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.43

This may be done also in any close Vessel of Glass , as a <font> Retort
<$$font> , or the like , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.44

and the several fluid substances that come over may be receiv'd in a fit
<font> Recipient <$$font> , which will yet further countenance this
<font> Hypothesis <$$font> : HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.45

And their manner of charring Wood in great quantity comes much to the
same thing , namely , an application of a great heat to the body , and
perserving it from the free access of the devouring air ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.46

this may be easily learn'd from the History of Charring of Coal , most
excellently describ'd and publish'd by that most accomplish'd Gentleman
, Mr. <font> John Evelin <$$font> , in the 100 , 101 , 103 , pages of
his <font> Sylva <$$font> , to which I shall therefore refer the curious
Reader that desires a full information of it . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,102.47

<P_103>

Next , we may learn what part of the wood it is that is the <font>
combustible <$$font> matter ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.49

for since we shall find that none , or very little of those fluid
substances that are driven over into the Receiver are <font> combustible
<$$font> , and that most of that which is left behind is so , it follows
, that the solid <font> interstitia <$$font> of the Wood are the <font>
combustible <$$font> matter . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.50

Further , the reason why uncharr'd Wood burns with a greater flame then
that which is charr'd , is as evident , because those waterish or
volatil parts issuing out of the fired Wood , every way , not onely
shatter and open the body , the better for the fire to enter , but
issuing out in vapours or wind , they become like so many little <font>
aeolipiles <$$font> , or Bellows , whereby they blow and agitate the
fir'd part , and conduce to the more speedy and violent consumption or
dissolution of the body . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.51

Thirdly , from the Experiment of charring of Coals <paren> whereby we
see that notwithstanding the great heat , and the duration of it , the
solid parts of the Wood remain , whilest they are preserv'd from the
free access of the air undissipated <$$paren> we may learn , that which
has not , that I know of , been publish'd or hinted , nay , not so much
as thought of , by any ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.52

and that in short is this . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.53

First , <font> that the Air <$$font> in which we live , move , and
breath {COM:sic} , and which encompasses very many , and cherishes most
bodies it encompasses , that this Air is the <font> menstruum <$$font> ,
or universal dissolvent of all <font> Sulphureous <$$font> bodies .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.54

Secondly , <font> that this action <$$font> it performs not , till the
body be first sufficiently heated , as we find requisite also to the
dissolution of many other bodies by several other <font> menstruums
<$$font> . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.55

Thirdly , <font> that this action <$$font> of dissolution , produces or
generates a very great heat , and that which we call Fire ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.56

and this is common also to many dissolutions of other bodies , made by
<font> menstruums <$$font> , of which I could give multitudes of
Instances . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.57

Fourthly , <font> that this action <$$font> is perform'd with so great a
violence , and does so minutely act , and rapidly agitate the smallest
parts of the <font> combustible <$$font> matter , that it produces in
the <font> diaphanous medium <$$font> of the air , the action or pulse
of light , which what it is , I have else-where already shewn .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.58

Fifthly , <font> that the dissolution <$$font> of sulphureous bodies is
made by a substance inherent , and mixt with the air , that is like , if
not the very same , with that which is fixt in <font> Salt-peter
<$$font> , which by multitudes of Experiments that may be made with
<font> Saltpeter <$$font> , will , I think , most evidently be
demonstrated . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.59

Sixthly , <font> that in this dissolution <$$font> of bodies by the Air
, a certain part is united and mixt , or dissolv'd and turn'd into the
air , and made to fly up and down with it in the same manner as a <font>
metalline <$$font> or other body dissolv'd into any <font> menstruums
<$$font> , does follow the motions and progresses of that <font>
menstruum <$$font> till it be precipitated . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.60

Seventhly , That as there is one part that is dissoluble by the Air , so
are there other parts with which the parts of the Air mixing and uniting
, do make a <font> Coagulum <$$font> , or <font> precipitation <$$font>
, as one may call it , which causes it to be separated from the Air ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,103.61

but this <font> precipitate <$$font> is so light , and in so small and
rarify'd or porous clusters , that it is very volatil , and is easily
carry'd up by the motion of the Air , though afterwards , when the heat
and <P_104> agitation that kept it rarify'd ceases , it easily condenses
, HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.62

and commixt with other diissoluble parts , it stickes and adheres to the
next bodies it meets withall ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.63

and this is a certain <font> Salt <$$font> that may be extracted out of
<font> Soot <$$font> . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.64

Eighthly , that many indissoluble parts being very apt and prompt to be
rarify'd , and so , whilest they continue in that heat and agitation ,
are lighter then the Ambient Air , are thereby thrust and carry'd
upwards with great violence , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.65

and by that means carry along with them , not onely that <font> Saline
concrete <$$font> I mention'd before , but many terrestrial , or
indissoluble and irrarefiable parts , nay , many parts also which are
dissoluble , but are not suffer'd to stay long enough in a sufficient
heat to make them prompt and apt for that action .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.66

And therefore we find in <font> Soot <$$font> , not onely a part , that
being continued longer in a competent heat , will be dissolv'd by the
Air , or take fire and burn ; but a part also which is fixt ,
terrestrial , and irrarefiable . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.67

Ninthly , that as there are these several parts that will rarifie and
fly , or be driven up by the heat , so are there many others , that as
they are indissoluble by the <font> aerial menstruum <$$font> , so are
they of such sluggish and gross parts , that they are not easily
rarify'd by heat , and therefore can@ @not be rais'd by it ; the
volatility or fixtness of a body seeming to consist only in this , that
the one is of a texture , or has component parts that will be easily
rarify'd into the form of Air , and the other , that it has such as will
not , without much ado , be brought to such a constitution ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.68

and this is that part , which remains behind in a white body call'd
Ashes , which contains a substance , or <font> Salt <$$font> , which
Chymists call <font> Alkali <$$font> : HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.69

what the particular natures of each of these bodies are , I shall not
here examine , intending it in another place , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.70

but shall rather add that this <font> Hypothesis <$$font> does so
exactly agree with all <font> Phaenomena <$$font> of Fire , and so
genuinely explicate each particular circumstance that I have hitherto
observ'd , that it is more then probable , that this cause which I have
assign'd is the true adequate , real , and onely cause of these <font>
Phaenomena <$$font> ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.71

And therefore I shall proceed a little further , to shew the nature and
use of the Air . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.72

Tenthly , therefore the dissolving parts of the Air are but few ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.73

that is , it seems of the nature of those <font> Saline menstruums
<$$font> , or spirits , that have very much flegme mixt with the spirits
, HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.74

and therefore a small parcel of it is quickly glutted ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.75

and will dissolve no more ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.76

and therefore unless some fresh part of this <font> menstruum <$$font>
be apply'd to the body to be dissolv'd , the action ceases ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.77

and the body leaves to be dissolv'd and to shine , which is the
Indication of it , though plac'd or kept in the greatest heat ; whereas
<font> Salt-peter <$$font> is a <font> menstruum <$$font> , when melted
and red-hot , that abounds more with those Dissolvent particles , and
therefore as a small quantity of it will dissolve a great sulphureous
body , so will the dissolution be very quick and violent .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.78

Therefore in the <font> Eleventh <$$font> place , it is observable ,
that , as in other solutions , if a copious and quick supply of fresh
<font> menstruum <$$font> , though but weak , be poured on , or applied
to the dissoluble body , it quickly consumes it :
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,104.79

So this <font> menstruum <$$font> of the Air , if by Bellows , or any
other such contrivance , it be copiously apply'd to the shining body ,
is found to <P_105> dissolve it as soon , and as violently as the more
strong <font> menstruum <$$font> of melted <font> Nitre <$$font> .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,105.80

Therefore twelfthly , it seems reasonable to think that there is no such
thing as an Element of Fire that should attract or draw up the flame ,
or towards which the flame should endeavour to ascend out of a desire or
appetite of uniting with that as its <font> Homogeneal <$$font>
primitive and generating Element ; but that that shining transient body
which we call <font> Flame <$$font> , is nothing else but a mixture of
Air , and volatil sulphureous parts of dissoluble or combustible bodies
, which are acting upon each other whilst they ascend ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,105.81

that is , flame seems to be a mixture of Air , and the combustible
volatil parts of any body , which parts the encompassing Air does
dissolve or work upon , which action , as it does intend the heat of the
<font> aerial <$$font> parts of the dissolvent , so does it thereby
further rarifie those parts that are acting , or that are very neer them
, whereby they growing much lighter then the heavie parts of the <font>
Menstruum <$$font> that are more remote , are thereby protruded and
driven upward ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,105.82

and this may be easily observ'd also in dissolutions made by any other
<font> menstruum <$$font> , especially such as either create heat or
bubbles . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,105.83

Now , that action of the <font> Menstruum <$$font> {TEXT:Menstuum} or
<font> Air <$$font> , on the dissoluble parts , is made with such
violence , or is such , that it imparts such motion or pulse to the
<font> diaphanous <$$font> parts of the Air , as I have elsewhere shewn
is requisite to produce light . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,105.84

This <font> Hypothesis <$$font> I have endeavoured to raise from an
Infinite of Observations and Experiments , the process of which would be
much too long to be here inserted , and will perhaps another time afford
matter copious enough for a much larger Discourse , the Air being a
Subject which <paren> though all the world has hitherto liv'd and
breath'd in , and been unconversant about <$$paren> has yet been so
little truly examin'd or explain'd , that a diligent enquirer will be
able to find but very little information from what has been <paren> till
of late <$$paren> written of it : HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,105.85

But being once well understood , it will , I doubt not , inable a man to
render an intelligible , nay probable , if not the true reason of the
<font> Phaenomena <$$font> of Fire , which , as it has been found by
Writers and Philosophers of all Ages a matter of no small difficulty ,
as may be sufficiently understood by their strange <font> Hypotheses
<$$font> , and unintelligible Solutions of some few <font> Phaenomena
<$$font> of it ; so will it prove a matter of no small concern and use
in humane affairs , as I shall elsewhere endeavour to manifest when I
come to shew the use of the air in respiration , and for the
preservation of the life , nay , for the conservation and restauration
of the health and natural constitution of mankind as well as all other
aereal <font> animals <$$font> , as also the uses of this principle or
propriety of the air in chymical , mechanical , and other operations .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,105.86

In this place I have onely time to hint an <font> Hypothesis <$$font> ,
which , if God permit me life and opportunity , I may elsewhere
prosecute , improve and publish . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,105.87

In the mean time , before I finish this Discourse , I must not forget to
acquaint the Reader , that having had the liberty granted me of making
some trials on a piece of <font> Lignum fossile <$$font> shewn to the
Royal Society , by the eminently Ingenious and Learned Physician ,
Doctor <font> Ent <$$font> , who receiv'd it for a Present from the
famous <font> Ingenioso Cavalliero de Pozzi <$$font> , it being one of
the fairest <P_106> and best pieces of <font> Lignum fossile <$$font> he
had seen ; Having <paren> I say <$$paren> taken a small piece of this
Wood , and examin'd it , I found it to burn in the open Air almost like
other Wood , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,106.88

and insteed {COM:sic} of a resinous smoak or fume , it yielded a very
bituminous one , smelling much of that kind of sent :
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,106.89

But that which I chiefly took notice of , was , that cutting off a small
piece of it , about the bigness of my Thumb , and charring it in a
<font> Crucible <$$font> with Sand , after the manner I above prescrib'd
, I found it infinitely to abound with the smaller sort of pores , so
extreme thick , and so regularly perforating the substance of it
long-ways , that breaking it off a-cross , I found it to look very like
an Honey-comb ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,106.90

but as for any of the second , or bigger kind of pores , I could not
find that it had any ; so that it seems , whatever were the cause of its
production , it was not without those small kind of pores which we have
onely hitherto found in Vegetable bodies ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,106.91

and comparing them with the pores which I have found in the Charcoals
that I by this means made of several other kinds of Wood , I find it
resemble none so much as those of Firr , to which it is not much unlike
in grain also , and several other proprieties {COM:sic} .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,106.92

And therefore , what ever is by some , who have written of it , and
particularly by <font> Francisco Stelluto <$$font> , who wrote a
Treatise in <font> Italian <$$font> of that Subject , which was Printed
at <font> Rome <$$font> , 1637 , affirm'd that it is a certain kind of
Clay or Earth , which in tract of time is turn'd into Wood , I rather
suspect the quite contrary , that it was at first certain great Trees of
Fir or Pine , which by some Earthquake , or other casualty , came to be
buried under the Earth , and was there , after a long time's residence
<paren> according to the several natures of the encompassing adjacent
parts <$$paren> either rotted and turn'd into a kind of Clay , <font>
petrify'd <$$font> and turn'd into a kind of Stone , or else had its
pores fill'd with certain Mineral juices , which being stayd in time ,
and in tract of time coagulated , appear'd , upon cleaving out , like
small Metaline Wires , or else from some flames or scorching forms that
are the occasion oftentimes , and usually accompany Earthquakes , might
be blasted and turn'd into Coal , or else from certain <font>
subterraneous <$$font> fires which are affirm'd by that Authour to
abound much about those parts <paren> namely , in a Province of <font>
Italy <$$font> , call'd <font> Umbria <$$font> , now the <font> Dutchie
<$$font> of <font> Spoletto <$$font> , in the Territory of <font> Todi
<$$font> , anciently call'd <font> Tudor <$$font> , and between the two
Villages of <font> Collesecco <$$font> and <font> Rosaro <$$font> not
far distant from the high-way leading to <font> Rome <$$font> , where it
is found in greater quantity then elsewhere <$$paren> are by reason of
their being encompassed with Earth , and so kept close from the
dissolving Air , charr'd and converted into Coal .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,106.93

It would be too long a work to describe the several kinds of pores which
I met withall , and by this means discovered in several other Vegetable
bodies ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,106.94

nor is it my present design to expatiate upon Instances of the same kind
, but rather to give a Specimen of as many kinds as I have had
opportunity as yet of observing , reserving the prosecution and
enlarging on particulars till a more fit opportunity ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,106.95

and in prosecution of this design , I shall here add : <P_107> <heading>
OBSERV. XVII . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.96

OF PETRIFY'D WOOD , AND OTHER PETRIFY'D BODIES .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.97

<$$heading>

Of this sort of substance , I observ'd several pieces of very differing
kinds , both for their outward shape , colour , grain , <font> texture
<$$font> , hardness , <font> &c. <$$font> some being brown and redish
{COM:sic} ; others gray , like a Hone ; others black , and Flint-like :
some soft , like a Slate or Whetstone , others as hard as a Flint , and
as brittle . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.99

That which I more particular {COM:sic} examin'd , was a piece about the
bigness of a mans hand , which seem'd to have been a part of some large
tree , that by rottenness had been broken off from it before it began to
be <font> petrify'd <$$font> . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.100

And indeed , all that I have yet seen , seem to have been rotten Wood
before the petrifaction was begun ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.101

and not long since , examining and viewing a huge great <font> Oak
<$$font> , that seem'd with meer age to be rotten as it stood , I was
very much confirm'd in this opinion ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.102

for I found , that the grain , colour , and shape of the Wood , was
exactly like this <font> petrify'd <$$font> substance ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.103

and with a <font> Microscope <$$font> , I found that all those <font>
Microscopical <$$font> pores , which in sappy or firm and sound Wood are
fill'd with the natural or innate juices of those Vegetables , in this
they were all empty , like those of <font> Vegetables charr'd <$$font> ;
but with this difference , that they seem'd much larger then I have seen
any in <font> Char-coals <$$font> ; nay , even then those of Coals made
of great blocks of Timber , which are commonly call'd <font> Old-@
@coals <$$font> . The reason of which difference may probably be , that
the charring of Vegatables , being an operation quickly performed , and
whilest the Wood is sappy , the more solid parts may more easily shrink
together , and contract the pores or <font> interstitia <$$font> between
them , then in the rotten Wood , where that natural juice seems onely to
be wash'd away by <font> adventitious <$$font> or unnatural moisture ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.104

and so though the natural juice be wasted from between the firm parts ,
yet those parts are kept asunder by the <font> adventitious <$$font>
moystures , and so by degrees settled in those postures .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.105

And this I likewise found in the <font> petrify'd <$$font> Wood , that
the pores were somewat bigger then those of <font> Charcoal <$$font> ,
each pore being neer upon half as bigg again , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.106

but they did not bear that disproportion which is exprest in the tenth
<font> Scheme <$$font> , between the small specks or pores in the first
Figure <paren> which representeth the pores of Coal or Wood charr'd
<$$paren> and the black spots of the second Figure <paren> which
represent the like <font> Microscopical pores <$$font> in the <font>
petrify'd <$$font> Wood <$$paren> HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.107

for these last were drawn by a <font> Microscope <$$font> that magnify'd
the object above six times more in Diameter then the <font> Microscope
<$$font> by which those pores of Coal were observ'd .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.108

Now , though they were a little bigger , yet did they keep the exact
figure and order of the pores of Coals and of rotten Wood , which last
also were much of the same cize . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,107.109

The other Observations on this <paren> petrify'd <$$font> substance ,
that a while since , by the appointment of the <font> Royal Society
<$$font> , I made , and presented to them an account of , were these
that follow , which had the honour done them <P_108> by the most
accomplish'd Mr. <font> Evelin <$$font> , my highly honour'd friend ,
to be inserted and published among those excellent Observations
wherewith his <font> Sylva <$$font> is replenish'd , and would therefore
have been here omitted , had not the Figure of them , as they appear'd
through the <font> Microscope <$$font> been before that engraven .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.110

This <font> Petrify'd <$$font> substance resembled Wood , in that First
, all the parts of it seem'd not at all <font> dislocated <$$font> , or
alter'd from their natural Position , whil'st they were Wood , but the
whole piece retain'd the exact shape of Wood , having many of the
conspicuous pores of wood still remaining pores , and shewing a manifest
difference visible enough between the grain of the Wood and that of the
bark , especially when any side of it was cut smooth and polite ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.111

for then it appear'd to have a very lovely grain , like that of some
curious close Wood . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.112

Next <paren> it resembled Wood <$$paren> in that all the smaller and
<paren> if I may so call those which are onely visible with a good
magnifying Glass <$$paren> <font> Microscopical <$$font> pores of it
appear <paren> both when the substance is cut and polish'd <font>
transversly <$$font> and <font> parallel <$$font> to the pores of it
<$$paren> perfectly like the <font> Microscopical <$$font> pores of
several kinds of Wood , especially like and equal to those of several
sorts of rotten Wood which I have since observ'd , retaining both the
shape , position and magnitude of such pores . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.113

It was differing from Wood : First , in <font> weight <$$font> , being
to common water as 3_1$$4 to 1 . whereas there are few of our <font>
English <$$font> Woods , that when very dry are found to be full as
heavie as water . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.114

Secondly , in <font> hardness <$$font> , being very neer as hard as a
Flint ; and in some places of it also resembling the grain of a Flint :
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.115

and , like it , it would very readily cut Glass ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.116

and would not without difficulty , especially in some parts of it , be
scratch'd by a black hard Flint : HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.117

It would also as readily strike fire against a Steel , or against a
Flint , as any common Flint . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.118

Thirdly , in the <font> closeness <$$font> of it ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.119

for though all the <font> Microscopical <$$font> pores of this <font>
petrify'd <$$font> substance were very conspicuous in one position , yet
by altering that position of the polish'd surface to the light , it was
also manifest , that those pores appear'd darker then the rest of the
body , onely because they were fill'd up with a more duskie substance ,
and not because they were hollow . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.120

Fourth , in its <font> incombustibleness <$$font> , in that it would not
burn in the fire ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.121

nay , though I kept it a good while red-hot in the flame of a Lamp ,
made very <font> intense <$$font> by the blast of a small Pipe , and a
large Charcoal , yet it seem'd not at all to have diminsh'd its
extension ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.122

but only I found it to have chang'd its colour , and to appear of a more
dark and duskie brown colour ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.123

nor could I perceive that those parts which seem'd to have been Wood at
first , were any thing wasted , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.124

but the parts appear'd as solid and close as before .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.125

It was further observable also , that as it did not consume like Wood ,
so neither did it crack and flie like a Flint , or such like hard Stone
, HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.126

nor was it long before it appear'd red-hot . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.127

Fifthly , in its <font> dissolubleness <$$font> ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,108.128

for putting some drops of distill'd <font> Vinegar <$$font> upon the
Stone , I found it presently to yield very many Bubbles , just like
those which may be observ'd in spirit of <font> Vinegar <$$font> when it
corrodes <font> corals <$$font> , <P_109> though perhaps many of those
small Bubbles might proceed from some small parcels of Air which were
driven out of the pores of this <font> petrify'd <$$font> substance by
the insinuating liquid <font> menstruum <$$font> .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.129

Sixthly , in its <font> rigidness <$$font> and <font> friability
<$$font> , being not at all flexible but brittle like a Flint , insomuch
that I could with one knock of a Hammer break off a piece of it , and
with a few more , reduce that into a pretty fine powder .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.130

Seventhly , it seem'd also very differing from Wood to the <font> touch
, feeling <$$font> more cold then Wood usually does , and much like
other close stones and minerals . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.131

The Reasons of all which <font> Phaenomena <$$font> seem to be , That
this <font> petrify'd <$$font> Wood having lain in some place where it
was well soak'd with <font> petrifying <$$font> water <paren> that is ,
such a water as is well <font> impregnated <$$font> with stony and
earthy particles <$$paren> did by degrees separate , either by straining
and <font> filtration <$$font> , or perhaps , by <font> precipitation ,
cohesion <$$font> or <font> coagulation <$$font> , abundance of stony
particles from the permeating water , which stony particles , being by
means of the fluid <font> vehicle <$$font> convey'd , not onely into the
<font> Microscopical <$$font> pores , and so perfectly stoping {COM:sic}
them up , but also into the pores or <font> interstitia <$$font> , which
may , perhaps , be even in the texture or <font> Schematisme <$$font> of
that part of the Wood , which through the <font> Microscope <$$font> ,
appears most solid , do thereby so augment the weight of the Wood , as
to make it above three times heavier then water , and perhaps , six
times as heavie as it was when Wood . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.132

Next , they thereby so lock up and fetter the parts of the Wood , that
the fire can@ @not easily make them flie away , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.133

but the action of the fire upon them is onely able to <font> Char
<$$font> those parts , as it were , like a piece of Wood , if it be
clos'd very fast up in Clay , and kept a good while red-hot in the fire
, will by the heat of the fire be charr'd and not consum'd , which may ,
perhaps , also be somewheat of the cause , why the <font> petrify'd
<$$font> substance appear'd of a dark brown colour after it had been
burnt . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.134

By this <font> intrusion <$$font> of the <font> petrifying <$$font>
particles , this substance also becomes hard and <font> friable <$$font>
; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.135

for the smaller pores of the Wood being perfectly wedg'd , and stuft up
with those stony particles , the small parts of the Wood have no places
or pores into which they may slide upon bending ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.136

and consequently little or no flexion or yielding at all can be caus'd
in such a substance . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.137

The remaining particles likewise of the Wood among the stony particles ,
may keep them from cracking and flying when put into the fire , as they
are very apt to do in a Flint . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.138

Nor is Wood the onely substance that may by this kind of <font>
transmutation <$$font> be chang'd into stone ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.139

for I my self have seen and examin'd very many kinds of substances ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.140

and among very credible Authours , we may meet with Histories of such
<font> Metamorphoses <$$font> wrought almost on all kind of substances ,
both <font> Vegetable <$$font> and <font> Animal <$$font> , which
Histories , it is not my business at present , either to relate , or
<font> epitomise <$$font> , but only to set down some Observation
{COM:sic} I lately made on several kind of <font> petrify'd <$$font>
Shels , found about <font> Keinsham <$$font> , which lies within four or
five miles of <font> Bristol <$$font> , which are commonly call'd <font>
Serpentine-stones <$$font> . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,109.141

<P_110>

Examining several of these very curiously figur'd bodies <paren> which
are commonly thought to be Stones form'd by some extraordinary <font>
Plastick virtue latent <$$font> in the Earth it self <$$paren> I took
notice of these particulars : HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.143

First , that these figured bodies , or stones , were of very differing
substances , as to hardness : some of Clay , some Marle , some soft
Stone , almost of the hardness of those soft stones which Masons call
Fire-stone , other as hard as Portland stone , others as hard as Marble
, and some as Hard as a Flint or Crystal . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.144

Next , they were of very differing substances as to transparency and
colour , some white , some almost black , some brown , some Metalline ,
or like Marchasites ; some transparent like white Marble , others like
flaw'd Crystal , some gray , some of divers colours ; some radiated like
these long <font> petrify'd drops <$$font> , which are commonly found at
the <font> Peak <$$font> , and in other <font> subterranean caverns
<$$font> , which have a kind of pith in the middle .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.145

Thirdly , that they were very different as to the manner of their
outward figuration ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.146

for some of them seem'd to have been the substance that had fill'd the
Shell of some kind of Shel-fish ; others , to have been the substance
that had contain'd or enwrapp'd one of those Shels , on both which , the
perfect impression either of the inside or outside of such Shells seem'd
to be left , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.147

but for the most part , those impressions seem'd to be made by an
imperfect or broken Shell , the great end or mouth of the Shell being
always wanting , and oftentimes the little end , and sometimes half ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.148

and in some there were impressions , just as if there had been holes
broken in the figurating , imprinting or moulding Shell ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.149

some of them seem'd to be made by such a Shell very much brused or
flaw'd , insomuch that one would verily have thought that very figur'd
stone had been broken or brused whilst a gelly , as 't@ @were , and so
hardned , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.150

but within in the grain of the stone , there appear'd not the least sign
of any such bruse or breaking , but onlye on the very uttermost
superficies . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.151

Fourthly , they were very different , as to their outward covering ,
some having the perfect Shell , both in figure , colour , and substance
, sticking on upon its surface , and adhering to it , but might very
easily be separated from it , and like other common <font> Cockle
<$$font> or <font> Scolop-shels <$$font> , which some of them most
accurately resembled , were very dissoluble in common <font> Vinegar
<$$font> , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.152

others of them especially those <font> Serpentine <$$font> , or <font>
Helical stones <$$font> were cover'd HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.153

or retained the shining or Pearl-colour'd substance of the inside of a
Shel , which substance , on some parts of them , was exceeding thin ,
and might very easily be rubbed off ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.154

on other parts it was pretty thick , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.155

and retained a white coate , or flaky substance on the top , just like
the outsides of such Shells ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.156

some of them had very large pieces of the Shell very plainly sticking on
to them , which were easily to be broken or flaked off by degrees :
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.157

they likewise , some of them retain'd all along the surface of them very
pretty kind of <font> sutures <$$font> , such as are observ'd in the
skulls of several kinds of living creatures , which <font> sutures
<$$font> were most curiously shap'd in the manner of leaves , and every
one of them in the same Shell , exactly one like another , which I was
able to discover plainly enough with my naked eye , but more perfectly
and distinctly with my <font> Microscope <$$font> ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,110.158

all <P_111> these <font> sutures <$$font> , by breaking some of these
stones , I found to be the <font> termini <$$font> , or bounding of
certain <font> diaphragms <$$font> , or partitions , which seem'd to
divide the cavity of the Shell into a multitude of very proportionate
and regular <font> cells <$$font> or <font> caverns <$$font> ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,111.159

these <font> Diaphragms <$$font> , in many of them I found very perfect
and compleat , of a very distinct substance from that which fill'd the
cavities , and exactly of the same kind with that which covered the
outside , being for the most part whitish , or <font> mother-of-pearl
<$$font> colour'd . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,111.160

As for the cavities between those <font> Diaphragms <$$font> , I found
some of them fill'd with Marle , and others with several kinds of stones
, others , for the most part hollow , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,111.161

onely the whole cavity was usually covered over with a kind of <font>
tartareous petrify'd <$$font> substance , which stuck about the sides ,
and was there shot into very curious regular Figures , just as <font>
Tartar <$$font> , or other dissolv'd Salts are observ'd to stick and
<font> crystallize <$$font> about the sides of the containing Vessels ;
or like those little <font> Diamants <$$font> which I before observed to
have covered the vaulted cavity of a Flint ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,111.162

others had these cavities all lin'd with a kind of <font> metalline
<$$font> or <font> marchasite-like <$$font> substance , which with a
<font> Microscope <$$font> I could as plainly see most curiously and
regularly figured , as I had done those in a Flint .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,111.163

From all which , and several other particulars which I oberv'd , I can@
@not but think , that all these , and most other kinds of stony bodies
which are found thus strangely figured , do owe their formation and
figuration , not to any kind of <font> Plastick virtue <$$font> inherent
in the earth , but to the Shells of certain Shel-fishes , which , either
by some Deluge , Inundation , Earthquake , or some such other means ,
came to be thrown to that place , and there to be fill'd with some kind
of Mudd or Clay , or <font> petrifying <$$font> Water , or some other
substance , which in tract of time has been settled together and hardned
in those shelly moulds into those shaped substances we now find them ;
that the great and thin end of these Shells by that Earthquake , or what
ever other extraordinary {TEXT:extraordinay} cause it was that brought
them thither , was broken off ; and that many others were otherwise
broken , bruised and disfigured ; that these Shells which are thus
<font> spiralled {TEXT:spirallied} <$$font> and separated with <font>
Diaphragmes <$$font> , were some kind of <font> Nautili <$$font> or
<font> Porcelane shelle <$$font> ; and that others were shells of <font>
Cockles , Muscles , Periwincles , Scolops <$$font> , &c. of various
sorts ; that these Shelles in many , from the particular nature of the
containing or enclos'd Earth , or some other cause , have in tract of
time rotted and mouldred away , and onely left their impressionss , both
on the containing and contained substances ; and so left them pretty
loose one within another , so that they may be easily separated by a
knock or two of a Hammer . That other of these Shells , according to
the nature of the substance adjacent to them , have , by a long
continuance in that posture , been <font> petrify'd <$$font> and turn'd
into the nature of stone , just as I even now observ'd several sorts of
Wood to be . That oftentimes the Shell may be found with one kind of
substance within , and quite another without , having , perhaps , been
fill'd in one place , and afterwards translated to another , which I
have very frequently observ'd in <font> Cockle , Muscle , Periwincle
<$$font> , and other shells , which I have found by the Sea side .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,111.164

Nay , further , that some parts of the same Shell may be fill'd in one
place , and <P_112> some other caverns in another , and others in a
third , or a fourth , or a fifth place , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,112.165

for so many differing substances have I found in one of these <font>
petrify'd <$$font> Shells , HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,112.166

and perhaps all these differing from the encompassing earth or stone ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,112.167

the means how all which varieties {COM:sic} may be caus'd , I think ,
will not be difficult to conceive , to any one that has taken notice of
these Shells , which are commonly found on the Sea shore :
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,112.168

And he that shall throughly examine several kinds of such curiously
form'd stones , will <paren> I am very apt to think <$$paren> find
reason to suppose their generation or formation to be ascribable to some
such accidents as I have mention'd , and not to any <font> Plastick
virtue : {COM:sic} <$$font> HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,112.169

For it seems to me quite contrary to the infinite prudence of Nature ,
which is observable in all its works and productions , to design every
thing to a determinate end , and for the attaining of that end , makes
use of such ways as are <paren> as farr as the knowledge of man has yet
been able to reach <$$paren> altogether consonant , and most agreeable
to man's reason , and of no way or means that does contradict , or is
contrary to humane Ratiocination ; whence it has a long time been a
general observation and <font> maxime <$$font> , that <font> Nature does
nothing in vain <$$font> ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,112.170

It seems , I say , contrary to that great Wisdom of Nature , that these
prettily shap'd bodies should have all those curious Figures and
contrivances <paren> which many of them are adorn'd and contriv'd with
<$$paren> generated or wrought by a <font> Plastick virtue <$$font> ,
for no higher end then onely to exhibite such a form ; which he that
shall throughly {COM:sic} consider all the circumstances of such kind of
Figur'd bodies , will , I think , have great reason to believe , though
, I confess , one can@ @not presently be able to find out what Nature's
designs are . HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,112.171

It were therefore very desirable , that a good collection of such kind
of figur'd stones were collected ; and as many particulars ,
circumstances , and informations {COM:sic} collected with them as could
be obtained , that from such a History of Observations well rang'd ,
examin'd and digested , the true original or production of all those
kinds of stones might be perfectly and surely known ; such as are <font>
Thunderstones , Lapides Stellares , Lapides Judaici <$$font> , and
multitudes of other , whereof mention is made in <font> Aldrovandus ,
Wormius <$$font> , and other Writers of Minerals .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P1,112.172

