<BEGIN_hoole-1660-e3-p1>

<P_11>

<heading>

Chap. III HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,11.4

How to teach a childe to spell distinctly . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,11.5

<$$heading>

The common way of teaching a childe to spell , is , after he know's the
letters in his Alphabet , to initiate him in those few syllables , which
consist of one vowell before a consonant , as <font> ab , eb , ib , ob ,
ub <$$font> , &c. or of one vowel after a consonant , as <font> ba , be
, bi , bo , bu , &c. in the Horn-book , & thence to proceed with him
little and little to the bottom of the book , hereing him twice or
thrice over till he can say his lesson , and then putting him to a new
one . In which course I have known some more apt children to have
profited prety well , but scarce one of ten , when they have gone thorow
the book , to be able to spell a word that is not in it ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,11.7

And some have been certaine years daily exercised in saying lessons
therein , who after much endeavour spent , have been accounted <P_12>
meer block-heads , and rejected alltogether as uncapable to learn any
thing ; whereas some Teachers that have assayed a more familiar way ,
have professed , that they have not met with any such thing as a Dunse
amid a great multitude of little Schollars . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,12.8

Indeed it is <font> Tullies <$$font> observation of old , and <font>
Erasmus <$$font> his assertion of latter years , that it is as natural
for a childe to learn , as it is for a beast to go , a bird to fly , or
a fish to swim , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,12.9

and I verily beleeve it , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,12.10

for the nature of man is restlessely desirous to know things ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,12.11

and were discouragements taken out of the way , and meet helps afforded
young learners , they would doubtless go on with a great deal more
cherefulness , and make more proficiency at their books then usually
they do ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,12.12

and <font> could the Master have the discretion to make their lessons
familiar to them , children would as much delight in being busied about
them , as in any other sport , if too long continuance at them might not
make them tedious <$$font> . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,12.13

Amongst those that have gone a readier way to reading , I shall onely
mention Mr. <font> Roe <$$font> , and Mr. <font> Robinson <$$font> ,
the latter of whom I have known to have taught little children not much
above four years old to read distinctly in the Bible , in six <P_13>
weekes time , or under ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.14

their books are to be had in print , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.15

but every one hath not the art to use them . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.16

And Mr. <font> Cootes <$$font> English-School-Master seem's rather to
be fitted for one that is a Master indeed , then for a Scholar .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.17

Besides the way then which is usuall , you may <paren> if you think good
<$$paren> make use of that which I have set down in the new Primar to
help little ones to spell readily , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.18

and it is this . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.19

1 . Let a childe be well acquainted with his vowells , and made to
pronounce them fully by themselves , because they are able to make a
perfect sound alone . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.20

2 . Teach him to give the true valour or force of the consonants , and
to take notice how imperfectly they sound , except a vowel be joyned
with them . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.21

Both these are set apart by themselves . <paren> p. 2. <$$paren>
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.22

3 . Proceed to syllables made of one consonant set before a vowel
<paren> Sect. 5. <$$paren> HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.23

and let him joyne the true force of the consonant with the perfect sound
of the vowel , as to say , <font> ba , be , bi , bo , bu , &c. <$$font>
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.24

Yet it were good to leave <font> ca , ce , ci , co , cu <$$font> , and
<font> ga , ge , gi , go , gu <$$font> , to the last , because the valor
of the consonant in the second and third sylables doth differ from that
in the rest . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,13.25

<P_14>

4 . Then exercise him in syllables made of one vowel set before one
consonant , <paren> Sect. 6. <$$paren> as to say , <font> ab , eb , ib
, ob , ub , &c. <$$font> till he can spell any syllable of two letters
, backwards or forwards , as , <font> ba , be , bi , bo , bu ; ab , eb ,
ib , ob , ub ; ba , ab ; be , eb ; bi , ib ; bo , ob ; bu , ub <$$font>
; and so in all the rest comparing one with another .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,14.27

5 . And if to any one of these syllables you adde a letter , and teach
him how to joyne it in sound with the rest , you will make him more
ready in spelling ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,14.28

as , if before <font> ab <$$font> you put <font> b <$$font> , and teach
him to say <font> bab <$$font> ; if after <font> ba <$$font> , you put
<font> d <$$font> , and let him pronounce it <font> bad <$$font> , he
will quickly be able to joyne a letter with any of the rest , as ,
<font> nip , pin , but , tub , &c. <$$font> HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,14.29

To enure your young Scholar to any , even the hardest syllable , in an
easie way . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,14.30

1 . Practise him in the joyning of consonants that begin syllables
<paren> Sect. 7. <$$paren> so as that he may give their joynt forces
at once ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,14.31

thus , Having shewed him to sound <font> bl <$$font> or <font> br
<$$font> together , make him to pronounce them , and a vowel with them ,
<font> bla , bra , ble , bre <$$font> , and so in any of the rest .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,14.32

2 . Then practise him likewise in consonants that end syllables ,
<paren> Sect. 8. <$$paren> HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,14.33

make him first to give the force of the <P_15> joyned consonants , and
then to put the vowels before them ; as , <font> ble <$$font> with the
vowels before them sound <font> able , eble , ible , oble , uble
<$$font> , to all which you may prefix other consonants and change them
into words of one syllable , as , <font> fable , peble , bible , noble ,
bubble <$$font> : <paren> with a <font> b <$$font> inserted or the
<font> like <$$font> . Where observe that <font> e <$$font> in the end
of many words , being silent , doth qualifie the sound of the foregoing
vowel , so as to make words different from those that have not <font> e
<$$font> ; as , you may see <font> made <$$font> , differeth quite from
<font> mad <$$font> , <font> bete <$$font> from <font> bet <$$font> ,
<font> pipe <$$font> from <font> pip <$$font> , <font> sope <$$font>
from <font> sop <$$font> , and <font> cube <$$font> from <font> cub
<$$font> . Whereby I think them in an error , that leave out <font> e
<$$font> in the end of words , and them that in pronouncing it make two
syllables of one , in <font> stable , bible , people , &c. <$$font>
which judicious Mr. <font> Mulcaster <$$font> will not allow .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,15.34

In this exercise of spelling you may do well sometime to make all the
young beginners stand together , and pose them one by one in all sorts
of syllables , till they be perfect in any ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,15.35

and , to make them delight herein , 1. Let them spell many syllables
together which differ onely in one letter ; as , <font> and , band ,
hand , land , sand <$$font> . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,15.36

2 . Teach them to frame any word of one syllable , by joyning any of
the consonants <P_16> which go before vowels , with those that use to
follow vowels , and putting in vowels betwixt them ; as <font> black ,
block , clack , clock <$$font> . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,16.37

And this they may do afterwards amongst themselves , having severall
loose letters made and given them , to compose or divide in a sporting
manner , which I may rightly terme the Letter-sport .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,16.38

When a childe is become expert in joyning Consonants with the vowels ,
then take him to the Diphthongs <paren> Sect. 9. <$$paren>
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,16.39

and there , 1. Teach him the naturall force of a Diphthong <paren>
which consists of two vowels joyned together <$$paren>
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,16.40

and make him to sound it distinctly by it self , as , <font> ai , ei ,
&c. <$$font> HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,16.41

2 . Let him see how it is joyned with other letters , and learne to
give its pronountiation together with them , minding him how the same
Diphthong differs from its self sometimes in its sounds , and which of
the two vowels in it hath the greatest power in pronouncation , as , in
<font> people e <$$font> seemeth to drown the <font> o <$$font> .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,16.42

And besides those words in the Book , you may adde others of your own ,
till by many examples the childe do well apprehend your meaning , and so
, as that he can boldly adventure to imitate <P_17> you , and practise
of himself . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,17.43

Thus after a childe is throughly exercised in the true sounding of the
vowels and consonants together , let him proceed to the spelling of
words , first of one syllable <paren> Sect. 10. <$$paren> then of two
<paren> Sect. 11. <$$paren> then of three <paren> Sect. 12.
<$$paren> then of four <paren> Sect. 13 <$$paren> in all which let him
be taught how to utter every syllable by it self truly and fully ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,17.44

and be sure to speak out the last . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,17.45

But in words of more syllables , let him learn to joyne and part them
according to these profitable rules . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,17.46

1 . An English syllable may sometimes consist of eight letters , but
never of more , as , <font> strength <$$font> . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,17.47

2

In words that have many syllables , the consonant between two vowels
belongeth to the latter of them ; as , Hu-mi-li-tie .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,17.49

3 . Consonants which are joyned in the beginning of words , are not to
be parted in the middle of them ; as , <font> My-ste-ry <$$font> .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,17.50

4 . Consonants which are not joyned in the beginning of words , are to
be parted in the middle of them ; as , <font> for-get-ful-ness <$$font>
. HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,17.51

5 . If a consonant be doubled in the middle of a word , the first
belong's to the syllable foregoing , and the latter to the following ;
as , <font> pos-ses-si-on <$$font> . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,17.52

<P_18>

6 . In compound words , every part which belongeth to the single words
, must be set by it self ; as , <font> In-a-bi-li-ty <$$font> .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,18.54

And these rules have I here set down rather to informe the less skilful
teacher , how he is to guide his learner , then to puzle a childe about
them , who is not yet so well able to comprehend them .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,18.55

I have also divided those words in the Book , to let Children see how
they ought to divide other polysyllable words , in which they must
alwayes be very carefull <paren> as I said <$$paren> to sound out the
last syllable very fully . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,18.56

To enable a child the better to pronounce any word he meets withall in
reading , I have set down some more hard for pronuntiation ; <paren>
Sect. 14 <$$paren> in often reading over which he may be exercised to
help his utterance ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,18.57

and the Master may adde more at his own discretion , till he see that
his willing Scholar doth not stick in spelling any , be it never so hard
. HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,18.58

And that the child may not be amused with any thing in his book , when
he cometh to read , I would have him made acquainted with the pauses ,
<paren> Sect. 15 <$$paren> with the figures , <paren> Sect. 16
<$$paren> numerall letters , <paren> Sect. 17 <$$paren> Quotations
<paren> Sect. 18. <$$paren> and Abbreviations <paren> Sect. 19
<$$paren> which <P_19> being but a work of few houres space , may easily
be performed after <font> he can readily spell <$$font> , which when he
can do , he may profitably be put to reading , but not before ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,19.59

for I observed it a great defect in some of Mr. <font> R. <$$font>
Scholars , <paren> whose way was to teach to read presently without any
spelling at all <$$paren> that when they were at a losse about a word ,
they made an imperfect confused sound , in giving the force of the
consonants , which if they once missed they knew not which way to help
themselves , to find what the word was , whereas if after a childe know
his letters , he be taught to gather them into just syllables , and by
the joyning of syllables together to frame a word , <paren> which as it
is the most antient , so certainely it is the most naturall method of
teaching <$$paren> he will soon be able , if he stick at any word in
reading , by the nameing of its letters , and pronouncing of its
syllables to say what it is , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,19.60

and then he may boldly venture to read without spelling at all ,
touching the gaining of a habit whereof , I shall proceed to say
somewhat in the next chapter . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,19.61

<P_20>

<heading>

Chap. IIII . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,20.64

How a child may be taught to read any English Book perfectly .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,20.65

<$$heading>

The ordinary way to teach children to read is , after they have got some
knowledge of their letters , & a smattering of some syllables and words
in the horn-book , to turn them into the <font> ABC. <$$font> or Primar
, and therein to make them name the letters , and spell the words , till
by often use they can pronounce <paren> at least <$$paren> the shortest
words at the first sight . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,20.67

This method take's with those of prompter wites , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,20.68

but many of more slow capacities , not finding any thing to affect them
, and so make them heed what they learned , go on remissely from lesson
to lesson , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,20.69

and are not much more able to read , when they have ended their book ,
then when they begun it . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,20.70

Besides , the <font> ABC. <$$font> being now <paren> I may say
<$$paren> generally thrown aside , and the ordinary Primar not printed ,
and the very fundamentalls of christian Religion <paren> which were wont
to be contained in those books , and were commonly taught children at
home by heart before they went to Schoole <$$paren> with sundry people
<paren> almost <P_21> in all places <$$paren> slighted , the matter
which is taught in most books now in use , is not so familiar to them ,
and therefore not so easie for Children to learn .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,21.71

But to hold still to the sure foundation , I have caused the Lords
Prayer <paren> Sect. 20. <$$paren> the Creed <paren> Sect. 21.
<$$paren> and the ten Commandements <paren> Sect. 23. {COM:sic}
<$$paren> to be printed in the Roman character , that a childe having
learned already to know his letters and how to spell , may also be
initiated to read by them , which he will do the more cheerfully , if he
be also instructed at home to say them by heart .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,21.72

As he read's these , I would have a childe name what words he can at the
first sight , and what he can@ @not , to spell them , and to take notice
what pauses and numbers are in his lesson . And to go them often over ,
till he can tell any tittle in them , either in or without the book .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,21.73

When he is thus well entered in the Roman character , I would have him
made acquainted with the rest of the characters now in use <paren> Sect.
23. <$$paren> which will be easily done , by comparing one with another
, and reading over those <font> sentences , Psalms , Thanksgivings
<$$font> , and <font> Prayers <$$font> <paren> which are printed in
greater <P_22> and less character of sundry sorts <$$paren> till he have
them pretty well by heart . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,22.74

Thus having all things which concerne reading English made familar
{COM:sic} to him , he may attaine to a perfect habit of it . 1. By
reading <font> the single Psalter <$$font> . 2. <font> The Palmes in
meeter <$$font> . 3. <font> The Schoole of good manners <$$font> , or
such like easie books , which may both profit and delight him . All
which I would wish he may read over at lest thrice , to make the matter
, as well as the words , leave an impression upon his mind .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,22.75

If any where he stick at any word <paren> as seeming too hard <$$paren>
let him marke it with a pin , or the dint of his nayle , and by looking
upon it againe , he will remember it . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,22.76

When he can read any whit readily , let him begin the Bible , and read
over the book of <font> Genesis <$$font> , <paren> and other remarkable
Histories in other places of Scripture , which are most likely to
delight him <$$paren> by a chapter at a time ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,22.77

But acquaint him a little with the matter beforehand ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,22.78

for that will intice him to read it , and make him more observant of
what he read's . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,22.79

After he hath read , aske him such generall Questions out of the Story ,
as are most easie for him to answer , and he will the better remember it
. HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,22.80

I have <P_23> known some , that by hiring a child to read two or three
chapters a day , and to get so many verses of it by heart , have made
them admirable proficients , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,23.81

and that betimes , in the Scriptures ; which was <font> Timothies
<$$font> excellency , and his Grandmothers great commendation .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,23.82

Let him now take liberty to exercise himself in any English book <paren>
so the matter of it be but honest <$$paren> till he can perfectly read
in any place of a book that is offered him ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,23.83

and when he can do this , I adjudge him fit to enter into a <font>
Grammar <$$font> Schoole , but not before . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,23.84

For thus learning to read English perfectly , I allow two or three years
time , so that at seven or eight years of age , a child may begin Latine
. HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,23.85

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_here}

<P_28>

<heading>

Chap. VI HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,28.89

Of the founding of a Petty-Schoole . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,28.90

<$$heading>

The Petty-Schoole is the place where indeed the first Principles of all
Religion and learning ought to be taught , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,28.92

and therefore rather deserveth that more encouragement should be given
to the Teachers of it , then that it should be left as a work for poor
women , or others , whose necessities compel them to undertake it , as a
meer shelter from beggery . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,28.93

Out of this consideration it is <paren> perhaps <$$paren> that some
nobler spirits , whom <P_29> God hath enriched with an over-plus of
outward means , have in some places whereunto they have been by birth
<paren> or otherwise <$$paren> related , erected Petty-Schoole-houses ,
and endowed them with yearly salaries ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,29.94

but those are so inconsiderate towards the maintenance of a Master and
his familie , or so over-cloyed with a number of Free-@ @Scholars , to
be taught for nothing , that few men of parts will daigne to accept of
them , or continue at them for any while ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,29.95

and for this cause I have observed such weak foundations to fall to
nothing . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,29.96

Yet if any one be desireous to contribute towards such an eminent work
of charity , my advice is , that he erect a Schoole and dwelling house
together , about the middle of a Market-Town , or some populous
Country-Village , and acomodate {COM:sic} it with a safe yard adjoyning
to it , if not with an Orchard or Garden , and that he endow it with a
salery of <paren> at least <$$paren> twenty pounds <font> per_annum
<$$font> , in consideration wherof all such poor boyes as can
conveniently frequent it , may be taught <font> gratis <$$font> , but
the more able sort of neighbours may pay for childrens teaching , as if
the Schoole was not free ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,29.97

for they will find it no small advantage to <P_30> have such a Schoole
amongst them . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,30.98

Such a yearly stipend and convenient dwelling , with a liberty to take
young children to board , and to make what advantage he can best by
other Scholars , will invite a man of good parts to undertake the charge
, and excite him to the diligent and constant performance of his duty ;
especially , if he be chosen into the place by three or four honest and
discreet Trustees , that may have power also to remove him thence , if
by his uncivil behaviour , or grose neglect he render himself uncapable
to perform so necessary a service to the Church and Common-Wealth .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,30.99

As for the Qualifications of one that is to be the Teacher of a
Petty-Schoole , I would have him to be a Person of a pious , sober ,
comely and discreet behaviour , and tenderly affectionate towards
children , haveing some knowledge of the Latine Tongue , and abilitie to
write a fair hand , and good skil in Arithmetick , and then let him move
within the compasse of his own orb , so as to teach all his Scholars
<paren> as they become capable <$$paren> to read English very well , and
afterwards to write and cast accounts . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,30.100

And let him not meddle at all with teaching the Accidents , <P_31>
except onely to some more pregnant wits , which are intended to be set
forwards to learn Latine , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,31.101

and for such be sure that he ground them well , or else dismisse them as
soon as they can read distinctly , and write legibly , to the Grammar
School . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,31.102

I should here have closed my discourse ; and shut up this Petty-Schoole
, were it not that I received <font> a model for the maintaining of
Students <$$font> from a worthy friends hands <paren> & one that is most
zealously and charitably addicted to advance Learning , and to help it
in its very beginnings to come forwards to its full Rise <$$paren> by
which I am encouraged to addresse my remaining words to the Godly-minded
Trustees and Subscribers for so good a work , <paren> especially to
those amongst them that know me , and my School-endeavours <$$paren>
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,31.103

and this I humbly request of them , that as they have happily contrived
a Model for the education of Students , and brought it on a suddain to a
great degree of perfection , so they would also put to their hands for
the improvement of Schoole-learning , without which such choise
abilities as they aim at in order to the Ministry can@ @not possibly be
obtained . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,31.104

And for the <P_32> first foundation of such a work , I presume to offer
my advise , that in some convenient places , within and about the City ,
there may be Petty-Schooles erected , according to the number of wards ,
unto which certain poor children out of every Parish may be sent , and
taught <font> gratis <$$font> , and all others that please to send their
children thither may have them taught at a reasonable rate , and be sure
to have them improved to the utmost of what they are capable .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,32.105

And I am the rather induced to propound such a thing , because that late
eminent , Dr. <font> Bathurst <$$font> lately deceased , Mr. <font>
Gouge <$$font> and some others yet living did out of their own good
affection to learning , endeavour at their own charge to promote the
like . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,32.106

<P_33>

<heading>

CHAP. VII HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,33.109

Of the discipline of a Petty-Schoole . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,33.110

<$$heading>

The sweet and orderly behaviour of children addeth more credit to a
Schoole then due and constant Teaching , because this speaketh to every
one that the Childe is well taught , though <paren> perhaps <$$paren> he
learn but little ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,33.112

and good manners indeed are a main part of good education .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,33.113

I shall here therefore take occasion to speak somewhat concerning the
Discipline of a Petty-Schoole , leaving the further Discourse of
Childrens Manners to Books that treat purposely of that subject : as
<font> Erasmus de moribus , Youths Behaviour , &c. <$$font>
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,33.114

1 . Let every Scholar repair to Schoole before eight a clock in a
morning , or in case of weaknesse before nine ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,33.115

and let him come fairly washed , neatly combed , and hansomly clad ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,33.116

and by commending his cleannesse , and shewing it to his fellowes , make
him to take pleasure betimes <P_34> of himself to go neat and comely in
his clothes . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,34.117

2 . Let such as come before Schoole-time take liberty to recreate
themselves about the Schoole , yet so as not to be suffered to do any
thing , whereby to harm themselves , or Schoole-fellowes , or to give
offence , or make disturbance to any neighbour .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,34.118

3 . When Schoole-time calleth , let them all go orderly to their own
places , and there apply themselves digligently to their books , without
noyse , or running about . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,34.119

4 . When the Master cometh into the Schoole , let them all stand up ,
and make obeysance , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,34.120

<paren> so likewise when any stranger cometh in <$$paren>
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,34.121

and after notice taken who are absent ; let one that is most able read a
chapter , and the rest attend , and give some littlt {COM:sic} account
of what they heard read ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,34.122

Then let him that read , say a short prayer fitted for the Schoole ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,34.123

and afterward let every one settle to his present taske .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,34.124

5 . The whole Schoole may not unfitly be divided into four formes ;
whereof the first and lowest should be of those that learn to know their
letters , whose lessons may be in the <font> Primar <$$font> . The
second <P_35> of those that learn to spell , whose lessons may be in the
Single-Psalter . The third of these {COM:sic} that learn to read ,
whose lessons may be in the Bible . The fourth of those that are
exercised in reading , writeing , and casting accounts , whose lessons
may be in such profitable English-@ @Books as the Parents can best
provide , and the Master think fittest to be taught .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,35.125

6 . Let their lessons be the same to each boy in every form ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,35.126

and let the Master proportion them to the meanest capacities ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,35.127

thus those that are abler may profit themselves by helping their weaker
fellowes , and those that are weaker be encouraged to see that they can
keep company with the stronger . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,35.128

And let the two highest in every forme give notice to the Master when
they come to say , of those that were most negligent in geting the
lesson . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,35.129

7 . When they come to say , let them all stand orderly in one or 2
rowes , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,35.130

& whilst one sayeth his lesson , be sure that all the rest look upon
their books , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,35.131

and give liberty to him that@ @s next to correct him that is saying if
he mistake , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,35.132

and in case he can say better , let him take his place , and keep it
till the same boy or another <P_36> win it from him .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,36.133

The striveing for places <paren> especially <$$paren> amongst little
ones , will whet them all on to more diligence , then any encouragement
that can be given them ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,36.134

and the Master should be very sparing to whip any one for his book ,
except he be sullenly negligent , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,36.135

and then also I would chuse rather to shame him out of his untowardnesse
by commending some of his fellowes , and asking him why he can@ @not do
as well as they , then by falling upon him with rating words , or
injurious blowes . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,36.136

A great care also must be had that those children that are slow_witted
and of a tender spirit , be not any way discouraged , though they can@
@not make so good performance of their task as the rest of their
fellowes . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,36.137

8 . On Mundayes , Wednesdayes and Fridayes they may say two lessons in
a forenoon and two in an afternoon ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,36.138

and on Tuesdayes and Thursdays in the forenoons they may also say two
lessons ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,36.139

but on Tuesdayes and Thursdayes in the afternoons , and on Saturday
mornings I would have the time spent in examineing , and directing how
to spell and read a_right , and hearing them say the Graces , Prayers ,
and Psalms , and especially <P_37> the Lords Prayer , the Creed , and
the Ten Commandements <paren> which are for that purpose set down in the
<font> New-@ @Primar <$$font> very perfectly by heart .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,37.140

And those that can these well may proceed to get other Catechisms ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,37.141

but be sure they be such as agree with the Principles of Christian
Religion . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,37.142

9 . Their lessons being all said , they should be dismissed about
eleven a clock , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,37.143

and then care must be taken that they go every one orderly out of the
Schoole , and passe quietly home without any stay by the way .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,37.144

And to prevent that too too common clamour , and crouding out of the
Schoole door , let them rise out of their places one by one with their
hat , and book in their hand , and make their honours to their Master as
they passe before his face , one following another at a distance out of
the Schoole . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,37.145

It were fittest and safest that the least went out the foremost , that
the bigger boyes following may give notice of any misdemeanour upon the
way . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,37.146

10 . Their return to Schoole in the after-noon should be by one of the
clock , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,37.147

and those that come before that hour , should be permitted to play
within their bounds till the clock strike one , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,37.148

<P_38>

and then let them all take their places in due order , and say their
lessons as they did in the fore-noon . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,38.150

After lessons ended , let one read a chapter , and say a Prayer ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,38.151

and so let them again go orderly and quietly home , about five a clock
in the summer , and four in the winter season . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,38.152

11 . If necessity require any one to go out in the School time , let
him not interrupt the Master by asking him leave ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,38.153

but let him leave his book with his next fellow above him , for fear he
should else spoile it , or loose it , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,38.154

and in case he tarry too long forth , let notice be given to the Monitor
. HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,38.155

12 . Those children in the upper form may be monitors , every one a day
in this turn , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,38.156

and let them every evening after all lessons said , give a bill to the
Master of their names that are absent , and theirs that have committed
any disorder ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,38.157

and let him be very moderate in correcting , and be sure to make a
difference betwixt those faults that are vitiously enormous , and those
that are but childish transgressons ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,38.158

Where admonition readily take place , it is a needlesse trouble to use a
rod , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,38.159

and as for a <font> ferula <$$font> I wish it were utterly banished out
of all Schooles . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,38.160

<P_39>

If one , before I conclude , should ask me , how many children I think
may be well and profitably taught <paren> according to the method
already proposed <$$paren> in a Petty-School ; I return him answer ,
that I conceive fourty boyes will be enough throughly to employ one man
, to hear every one so often as is required , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,39.162

and so many he may hear and benefit of himself , without making use of
any of his Scholars to teach the rest , which however , it may be
permitted , and is practised in some Schooles , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,39.163

yet it occasioneth too much noyse and disorder , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,39.164

and is no whit so acceptable to Parents , or pleasing to the children ,
be the work never so well done . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,39.165

And therefore I advise , that in a place where a great concours of
children may be had , there be more Masters then one employed according
to the spatiousnesse of the room , and the number of boyes to be taught
; so that every fourty Scholars may have one to teach them ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,39.166

and in case there be boyes enough to be taught , I would appoint one
single Master , to attend one single forme , and have as many Masters as
there are forms , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,39.167

and then the work of teaching little ones to the height of their best
improvement may be throwly done , especially <P_40> if there were a
writeing-master employed at certain houres in the Schoole , and an
experienced Teacher encouraged as a supervisor , or inspector , to see
that the whole Schoole be well and orderly taught , and disciplined .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,40.168

What I have here writ concerning the Teaching and ordering of a
Petty-Schoole , was in many particulars experienced by my self with a
few little boyes , that I taught amongst my Grammar-Scholars in London ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,40.169

and I know those of eminent worth , and great learning that upon tryal
made upon their own children at home , and others at Schoole are ready
to attest the ease and benefit of this method . Insomuch as I was
resolved to have adjoyned a Petty-Schoole to my Grammar-Schoole at the
Token-house in <font> Lothbury London <$$font> , and there to have
proceeded in this familiar and pleasing way of Teaching , had I not been
unhansomly dealt with by those whom it concerned , for their own profit
sake to have given me lesse discouragement . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,40.170

Neverthelesse , I think it my duty to promote Learning what I can , and
to lay a sure foundation for such a goodly structure as learning is ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,40.171

And <P_41> though <paren> perhaps <$$paren> I may never be able to
effect what I desire for its advancement , yet it will be my comfort ,
to have imparted somwhat to others that may help thereunto .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,41.172

I have here begun at the very ground work , intending <paren> by Gods
blessing <$$paren> forthwith to publish <font> The New Discovery of the
Old Art of Teaching <$$font> , which doth properly belong to a
Grammar-Schoole . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,41.173

In the mean time I intreat those into whose hands this little work may
come , to look upon it with a single eye , and whether they like or
dislike it , to think that it is not unnecessary for men of greatest
parts to bestow a sheet or two at leasure time upon so mean a subject as
this seem's to bee . And that God which causeth immense rivers to flow
from small spring-heads , vouchsafe to blesse these weak beginings in
tender age , that good learning may proceed hence to its full perfection
in riper years . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,41.174

Finis . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,41.175

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_here}

<P_228>

It would withall be a great encouragement to these poorer sort of
children to learn , if some whom God hath enriched with more then enough
, would spend the <font> supererrogation <$$font> of their wealth ,
<paren> as <font> Mr. Mulchaster <$$font> terms it <$$paren> in
affording exhibitions of 8. or 10. l. <font> per_annum <$$font>
towards keeping them at the Schoole , or sending them abroad as they are
fit , to Trades , or Universities . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,228.178

They that go thither , should have larger exhibitions allowed them ,
upon condition that they employ more time then others in the study of
tongues , and critical learning ; for the promoting whereof I shall
onely propound <font> Mr. Mulcaster's <$$font> question in his own
words , which are these ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,228.179

<font> If there were one Colledge , where nothing should be professed ,
but Languages onely , <paren> as there be some people which will proceed
no further <$$paren> to serve the Realme abroad , and studies in the
Universitie , in that point excellently & absolutely , were it not
convenient ? HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,228.180

nay , were it not most profitable <$$font> , &c.
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,228.181

As for what he writes further , <paren> in Chap. 41. of his <font>
Positions <$$font> <$$paren> touching the <font> division of Colledges
by <P_229> profession and faculties <$$font> ; and <font> Mr. John
Drury <$$font> hath lately published <paren> in his reformed Schoole
<$$paren> and his <font> Supplement <$$font> thereto , concerning the
<font> bringing together into one society , such as are able to exercise
themselves in any , or all kind of Studies , that by their mutuall
Association , Communication , and assistance in reading , meditating ,
and conferring about profitable matters , they may not onely profit
their own abilities , but advance the superstructures of all learning to
the perfection which by such meanes is attainable <$$font> ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,229.182

I refer the more judicious to their Books , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,229.183

and leave it to the consideration of those that endevour to promote
Schoole-teaching , whether such a Schoole as I have now delineated ,
would not be of great concernment to Church and Common-wealth ,
where-out to pick more able Schoole-masters , that by degrees have been
exercised in teaching all sorts of Scholars , for <paren> at least
<$$paren> seven years together , then many men that have scarce saluted
, or are newly come from the Universities , can suddenly prove to be .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,229.184

For I think it one thing to be a good Schoole-master , and another thing
to be a good Scholar , though the former can@ @not well do his duty as
he ought , except he be also the latter . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,229.185

<P_230>

I might here bewayle the unhappy divertment of <font> Jesus College
<$$font> in <font> Rotherham <$$font> , in which Town , one <font>
Thomas Scot , alias Rotherham <$$font> <paren> a poor boy in <font>
Ecclesfield <$$font> Parish <$$paren> having had his education , and
being advanced to the Arch-bishoprick of <font> York <$$font> , in the
time of <font> Edward <$$font> the fourth , did out of love to his
country and gratitude to the Town , erect a Colledge as a Schoole , for
a Provost who was to be a Divine , and to preach at <font> Ecclesfield
<$$font> , <font> Laxton <$$font> , and other places <paren> where the
Colledge demeanes lay ; <$$paren> and three Fellowes , whereof one was
to teach <font> Grammar <$$font> , another <font> Musick <$$font> , and
the third <font> Writing <$$font> ; besides a number of Scholars ; for
some of whom he also provided Fellowships in <font> Lincolne Colledge
<$$font> in <font> Oxford <$$font> . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,230.187

But in the time of <font> Henry <$$font> the eighth , the Earle of
<font> Shrowesbury <$$font> <paren> who as I have heard , was the first
Lord that gave his vote for demolishing of Abbies <$$paren> having
obtained <font> Roughford Abbey <$$font> in <font> Nottinghamshire
<$$font> , <paren> to the <font> Prior <$$font> whereof the Lordship of
the Town of <font> Rotherham <$$font> belonged <$$paren> took advantage
also to sweep away the Revenues of <font> Rotherham Colledge <$$font>
<paren> which according to a rentall that I have seen , amounted to
about 2000. l. <font> per_annum <$$font> HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,230.188

and after a while <paren> having engratiated himself with some Townsmen
, and Gentlemen thereabout <P_231> by erecting a Cock-pit <$$paren> he
removed the Schoole out of the Colledge into a sorry house before the
gate , leaving it destitute of any allowance , till <font> Mr. West
<$$font> <paren> that writ the <font> Presidents <$$font> <$$paren> in
the time of Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> <paren> and when <font> Mr.
Snell <$$font> was Schoolmaster <$$paren> obtained a yearely Salary of
tenne pounds <font> per_annum <$$font> , which is since Paid out of the
Exchequer , by the Auditor of accounts . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,231.189

I remember how often , and earnestly <font> Mr. Francis West <$$font> ,
who had been Clerk to his Uncle , would declaime against the injury done
to the Schoole , which indeed <paren> as he said <$$paren> ought still
to have been kept in the Colledge , and how when I was a Schoole-master
there , he gave me a Copy of the Foundation , and showed me some
rentalls of Lands , and told me where many Deeds and Evidences belonging
thereunto were then concealed , and other remarkable passages , which he
was loth to have buried in silence . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,231.190

But I onely mention thus much touching that worthy foundation , to shew
how charitably some men have been addicted to cherish the roots of
learning , and how covetously others have been bent to destroy the whole
body of it , even in former ages ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,231.191

And I hope none will be discouraged from Pious undertakings , for feare
least <P_232> his benevolence should in these , or after time be
perverted , when he considereth that God looketh upon the sincerity of
his ends , and will accordingly reward him , though what he religiously
intended , may unhappily be abused by others , contrary to his minde .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,232.192

I shall now to end this Chapter , recite some <font> remarkable passages
of Mr. Mulcasters <$$font> out of his <font> Positions <$$font> <paren>
Ch. 40. <$$paren> which I leave to the consideration of others , to
think how far they concurre with what I have said , as well concerning
the foundation of a Petty , as a Grammar-Schoole .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,232.193

' If any well-disposed wealthy man , for the honour that he beareth to
the murthered infants <paren> as all our erections have some respect
that way <$$paren> would begin some building , even for the little yong
ones which were no increase to Schooles , but an help to the elementary
degree , all they would pray for him , HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,232.194

and he himself should be bound to the memory of the young infants ,
which put him in remembrance of so vertuous an act .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,232.195

The opportunity of the place , and the commodity of able Trainers ,
whereof a small time will bring forth a great many , will draw many on ,
and procure good Exhibitours , to have the thing go forward .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,232.196

<P_233>

I could wish we had fewer Schooles , so they were more sufficient , and
that upon consideration of the most convenient seats for the Countries ,
and Shires , there were many put together , to make some few good .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,233.198

The use of under-teachers is not , as we now practise it in Schooles ,
where indeed Ushers be Masters of themselves , but to assist the Master
in the easier points of his charge , which ought to have all under his
own teaching , for the chief points , and the same under the Ushers ,
for the more usual , and easie . HOOLE-1660-E3-P1,233.199

