<BEGIN_hoxinden-1648-e3-p1>

<P_108>

<heading:edcomment:LXIX_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_HIS_WIFE_KATHERINE_OXINDEN>

<P_109>

Deare Heart , I am verie sorrie for the death of the Lady Percivall ,
who was so good a neighbour as I can never expect a better .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,109.5

Wee may learne by her how uncertaine our lifes are here and thereby the
better to prepare ourselves for another . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,109.6

<P_110>

I have yett dispatched verie little businesse since I came to Towne
having onlie put in my answere to old Mr. Dean's bill .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.8

Tomorrow we shall have a hearing att Westminster after which time I
shall be readie to bee commanded by you into the Countrie ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.9

for I desire not to stay here , sith it will bee no advantage to the
businesse you know of . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.10

If you find itt will not take , make as if you never intended anie such
thing . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.11

I have been to see the Ladie Oxinden and my Cozin Dallison , who are
both well . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.12

My Ladie intends for Dene when Sir James returns and my Cozin Dallison
for Halling . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.13

My brother Huffam is gone into the West uppon the States charge ,
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.14

and for ought I can learn may have a living there if he please .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.15

I delivered the letter I had of the Ladie Deering a Wednesday last to
the Lady Gibb . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.16

Cap=t= Dixwell hath bought all Sir Thomas Soames his estate in Barham ,
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.17

but say nothing of itt . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.18

I dined with him this Mooneday att Westminster where hee told mee of itt
. HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.19

Sure what ever others expect , by his laying out of his monie hee
expects peace . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.20

I beeleeive in few yeares hee will have most of the land from thence to
Folkston . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.21

How sir John Sidly's businesse goes you may see by the Diurnall ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.22

and as it hapned to him so itt will do to everie one who flatters
himselfe up against the State . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.23

I desire thee uppon Mooneday next to send my man up with my gelding ,
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.24

hee may come out at 4 in the morning and reach to London that night and
baite a little by the way - HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.25

Lett him bring him to my Cozin Oxinden@ @'s at the Green Muze ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.26

if I do not put him off att a verie greate rate I will come home uppon
him . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.27

I desire to heare by the Fryday post from thee what thy opinion is
herein as allso in other matters . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.28

I have not yet beene to see the Ladie Zouch nor Sir Allan ,
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.29

yett I heare they are both in towne . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.30

I hope thou art in good health . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.31

Yet by thy being lett blood I doubt the worst ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.32

pray let mee heare from thee concerning itt .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,110.33

<P_111>

I will not have my sonne go to schoole till I come home ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.35

but my Cozin may goe when hee desires itt . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.36

Pray certifie mee of all Passages thou canst concerning the Ladie
Percivall@ @'s death and funerall , as who was att itt etc.
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.37

I do alreadie wish my selfe att home with thee -
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.38

Pray remember mee to my daughter Kate - HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.39

Pray faile not at sending to mee by the Fryday post and write a noate of
all such things as thou must of necessitie have and I will provide them
for thee as far as my monie will goe . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.40

I beelieve I shall buy myself nothing this Tearme .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.41

I leave all my businesses att home to thy managerie
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.42

and am dayly more and more Thy affectionate and faithfull husband Hen:
Oxinden . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.43

10 May 1647 HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.44

Pray see my sonne follow his booke , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.45

and tell him that I do expect that hee translate everie day a chapter
till I come home . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.46

<heading:edcomment:LXX_SAME_TO_SAME>

Deare Heart , How glad I was to heare from thee I can@ @nott well
expresse : HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.48

I will assure thee , leaving all manner of expressions out which are not
as reall as God is true , I do exceedingly love and honour thee .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.49

And the more because of thy industrie in advancing her who if this
businesse in hand aile , can@ @not expect anie {SIC:fanie} thing of
consequence . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.50

Pre@ @thee if the rub be onlie in her , remove itt by all meanes
possible , and I shall thinke nothing too much for thee that I may be
able to give thee . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.51

I would thou didst but know one halfe of my ardent affections towards
thee HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,111.52

and then I dare say thou wouldst run through fire and water to effect
<P_112> my desires ; amongst which this must needs bee of most
consequence , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.53

and indeede thy owne convenience will much depend thereon in the regard
of my uncertaine condition as in relation to what is not thine .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.54

I am afraid to come home least my presence may hinder that which hath so
long caused my absence . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.55

Yett there is nothing under heaven which I desire more then {I_desire}
to bee with thee . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.56

Things as in relation to the armie and the Cittie and parliament are all
in an uncertaine condition , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.57

pray God send a better end than is expected .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.58

If I come not home Saturday night , I can@ @not posibly defer coming
longer then Wedensday in Whitson weeke , att which day att the uttmost
pray lett mee heare the absolute off or on of the businesse you know of
. HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.59

I shall have my braine <paren> to use thyn own words , for I know not
how to expresse myself in better <$$paren> orecast with a thicke cloud
of melancholy if this now hoped businese succeede not , toward the
effecting of which if thou knowst not how to bring itt otherwise about ,
send for my Cozin Roberts and take private instructions from him ,
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.60

but pray lett that bee thy last refuge , in case thou knowst now how to
effect it otherwise . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.61

You can@ @not in humane reason doe thyselfe and mee more right then in
effecting itt ; our affaires so much depending thereon .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.62

But be sure lett itt bee done before such witnesses as will not bee
known of itt till time and occasion serve . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.63

What thou doest do quickly HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.64

and so God blesse thee to whom I resolve and desire above all earthly
things to bee An affectionat and faithfull servant .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.65

Hen: Oxinden . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.66

3 June 1647 HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.67

I will not faile to buy thy stuffe , etc. HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.68

I beleive Capt. Dixwell will bee at home Sat. night ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.69

perhaps I too ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.70

but stay only out of hopes of hearing the confirmation of my desires -
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,112.71

<P_113>

<heading:edcomment:LXXI_SAME_TO_SAME>

Deare Heart , I received thine of Fryday 4th of June , where in to my
incredible greife I heard of the frustration of all thy care and
endeavours , insomuch as itt would greive thy heart to see my
perplexitie concerning the same : HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.74

if the default had beene in the other partie I should have beene the
lesse troubled , because that had beene a thing inavoidable ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.75

but when itt was brought to this issue that shee must bee the refusing
partie , itt would melt a heart of stone for greife to thinke of itt .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.76

Now all my hopes are dashed in peices ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.77

the foundation I layd whereuppon to erect the building of my happinesse
is pulled up , and I left as disconsolate as my verie Enemies can desire
. HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.78

In summe except in thy selfe , I shall live without all manner of ioy
and delight . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.79

when nothing ellse could hinder itt , must needes the follie of a girle
prevent her owne happinesse and make her selfe assuredlie miserable ?
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.80

O yee heavens , why do yee not poure down showers in abundance , that
the earth may not bee able to drinke them up ,
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.81

and why do they not encrease to such an abundance that etc.
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.82

If the fault bee onlie in her mee thinks itt might bee remidied ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.83

lett her know from mee shee hath undone her selfe ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.84

and most assuredly shee hath . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.85

Lett her know I shall never againe desire to see her face ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.86

lett her like Caine wander as a vagabond and a runagate ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.87

itt shall move no heart of mine ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.88

lett her know I shall never account her amongst the number of my
Children , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.89

and am resolved when I come home to send her out of my sight .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.90

I never imagined that the fault would rest in her , as I perceive by
your letter itt doth . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,113.91

<P_114>

Sir Allan intends suddenlie to bee in Kent : HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.93

Sir James Oxinden and my Ladie will come out of London toward Deane
uppon Wedensday or Thursday next . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.94

I had come three weeks since , had not the hopes of the effecting this
businesse stayed mee . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.95

I have had but too dayes perfect health since I came into this stinking
smoakie Cittie , having a perpetuall cold and continuall sweate in itt .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.96

If I should find no more pleasure att home with thee then I have found
here , I would not desire to live . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.97

I doubt not but thou hast heared that the King is with the Independent
armie ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.98

what will bee the issue no bodie knowes ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.99

some hope the best . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.100

My Brother Huffam I beleive is by this time att his journy's end in the
West HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.101

and intends to come home by water , as his kinsman Mr. Huffam , att
whose house hee lodged , certifyed mee Saturday last .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.102

I sent thee the newest and best fashion stuffe in London on Tuesday last
for a gound and petticoate , because I thought nothing too good or too
deare for thee . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.103

I was att Val Pettitt's Saturday last , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.104

and wrott a letter to thee there of some stuffe I sent for my two
daughters ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.105

but since Peg is so refractorie , lett her weare her old cloathes ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.106

the stuffe is an excellent stuffe , and much worne , though formerly in
fashion . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.107

I receaved but 8@ @=l= of the 10@ @=l= thou didst write mee word thou
sentest mee ; which 8@ @=l= the stuff cost , except 11 or 12 =s= .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.108

I have bought an excellent watch for my Sister Ellen , which I intend to
bring home with mee for her . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.109

I used much industry in procuring itt , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.110

but itt cost mee well , in regard it hath a double silver case ,
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.111

and is promised mee to bee excellent good worke .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.112

I have sent thee a small necklace of Perle , such as my money would
reach to , with a small wire to string them as occasion may serve ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.113

I desire thee to accept of itt for my sake .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.114

I have nothing but that thou shalt liveing or dying share in according
to my ability , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.115

and I doubt not of according to thy owne desires ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,114.116

for truly I exceedingly love honour and <P_115> value Thee , more than
anie soule uppon the face of the whole earth .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.117

I have not yett receaved the 5@ @=l= thou didst specify in thy last
letter , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.118

and therfore am forced to omit buying of some things .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.119

I have bought my selfe nothing but a hatt and paire of bootes since I
came to London , and some pedling small thinges .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.120

I do not know whether I shall send this letter by the Carrier or my
Cozin Robin Hales , in regard I doubt of the breaking open of Letters at
this distempered time . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.121

Pray , if yett thou canst retrive the businesse betweene the parties ,
do itt before my coming home ; it will bee a businesse of everlasting
honour to thee if thou canst effect it . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.122

I have herin sent thee the picture of a gentleman who loves thee
exceeding well , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.123

and is resolved alwaies to bee thy reall , true , loveing and constant
servant so long as hee lives . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.124

In exceeding hast I am Thine assuredly Hen. Oxinden
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.125

7 June 1647 HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.126

I have sent downe a trunke containing divers writings which concerne an
especiall friend of mine , which I desire you to lett Henry have a care
to preserve from the wett in case of raine ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.127

and pray sett itt up carefully . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.128

Pray seale up the things directed to my ensigne
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.129

and send them to him immediatelie - HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,115.130

<P_136>

<heading:edcomment:LXXXVI_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_HIS_WIFE>

<P_137>

Deare Heart , Pray excuse mee that I have not wrott to thee till now ,
in regard I could not unlesse I had sent a messenger of purpose , which
would have bene expensive . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,137.134

That Tom Denne is dead you knew of before . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,137.135

The manner of his death was unexpected . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,137.136

Hee was well uppon Fryday HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,137.137

and dyed uppon Satterday night , t'@ @is said of an impostume ,
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,137.138

confident I am of no infectious disease . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,137.139

His sicknesse he had att my house I beleive was doubtlesse the same with
that which brought him to his grave . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,137.140

Hee had made no other will then what hee made beefore hee went over to
France ; which proves somewhat better then I expected .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,137.141

Pray send to Mr. Howard and my other tenants at Barham desiring them to
pay you the last our Ladies rent and not Mr. Denne ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,137.142

pray hire Adam Jull to go over to all the tenants and tell them they are
all to pay their rents to mee and none but mee , and that Mr. Den nor
his sonne have nothing to doe to receave one pennie of rent of anie of
his land except of womenjoul {COM:sic} , the rest being given to mee and
my heires to pay debts and legacies with_all , whereof 1500@ @=ll= is
given to Ms Thomasin and a_1000@ @=ll= a peice to the other sisters ,
except <P_138> to her that is married ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.143

a_50@ @=ll= is given to my Cozin Roberts , 5@ @=ll= to Mr. Meriwether ,
5@ @=ll= to John Osborne , 5@ @=ll= to Mr. Coppin , 5@ @=ll= to
{TEXT:missing_"to"} Paul Pettit , 5@ @=ll= to Ned Den and 5@ @=ll= to
Nicholas and 5@ @=ll= to Mr. Stephens of Wingham .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.144

I hope I shall make my part good enough with Mr. Denne , having the
estate in my hands untill I shall bee discharged of all sutes and
Legacies . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.145

Pray send my bay gelding downe into the Marsh to goodman Collier , as I
take it his name is , who uses to keepe horses for mee ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.146

Gray knowes him , who I desire may carrie them speedilie ,
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.147

and desire him , and Mr. Browne , and goodman Gilbert to pay his rent
to mee who have onlie right to receave it . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.148

Pray lett the men proceede in digging the timber att Roxpol wood , and
that I appointed to bee digged in the Conie ground ,
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.149

and let Cooper appoint what Oakes hee thinks may bee spared to bee
felled in Gatehurst wood : HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.150

let him enquire out the price of tan : HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.151

pray see that my men follow their worke , and spare the pease for my
blacke horse , whom I must keepe up in the stable this summer ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.152

they may put their horses in Roxpol Wood ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.153

let Oxinden Cloase bee laid in for hey HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.154

and pray put on the breeches till I come home .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.155

Today I saw to the number of 10,000 horse and foote come out of Essex
who went to the parliament to petition that the King our most gracious
Soveraigne may come with honour and safetie to treate with his two
houses of Parliament : HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.156

they were most gallant men and men of estats and fortune ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.157

itt is beleft all other counties will take example by them .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.158

T'@ @is said the King hath sent the duke of Yorke a Commission to bee
Admirall of the narrow sees , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.159

and the sea men begin to bee mutinous against Rainsborow who came to the
houses to acquaint them therewith . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.160

Cromwell is gon with 5,000 horse and foote against Poyer ,
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.161

but the horse begin to mutinie in regard they are unwilling to fight
against men of their owne opinions . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.162

I am in hast HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.163

and can not write so much to thee as I would in regard of busines .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.164

I therfore refer thee to the bookes . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,138.165

<P_139>

T'@ @is said Ms Dixwell is well HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,139.167

but I have no leasure to visit her , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,139.168

beside I doubt shee may bee fearefull in regard Tom Den dyed so
suddenlie . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,139.169

Pray let Adam Jull shew all the Tenants this noate enclosed .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,139.170

Mr. Denne was buried beefore I came to London , in regard his bodie
could not keepe ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,139.171

pray remember mee to Mr. Barling and my ensigne :
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,139.172

and communicate the newes to each of them , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,139.173

but lay up my bookes safe after they have perused them .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,139.174

I am in exceeding hast but Your affectionate husband Hen. Oxinden
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,139.175

4th May 1648 . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,139.176

<P_140>

<heading:edcomment:LXXXVIII_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_HIS_WIFE>

<P_141>

Deare Heart , Though it bee long first , our writings are now in hand
and drawing up ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.180

the rubs that have been in the way I shall acquaint thee with when I
shall have the happinesse to see thee . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.181

One was the not getting monie together , another Mr. Thompson's desire
to protract time , for reasons I beeleive you conceave .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.182

My Cozin Roberts , who longs to bee att home , can certify you I have
not beene in fault . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.183

I heare Deale Castle is surrendered ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.184

<paren> if soe <$$paren> pray gett what monie thou canst for the
soldiers' quarter HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.185

and keepe itt to thine owne use . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.186

Pray have a care of my harvest and all other my affaires .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.187

Here is no apparence of a thanksgiving
{COM:preceding_word_"thanksgiving"_emended} this day , neither in Church
nor streetes , divers Churches being altogether emptie and most not
above 20 people in them ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.188

of this Sir Tho: Peirce and I are witnesses , who went from Temple Bar
to the end of Leaden Hall streete and find no signes of ioy .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.189

Sir Allan Zouch and his ladie went out of Towne about a fourthnight agoe
, whom I saw but once since I came hether . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.190

My Cozin Dalison is in Towne HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.191

but I never had the fortune or will to see her ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.192

I know no newes but what I have sent . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.193

I wish myselfe at home but in regard of my occasions and an extreame
cold I have gott . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.194

In hast I am Thine onlie Hen: Oxinden HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.195

Sep. 7. 1648 HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.196

Pray remember my love to my sister Ellen and to all you see whom you
take to bee reall to mee . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,141.197

<P_153>

<heading:edcomment:XCVI_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_HIS_WIFE>

Deare Hearte , My Cozin John Hobart I beeleive will bee with you by
Saturday next , if I bee not ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,153.200

my desire is to overtake him ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,153.201

what you doe now in relation to former businesses must bee done out of
hand , HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,153.202

for time will occasion distasts ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,153.203

jealousies of others must bee the onlie best way of accelerating that
which else may aske longer time to effect . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,153.204

I have with much adoe brought my Lady to give way to his coming :
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,153.205

if his fondnesse to a second person's familiar usage of him bee no
obstacle , hee will probably sett his minde more entire one what is most
desirable by mee to be accomplished : HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,153.206

your distance and reservednes will putt him uppon you know whom ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,153.207

in short you are soe wise of your selfe as I shall leave <P_154> all to
your discretion . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.208

Sir Nicholas and the Ladie Crisper are come to Towne exceedinglie fine
together with old Mr. Denne and his other daughters
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.209

and have discharged 100@ @=ll= to Mr. Winstanlie since their coming ,
for which I stood bound . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.210

Fryday last I saw one Robert Lockier shott to death for the cause , as
you may reade in the Army's Martyr ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.211

he was buryed uppon Sunday ; two_thousand of his partie accompanying his
corpse all in blacke ribbons , one leading his charging horse in great
state etc ; HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.212

what this will produce amongst the Levellers time will produce .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.213

I have such an extreame cold ever since about four dayes from the time
of my coming to London that I have beene scarce able to speake .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.214

I have little comfort in staying , onlie as in relation to my businesse
. HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.215

{COM:6_lines_of_business_omitted} Pray gett in what money you can
against my returne HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.216

for I shall bee in want very much thereof . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.217

Deare heart pray bee mindefull of all my affaires att home , the sole
ordering of which I leave to thy providence .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.218

I am as wearie of London as a dog of a he {COM:ms._torn} ;
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.219

if I can but once settle my businesses here I will hardly come up againe
in hast . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.220

Pray present my humble respects to Ms. Dixwell
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.221

and lett her know I take myselfe infinitely obliged unto her for her
kind visitt of you in my absence . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.222

I have not beene to see my Lady Oxinden since I have beene att London
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.223

but have mett Sir Ja: casually in the Towne .
HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.224

I heare but now from him that hee is like to bee some time at Sir
William Merideth's . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.225

I have delivered the silver spoone to Capt Reade to bee sent or
delivered by him to thee . HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.226

I shall remember the rest of thy commands who am Dearest Thy
affectionate and true selfe Hen: Oxinden HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.227

30: <font> Ap: <$$font> 1649 HOXINDEN-1648-E3-P1,154.228

