<BEGIN_jbarring-1629-e2-p1>

<P_41>

<heading:edcomment:14_JOHN_BARRINGTON,_13_DECEMBER_1628>

Deare mother I have been latelie in Sussex with a frind of mine which
hath both caused my neglect of my dutie in wrighting or comming unto yow
, JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,41.4

and at this present am constrained to stay about my monnie which is dew
to mee from the kinge which wee are promised to have the next weeke , so
soane as our accompts are all brought in , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,41.5

and so every man is to be cashered . JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,41.6

Howbeit it is reported that theare are two reigiments to goe for Venice
among whome I do <paren> God willing <$$paren> intend to goe ,
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,41.7

and doe to that effect seake for a companie . JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,41.8

I am very much bound to my lord generall bye my lord of Warwick@ @'s
meanes . JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,41.9

He hath offred mee large courtesies for to incouradg my going in the
very next imploiment which <paren> as wee heare <$$paren> wil@ @be about
the middle of Februarie at the farthest . JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,41.10

With the remembrance of my most humble dutie , I cease ,
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,41.11

and do beaseach the allmightie to guide yow in all your affaires
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,41.12

Your obedient sonn John Barrington London , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,41.13

December 13th , 1628 JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,41.14

{COM:no_endorsement}

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample,_letters_46,_50_and_71}

<P_101>

<heading:edcomment:77_JOHN_BARRINGTON,_12_NOVEMBER_1629>

Deare mother I understood by Mr Bridge your desire of my going downe
into the country , which commandment I shall most willinglie obsearve as
soane as ever I can cleare my selfe out of towne of some small debts ,
which I hope I shall shortlie doe by meanes of my brother's letter to my
lord treasorer . JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.19

I have her@ @inclosed sente yow a coppie of a letter wee receaved from
the sergeant_major generall of the kinge of Sweden@ @'s army ,
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.20

and allthough wee are for the present prevented of our expectacions ,
yet wee hope before the springe to have our desire that way .
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.21

I beseach yow however to be assured that my desire is greate to be in
inployment , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.22

yet I ought to loake for such an one as I may be able to live by , which
I will not fayle to doe to my best if our hopes of Swethland do fayle .
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.23

Moste parte of the English which went over last sommer into Swethland
being placed in the front of the king's army weare cut of by the
Polanders , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.24

however that can@ @not daunt us ; JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.25

allthough the kinge is very much blamed for placing such younge
souldiers in the front , yet wee thinck the best .
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.26

Thus with my humble dutie remembred I betake yow to the tuition of the
allmighty who I beseach to propser {COM:sic} yow in all your godly
indeavours JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.27

and rest Your obedient sonn John Barrington JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.28

London , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.29

12th November , 1629 JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.30

Since my wrighting of this I heare there is a frind of mine come from
Sweden who was a captain there . JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.31

He reports the peace is ended twixt Sweden and Poland and allmost all
the English officers are dead , some slayne others {COM:dead} by famine
and pestilence , that he was constrayned to come home by reason of that
extremitie ; JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.32

the like he hath related to the kinge . JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.33

{COM:Endorsed_80b} To my honorable mother the lady Johan Barrington at
Sir Gilbert Gerrard's in Harrow Hill JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,101.34

<P_110>

<heading:edcomment:87_JOHN_BARRINGTON,_18_DECEMBER_1629>

Deare mother I doe most humblie thanck yow that yow have beene pleased
to healpe mee in this extremitie in furnishing mee with monie to cleare
mee out of towne , which I will not faile to restore in Februarie when I
receave my monie dew to mee from the kinge . JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,110.37

Sir Francis Herris hath certified mee of a command in the Ile of Man of
a castle which is in the gift of my lord Strange ,
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,110.38

I shal@ @be very joyfull if yow will please in any way to instruct mee
to compass so much happines to my sealfe , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,110.39

but Sir Francis will more largelie relate this to yow upon Monday ,
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,110.40

for he assures mee tomorrow he will fully informe himselfe herof .
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,110.41

I shall ever be willing to conforme my selfe to your will and pleasure
in the taking of any course of life . JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,110.42

I had thought to have gone before now into Essex to my brother Masham@
@'s JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,110.43

but my chirurgion , by reason of the weaknes of my legg and being but
latelie cured of the last sorenes , did counsell mee not to depart
untill he had made mee a strengthing plaster and a remedie to hinder the
breaking out of the skin , which I am to have tomorrow ;
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,110.44

then I will not fayle to goe downe . JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,110.45

In meane tyme I beseach yow not to blame my stay two daies or three
daies more then your command is I should , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,110.46

for I doe assure yow I have written the trew cause
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,110.47

and I will with all <P_111> expedicion hasten downe .
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,111.48

Meane time I doe <paren> with my humble dutie remembred <$$paren> commyt
yow to God his protection and rest Your obedient sonn John Barrington
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,111.49

London , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,111.50

18 December , 1629 JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,111.51

{COM:endorsed_f._105b}

To my honourable mother the ladie Johan Barrington
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,111.53

<P_117>

<heading:edcomment:95_JOHN_BARRINGTON,_30_DECEMBER_1629>

Deare mother May it please yow , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.56

as soone as I possibly could I have according to your command repayred
into the country JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.57

and am very much bound unto my brother Masham and sister for my
courteous entertaynment . JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.58

I have understood your pleasure concerning my sealfe and that yow would
have mee enter into some setled course of life ;
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.59

I do intreate yow will be pleased to beleave what I have formerly
declared by my letters unto yow , which is that I shall be ever desirous
to be instructed hearin by your sealfe and will not be wanting in the
following of the course yow shall be pleased to advise mee ,
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.60

howbeit I shall nevertheles be diligent my sealfe in learning some good
way to proffit my sealfe , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.61

and shall carefully follow it with my best indeavours .
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.62

I will be no farther tedious unto yow , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.63

but with my humble duty remembred I betake yow to God his tuition
JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.64

and rest Your obedient sonn John Barrington JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.65

Oates , JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.66

30th December , 1629 JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.67

{COM:endorsed_f._117b} To my honourable mother the ladie Johan
Barrington at Harrow Hill JBARRING-1629-E2-P1,117.68

