<BEGIN_jetaylormeas-1662-e3-p1>

<P_5>

Madam , The wise <font> Bensirach <$$font> advised that we should not
consult with a woman concerning her of whom she is jealous , neither
with a coward in matters of warre , nor with a merchant concerning
exchange ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,5.3

and some other instances he gives of interested persons , to whom he
<P_6> would not have us hearken in any matter of Counsel .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,6.4

For where ever the interest is <font> secular <$$font> or <font> vitious
<$$font> , there the bias is not on the side of <font> truth <$$font> or
<font> reason <$$font> , because <font> these <$$font> are seldom serv'd
by profit and low regards . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,6.5

But to consult with a friend in matters of friendship is like consulting
with a spiritual person in Religion ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,6.6

they who understand the secrets of Religion or the interior beauties of
friendship are the fittest to give answers in all inquiries concerning
the respective subjects ; because <font> reason <$$font> and <font>
experience <$$font> are on the side of <font> interest <$$font> ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,6.7

and that which in friendship is most <font> pleasing <$$font> and most
<font> useful <$$font> , is also most <font> reasonable <$$font> and
most <font> true <$$font> ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,6.8

and a friends fairest interest is the best measure of the conducting
friendships : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,6.9

and therefore you who are so eminent in friendships could also have
given <P_7> the best answer to your own inquiries ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,7.10

and you could have trusted your own reason , because it is not onely
greatly instructed by the direct notices of things , but also by great
experience in the matter of which you now inquire .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,7.11

But because I will not use any thing that shall look like an excuse , I
will rather give you such an account which you can easily reprove , then
by declining your commands , seem more safe in my prudence , then open
and communicative in my friendship to you .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,7.12

You first inquire how far a Dear and a perfect friendship is authoriz'd
by the principles of Christianity ? JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,7.13

To this I answer that the word <font> Friendship <$$font> in the sense
we commonly mean by it , is not so much <P_8> as named in the
New-Testament ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,8.14

& our Religion takes no notice of it . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,8.15

You think it strange ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,8.16

but read on before you spend so much as the beginning of a passion or a
Wonder upon it . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,8.17

There is mention of <paren> <font> Friendship with the world <$$font> ,
<$$paren> JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,8.18

and it is said to be <font> enmity with God <$$font> ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,8.19

but the word is no where else named , or to any other purpose in all the
New Testament . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,8.20

It speaks of Friends often ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,8.21

but by <font> Friends <$$font> are meant our acquaintance , or our
Kindred , the relatives of our family or our fortune , or our sect ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,8.22

something of society , or something of kindness there is in it ; a
tenderness of appellation and civility , a relation made by gifts , or
by duty , by services and subjection ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,8.23

and I think , I have reason to be confident , that the word <font>
Friend <$$font> <paren> speaking of humane intercourse <$$paren> <P_9>
is no other-wayes used in the Gospels or Epistles , or Acts of the
Apostles : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,9.24

and the reason of it is , the word <font> Friend <$$font> is of a large
signification ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,9.25

and means all relations and societies , and whatsoever is not <font>
enemy <$$font> ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,9.26

but by <font> friendships <$$font> , I suppose you mean , <font> the
greatest love , and the greatest usefulnesse , and the most open
communication , and the noble sufferings , and the most exemplar
faithfulness , and the severest truth , and the heartest {COM:sic}
counsel , and the greatest union of minds <$$font> , of which brave men
and women are capable . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,9.27

But then I must tell you that Christianity hath new christened it ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,9.28

and calls this <font> Charity <$$font> . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,9.29

The Christian knowes no enemy he hath ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,9.30

that is , though persons may be injurious to him , and unworthy in
themselves , yet he knowes none whom he is not first bound to forgive ,
which is indeed <P_10> to make them on his part to be no enemies ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,10.31

that is , to make that the word <font> enemy <$$font> shall not be
perfectly contrary to <font> Friend <$$font> ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,10.32

it shall not be a relative term and signifie something on each hand , a
<font> relative <$$font> and a <font> correlative <$$font> ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,10.33

and then he knowes none whom he is not bound to love & pray for , to
treat kindly and justly , liberally , and obligingly .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,10.34

Christian Charity is Friendship to all the world ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,10.35

and when Friendships were the noblest things in the world , Charity was
little , like the Sun drawn in at a chink , or his beams drawn into the
centre of a Burning glass ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,10.36

but Christian Charity is Friendship , expanded like the face of the Sun
when it mounts above the Eastern hills : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,10.37

and I was strangely pleased when I saw something of this in Cicero ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,10.38

for I have been so <P_11> push'd at by herds and flockes of people that
follow any body that whistles to them , or drives them to pasture , that
I am grown afraid of any Truth that seems chargeable with singularity :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,11.39

but therefore I say , glad I was when I saw <font> Laelius <$$font> in
<font> Cicero <$$font> discourse thus : <font> Amicitia ex infinitate
generis humani quam conciliavit ipsa natura , contracta res est , &
adducta in angustum ; ut omnis charitas , aut inter duos , aut inter
paucos jungeretur <$$font> . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,11.40

Nature hath made Friendships , and societies
{COM:preceding_word_"societies"_emended} , relations and endearments ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,11.41

and by something or other we relate to all the world ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,11.42

there is enough in every man that is willing , to make him becom our
friend ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,11.43

but when men contract Friendships , they inclose the Commons ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,11.44

and what Nature intended should be every mans , we make proper to two or
<P_12> three . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,12.45

Friendship is like rivers and the strand of seas , and the ayre , common
to all the world ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,12.46

but Tyrants , and civil Customs , Warres , and want of Love have made
them proper and peculiar . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,12.47

But when Christianity came to renew our nature , and to rest ore our
lawes , and to increase her priviledges , and to make her aptness to
becom Religion , then it was declared that our Friendships were to be as
universal as our conversation ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,12.48

that is , <font> actual <$$font> to all with whom we converse , and
<font> potentially extended <$$font> unto those with whom we did not .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,12.49

For he who was to treat his enemies with forgiveness and prayers , and
love , and beneficence was indeed to have no enemies , and to have all
friends . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,12.50

So that to your question , how far a Dear & perfect Friendship is
authoriz'd <P_13> by the principles of Christianity ? The answer is
ready and easie . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,13.51

It is warranted to extend to all Mankind ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,13.52

and the more we love , the better we are , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,13.53

and the greater our friendships are , the dearer we are to God ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,13.54

let them be as Dear , and let them be as perfect , and let them be as
many as you can ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,13.55

there is no danger in it ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,13.56

onely where the restraint begins , there begins our imperfection ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,13.57

it is not ill that you entertain brave Friendships and worthy societies
: JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,13.58

it were well if you could <font> love <$$font> . and if you could
<font> benefit <$$font> all Mankind ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,13.59

for I conceive that is the sum of all Friendships .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,13.60

I confess this is not to be expected of us in this world ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,13.61

but as all our graces here are but imperfect , that is , at the best
they are but tendencies to glory , so our <P_14> Friendships are
imperfect too , and but beginnings of a coelestial Friendship , by which
we shall love every one as much as they can be loved .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,14.62

But then so we must here <font> in our proportion <$$font> ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,14.63

and indeed that is it that can make the difference ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,14.64

we must be friends to all : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,14.65

That is , apt to do good , loving them really , and doing to them all
the benefits which we can , and which they are capable of .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,14.66

The Friendship is equall to all the World ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,14.67

and of it self hath no difference ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,14.68

but is differenced onely by accidents , and by the capacity or
incapacity of them that receive it . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P1,14.69

