<BEGIN_jetaylor-1673-e3-p1>

<P_1>

<heading>

THE MYSTERIOUSNESS AND DUTIES OF MARRIAGE JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,1.4

PART I . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,1.5

<$$heading>

{COM:verse_omitted}

The first Blessing God gave to man , was Society :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,1.8

and that society was a Marriage , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,1.9

and that marriage was confederate by God himself , and hallowed by a
blessing : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,1.10

and at the same time , and for very many descending ages , not only by
the instinct of Nature , but by a superadded forwardness <paren> God
himself inspiring the desire <$$paren> the world was most desirous of
Children , impatient of Barrenness , accounting single life a Curse ,
and a childless person hated by God . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,1.11

The world was rich and empty , and able to provide for a more numerous
posterity than it had . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,1.12

{COM:greek_omitted} You that are rich <font> Numenius <$$font> , you may
multiply your family ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,1.13

<P_2>

poor men are not so fond of Children , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,2.15

but when a family could drive their Herds , and set their children upon
Camels , and lead them till they saw a fat Soil watered with Rivers ,
and there sit down without paying rent , they thought of nothing but to
have great Families , that their own relations might swell up to a
Patriarchate , and their children be enough to possess all the Regions
that they saw , and their grand-children become Princes , and themselves
build Cities and call them by the name of a Child , and become the
fountain of a Nation . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,2.16

This was the consequent of the first blessing , <font> Increase and
multiply <$$font> . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,2.17

The next blessing was , <font> the promise of the Messias , <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,2.18

and that also increased in men and women a wonderful desire of marriage
: JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,2.19

for as soon as God had chosen the family of <font> Abraham <$$font> to
be the blessed line , from whence the worlds Redeemer should descend
according to the flesh , every of his Daughters hoped to have the honour
to be his Mother , or his Grand-mother , or something of his Kindred :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,2.20

and to be childless in <font> Israel <$$font> was a sorrow to the <font>
Hebrew <$$font> women great as the slavery of <font> Egypt <$$font> , or
their dishonours in the land of their Captivity .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,2.21

But when the Messias was come , and the Doctrine was published , and his
Ministers but few , and his Disciples were to suffer persecution , and
to be of an unsetled dwelling , and the Nation of the <font> Jews
<$$font> , in the bosome and society of which the Church especially did
dwell , were to be scattered and broken all in pieces , with fierce
calamities , and the world was apt to calumniate and to suspect and
dishonour Christians upon pretences and unreasonable jealousies , and
that to all these purposes the state of marriage brought many
inconveniencies ; it pleased God in this new Creation to inspire into
the Hearts of his servants a Disposition and strong Desires to live a
single Life , lest the state of marriage should in that <P_3>
conjunction of things become an accidental Impediment to the
dissemination of the Gospel , which call'd men from a confinement in
their domestick charges to Travel , and Flight , and Poverty , and
Difficulty , and Martyrdom : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,3.22

upon this necessity the Apostles and Apostolical men published Doctrines
, declaring the advantages of single life , not by any commandment of
the Lord , but by the spirit of Prudence , {COM:greek_omitted} , for the
present and then incumbent necessities , and in order to the advantages
which did accrew to the publick Ministeries and private Piety .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,3.23

There are some <paren> said our Blessed Lord <$$paren> who make
themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,3.24

that is , for the advantages and the ministry of the Gospel , <font> non
ad vitae bonae meritum <$$font> <paren> as S. <font> Austin <$$font> in
the like case <$$paren> not that it is a better service of God in itself
, but that it is useful to the first circumstances of the Gospel and the
infancy of the Kingdom , because the unmarried person
{COM:greek_omitted} , is apt to spiritual and Ecclesiastical imployments
: JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,3.25

first {COM:greek_omitted} , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,3.26

and then {COM:greek_omitted} , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,3.27

holy in his own person , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,3.28

and then sanctified to publick Ministeries ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,3.29

and it was also of ease to the Christians themselves , because as then
it was , when they were to flee , and to flee for ought they knew , in
Winter , and they were persecuted to the four winds of Heaven ; and the
nurses and the women with child were to suffer a heavier load of sorrow
because of the imminent persecutions ; and above all , because of the
great fatality of ruine upon the whole nation of the Jews , well it
might be said by S. <font> Paul <$$font> {COM:greek_omitted} , <font>
Such shall have trouble in the flesh , <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,3.30

that is , they that are married shall , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,3.31

and so <font> at that time <$$font> they had : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,3.32

<P_4>

and therefore it was an act of charity to the Christians to give that
counsel , {COM:greek_omitted} , <font> I do this to spare you , <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.34

and {COM:greek_omitted} : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.35

for when the case was alter'd , and that storm was over , and the first
necessities of the Gospel served , and <font> the sound was gone out
into all nations ; <$$font> in very many persons it was wholly changed ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.36

and not the married but the unmarried had {COM:greek_omitted} trouble in
the flesh ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.37

and the state of marriage returned to its first blessing ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.38

<font> & non erat bonum homini esse solitarium <$$font> ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.39

and it was not good for man to be alone . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.40

But in this first interval , the publick Necessity and the private Zeal
mingling together did sometimes over-act their love of single Life ,
even to the disparagement of Marriage , and to the scandal of Religion ;
which was increased by the occasion of some pious persons renouncing
their contract of marriage , not consummate , with unbelievers .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.41

For when <font> Flavia Domitilla <$$font> being converted by <font>
Nereus <$$font> and <font> Achilleus <$$font> the Eunuchs , refused to
marry <font> Aurelianus <$$font> to whom she was contracted ; if there
were not some little envy and too sharp hostility in the Eunuchs to a
married state , yet <font> Aurelianus <$$font> thought himself an
injur'd person , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.42

and caus'd S. <font> Clemens <$$font> who vail'd her and his spouse
both to die in the quarrel . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.43

St. <font> Thecla <$$font> being converted by St. <font> Paul <$$font>
grew so in love with Virginity , that she leaped back from the marriage
of <font> Tamyris <$$font> , where she was lately ingaged .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.44

S. <font> Iphigenia <$$font> denied to marry King <font> Hirtacus
<$$font> , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.45

and it is said to be done by the advice of St. <font> Matthew <$$font>
. JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.46

And <font> Susanna <$$font> the Niece of <font> Diocletian <$$font>
refus'd the love of <font> Maximianus <$$font> the Emperor ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.47

and these all had been betrothed ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,4.48

and so did St. <font> Agnes <$$font> , and St. <font> Felicula
<$$font> , and divers others then and afterwards ; insomuch , that it
was reported among the Gentiles , that the Christians did not only hate
all that were not of their perswasion , but were Enemies of the <P_5>
chast Laws of Marriage ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.49

And indeed some that were called Christians were so ; <font> forbidding
to marry , and commanding to abstain from meats . <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.50

Upon this occasion it grew necessary for the Apostle to state the
Question right , and to do honour to the holy Rite of Marriage , and to
snatch the Mystery from the hands of zeal and folly , and to place it in
Christs right hand , that all its beauties might appear , and a present
convenience might not bring in a false Doctrine , and a perpetual Sin ,
and an intolerable Mischief . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.51

The Apostle therefore who himself had been a Married man , but was now a
Widower , does explicate the mysteriousness of it ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.52

and describes its honours , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.53

and adorns it with rules and provision of Religion , that as it begins
with Honour , so it may proceed with Piety , and end with Glory .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.54

{COM:greek_omitted} For although single life hath in it privacy and
simplicity of affairs , such solitariness and sorrow , such leisure and
unactive circumstances of living , that there are more spaces for
religion if men would use them to these purposes ; and because it may
have in it much Religion and Prayers , and must have in it a perfect
Mortification of our strongest appetites , it is therefore a state of
great excellency ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.55

yet concerning the state of Marriage we are taught from Scripture and
the Sayings of wise men great things and honourable .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.56

<font> Marriage is honourable in all men , <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.57

so is not single life ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.58

for in some it is a snare and {COM:greek_omitted} , <font> A trouble in
the flesh , <$$font> a prison of unruly desires which is attempted daily
to be broken . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.59

Celibate or single life is never commanded ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.60

but in some cases marriage is ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.61

and he that burns , sins often if he marries not ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.62

he that can@ @not contain must marry , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,5.63

and he that can contain is not tied to a single <P_6> life ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.64

but may marry and not sin . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.65

Marriage was ordained by God , instituted in Paradise ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.66

was the relief of a natural Necessity , and the first blessing from the
Lord ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.67

he gave to Man not a Friend , but a Wife , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.68

that is a Friend and a Wife too : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.69

<paren> for a good woman is in her soul the same that a man is ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.70

and she is a woman only in her body ; that she may have the excellency
of the one , and the usefulness of the other , and become amiable in
both ; <$$paren> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.71

it is the seminary of the Church , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.72

and daily brings forth sons and daughters unto God ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.73

it was ministred to by Angels , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.74

and <font> Raphael <$$font> waited upon a young man that he might have a
blessed Marriage , and that that marriage might repair two sad Families
, and bless all their Relatives . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.75

Our blessed Lord , though he was born of a Maiden , yet she was vail'd
under the cover of marriage , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.76

and she was married to a Widower ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.77

for <font> Joseph <$$font> the supposed Father of our Lord had children
by a former wife . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.78

The first Miracle that ever <font> Jesus <$$font> did , was to do honour
to a wedding ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.79

Marriage was in the world before sin , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.80

and is in all ages of the world the greatest and most effective Antidote
against sin , in which all the world had perished , if God had not made
a remedy ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.81

and although Sin hath sour'd marriage , and struck the mans head with
Cares , and the womans bed with Sorrows in the production of children ;
yet these are but throws of Life and Glory , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.82

and <font> she shall be saved in child-bearing , if she be found in
faith and righteousness . <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.83

Marriage is a School and Exercise of vertue ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.84

and though <font> Marriage <$$font> hath <font> cares , <$$font> yet
<font> the single life <$$font> hath <font> desires , <$$font> which are
more troublesome and more dangerous , and often end in sin , while the
cares are but instances of Duty and exercises of Piety :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.85

and therefore if single Life hath more privacy of Devotion , yet
marriage hath more Necessities and more Variety of it ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.86

and is an exercise of more Graces . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,6.87

In two virtues , <font> celibate <$$font> or single life may have the
advantage of <P_7> degrees ordinarily and commonly ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.88

that is , in <font> chastity <$$font> and <font> devotion : <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.89

but as in some persons this may fail , and it does in very many , and a
married man may spend as much time in devotion as any Virgins or Widows
do ; yet as in marriage even those virtues of chastity and devotion are
exercised : so in other instances , this state hath proper exercises and
trials for those graces , for which single life can never be crown'd ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.90

Here is the proper scene of Piety and Patience , of the duty of Parents
and the charity of Relatives ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.91

here Kindness is spread abroad , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.92

and Love is united and made firm as a center : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.93

Marriage is the nursery of Heaven ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.94

the Virgin sends prayers to God , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.95

but she carries but one Soul to him ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.96

but the state of marriage fills up the numbers of the Elect ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.97

and hath in it the labour of Love , and the delicacies of Friendship ,
the blessing of Society , and the union of Hands and Hearts ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.98

it hath in it less of beauty , but more of safety than the single life ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.99

it hath more care , but less danger ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.100

it is more merry , and more sad ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.101

is fuller of sorrows , and fuller of joys ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.102

it lies under more burdens , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.103

but is supported by all the strengths of love and charity ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.104

and those burdens are delightful . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.105

Marriage is the mother of the world , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.106

and preserves Kingdoms , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.107

and fills Cities , and Churches , and Heaven itself .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.108

Celibate , like the Flie in the Heart of an apple , dwells in a
perpetual sweetness , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.109

but sits alone , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.110

and is confin'd and dies in Singularity ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.111

but Marriage , like the useful Bee , builds a house
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.112

and gathers sweetness from every flower , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.113

and labours and unites into Societies and Republicks ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.114

and sends out Colonies , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.115

and feeds the World with delicacies , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.116

and obeys their King , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.117

and keeps order , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.118

and exercises many Vertues , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,7.119

and promotes <P_8> the Interest of mankind , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,8.120

and is that state of good things to which God hath designed the present
constitution of the world . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,8.121

{COM:greek_omitted}

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample}

<P_28>

3 . Hither also is to be referred that he secure the Interest of her
Vertue and Felicity by a fair Example ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,28.125

for a Wife to a Husband is a Line of Superficies ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,28.126

it hath Dimensions of its <P_29> own , but no Motion or proper
affections ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.127

but commonly puts on such images of virtues or vices as are presented to
her by her Husband's Idea : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.128

and if thou beest vicious , <font> complain not that she is infected
that lies in thy bosom ; <$$font> the interest of whose love ties her to
transcribe thy Copy , and write after the Characters of thy manners .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.129

<font> Paris <$$font> was a man of Pleasure , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.130

and <font> Helena <$$font> was an Adulteress ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.131

and she added Covetousness upon her own account .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.132

But <font> Ulysses <$$font> was a prudent man , and a wary counselor ,
sober and severe ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.133

and he efformed his Wife into such imagery as he desir'd ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.134

and she was Chast as the Snows upon the mountains , Diligent as the
fatal Sisters , always Busie , and always Faithful ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.135

{COM:greek_omitted} , she had a lazy tongue , and a busie hand .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.136

4 . Above all the instances of Love , let him preserve towards her an
inviolable Faith , and an unspotted Chastity ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.137

for this is <font> the Marriage Ring , <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.138

it ties two hearts by an eternal band ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.139

it is like the Cherubims flaming sword , set for the guard of Paradise ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.140

he that passes into that garden , now that it is immur'd by Christ and
the Church , enters into the shades of death .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.141

No man must touch the forbidden Tree , that in the midst of the garden ,
which is the tree of Knowledge and Life . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.142

Chastity is the security of Love , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.143

and preserves all the Mysteriousness like the secrets of a Temple .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.144

Under this Lock is deposited security of Families , the union of
Affections , the repairer of accidental Breaches .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.145

{COM:greek_omitted} This is a Grace that is shut up and secur'd by all
arts of Heaven , and the defence of Laws , the locks and bars of Modesty
, by honour and reputation , by fear and shame , by interest and high
regards , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,29.146

and that contract that is intended <P_30> to be for ever , is yet
dissolved , and broken by the violation of this ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.147

nothing but Death can do so much Evil to the holy rites of Marriage , as
Unchastity and breach of Faith can . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.148

The shepherd <font> Cratis <$$font> falling in love with a She-goat ,
had his brains beaten out with a Buck as he lay asleep ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.149

and by the Laws of the <font> Romans , <$$font> a man might kill his
Daughter , or his Wife , if he surprised her in the breach of her holy
Vows , which are as sacred as the threads of Life , secret as the
privacies of the Sanctuary , and holy as the society of Angels .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.150

<font> Nullae sunt inimicitiae nisi amoris acerbae , <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.151

and God that commanded us to forgive our Enemies , left it in our choice
, JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.152

and hath not commanded us to forgive an adulterous Husband or a Wife ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.153

but the offended partie's Displeasure may pass into an eternal
Separation of Society and friendship . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.154

Now in this Grace it is fit that the Wisdom and severity of the man
should hold forth a pure Taper , that his Wife may , by seeing the
beauties and transparency of that Crystal , dress her mind and her body
by the light of so pure reflexions ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.155

It is certain he will expect it from the modesty and retirement , from
the passive nature and colder temper , from the humility and fear , from
the honour and love of his Wife , that she be pure as the Eye of Heaven
: JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.156

and therefore it is best reason that the wisdom and nobleness , the love
and confidence , the strength and severity of the man should be as holy
and certain in this grace , as he is a severe exactor of it at her hands
, <font> who can more easily be tempted by another , and less by her
self . <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.157

These are the little Lines of <font> a mans Duty , <$$font> which like
threads of Light from the body of the Sun do clearly describe all the
regions of his proper Obligations . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,30.158

Now concerning <font> the womans duty , <$$font> although it consists in
doing whatsoever her Husband commands , and so receives Measures from
the rules of his Government , yet there are also some lines of life
<P_31> depicted upon her hands , by which she may read and know how to
proportion out her duty to her Husband . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.159

1 . The first is <font> Obedience ; <$$font> which because it is
nowhere enjoyned that the man should exact of her , but often commanded
to her to pay , gives demonstration that it is a voluntary Cession that
is required , such a Cession as must be without <font> coercion <$$font>
and <font> violence <$$font> on his part , but upon <font> fair
inducements , <$$font> and <font> reasonableness in the thing , <$$font>
and out of <font> love , <$$font> and <font> honour <$$font> on her part
. JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.160

When God commands us to love him , he means we should obey him ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.161

<font> This is love that ye keep my Commandments <$$font> ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.162

and , <font> If ye love me <$$font> <paren> said our Lord <$$paren>
<font> keep my Commandments : <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.163

Now as Christ is to the Church , so is Man to the Wife :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.164

and therefore <font> obedience <$$font> is the best instance of her Love
; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.165

for it proclaims her Submission , her Humility , her Opinion of his
wisdom , his preeminence in the family , the Right of his priviledge ,
and the Injunction imposed by God upon her Sex , that although <font> in
sorrow she bring forth children , <$$font> yet with <font> love and
choice she should obey . <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.166

The <font> mans authority is love , <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.167

and <font> the womans love is obedience ; <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.168

and it was not rightly observed of him that said , when the woman fell ,
God made her timorous that she might be rul'd , apt and easie to obey ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.169

for this obedience is no way founded in fear , but in love and reverence
. JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.170

<font> Receptae reverentiae est , si mulier viro subsit , <$$font> said
the Law ; unless also that we will add , that it is an effect of that
Modesty which like Rubies adorn the necks and cheeks of Women .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.171

<font> Pudicitia est , pater , eos magnificare , qui nos socias
sumpserunt sibi , <$$font> said the Maiden in the Comedy :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.172

It is modesty to advance and highly to honour them , who have honoured
us by making us to be the companions of their dearest excellencies ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.173

for the Woman that went before the man in the way of Death , is
commanded to follow him in the way of Love ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,31.174

and that makes the Society <P_32> to be perfect , and the Union
profitable , and the Harmony compleat . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.175

Inferior Matrona suo sit , Sexte , Marito ; Non aliter fiunt foemina
virque pares . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.176

For then the Soul and Body make a perfect Man , when the Soul commands
wisely , or rules lovingly , and cares profitably , and provides
plentifully , and conducts charitably that Body which is its partner and
yet the inferior . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.177

But if the Body shall give Laws , and by the violence of the appetite ,
first abuse the Understanding , and then possess the superior portion of
the Will and Choice , the body and the soul are not apt company ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.178

and the man is a fool and miserable . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.179

If the Soul rules not , it can@ @not be a Companion ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.180

either it must govern , or be a slave ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.181

Never was King deposed and suffered to live in the state of Peerage and
equal Honour , but made a Prisoner , or put to death ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.182

and those women , that had rather lead the blind than follow prudent
guides , rule fools and easie men than obey the powerful and wise ,
never made a good society in a house : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.183

a wife never can become equal but by obeying ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.184

but so her power while it is in minority , makes up the authority of the
man integral , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.185

and becomes one government , as themselves are one man .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.186

<font> Male and Female created he them , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.187

and called their name Adam , <$$font> saith the holy Scripture ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.188

they are but One : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.189

and therefore the several parts of this one man must stand in the place
where God appointed , that the lower parts may do their offices in their
own station , and promote the common interest of the whole .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.190

A ruling Woman is intolerable ... Faciunt graviora coactae Imperios
sexus ... JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,32.191

<P_33>

But that 's not all ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.193

for she is miserable too : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.194

for , It is a sad calamity for a Woman to be joined to a Fool or a weak
person ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.195

it is like a guard of Geese to keep the Capitol , or as if a flock of
Sheep should read grave Lectures to their Shepherd , and give him orders
where he shall conduct them to pasture . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.196

<font> O vere` Phrygiae , neque enim Phryges , <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.197

It is a curse that God threatned sinning persons <font> Devoratum est
robur eorum , facti sunt quasi mulieres . Effoeminati dominabuntur eis
. <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.198

To be ruled by weaker people ; {COM:greek_omitted} , to have a fool to
ones Master , is the fate of miserable and unblessed people :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.199

and the Wife can be no ways Happy , unless she be governed by a prudent
Lord , whose Commands are sober counsels , whose Authority is paternal ,
whose Orders are provisions , and whose Sentences are charity .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.200

But now concerning the Measures and Limits of this Obedience , we can
best take accounts from Scripture : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.201

{COM:greek_omitted} , saith the Apostle , <font> in all things ; ut
Domino , as to the Lord ; <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.202

and that 's large enough ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.203

as unto a Lord , <font> ut Ancilla Domino , <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.204

So S. <font> Hierome <$$font> understands it , who neither was a friend
to the sex nor to marriage ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.205

But his mistake is soon confuted by the Text ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.206

It is not <font> ut Dominis <$$font> , be subject to your Husbands as
unto Lords , but {COM:greek_omitted} , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.207

that is , in all religion , in reverence and in love , in duty and zeal
, in faith and knowledge ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.208

or else {COM:greek_omitted} may signifie , Wives be subject to your
Husbands , but yet so , that at the same time ye be subject to the Lord
. JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.209

For that 's the measure of {COM:greek_omitted} , <font> in all things ;
<$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.210

and it is more plain in the parallel place , {COM:greek_omitted} ,
<font> as it is fit in the Lord ; <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,33.211

Religion must be the Measure of your obedience and subjection : <font>
intra limites <P_34> disciplinae , <$$font> so <font> Tertullian
<$$font> expresses it , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,34.212

{COM:greek_omitted} , so <font> Clemens Alex . <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,34.213

In all things let the Wife be subject to the Husband , so as to do
nothing against his will ; those only things excepted , in which he is
impious or refractory in things pertaining to wisdom and piety .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,34.214

But in this also there is some peculiar Caution .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,34.215

For although in those things which are of the necessary parts of faith
and holy life , the Woman is only subject to Christ , who only is and
can be Lord of consciences , and commands alone where the conscience is
instructed and convinced ; yet as it is part of the mans office to be a
Teacher , and a Prophet , and a Guide , and a Master ; so also it will
relate very much to the demonstration of their affections to obey his
Counsels , to imitate his Vertues , to be directed by his Wisdom , to
have her Perswasion measured by the lines of his excellent Religion ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,34.216

{COM:greek_omitted} , It were hugely decent <paren> saith <font>
Plutarch <$$font> that the Wife should acknowledge her Husband for her
teacher and her guide ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,34.217

for then when she is what he please to efform her , he hath no cause to
complain if she be no better : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,34.218

his precept and wise counsels can draw her off from vanities ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,34.219

and , as he said of Geometry , that if she be skill'd in that , she will
not easily be a Gamester or a Dancer , may perfectly be said of Religion
. JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,34.220

If she suffer her self to be guided by his Counsel , and efformed by his
Religion ; either he is an ill Master in his Religion ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,34.221

or he may secure in her and for his advantage an excellent Vertue .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,34.222

And although in matters of Religion the Husband hath no Empire and
Command , yet if <P_35> there be a place left to perswade , and intreat
, and induce by arguments , there is not in a family a greater
Endearment of Affections than the Unity of Religion :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.223

and anciently it was not permitted to a Woman to have a Religion by her
self . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.224

<font> Eosdem quos maritus nosse Deos & colere solos uxor debet ,
<$$font> <paren> said <font> Plutarch <$$font> .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.225

And the rites which a woman performs severally from her Husband are not
pleasing to God ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.226

and therefore <font> Pomponia Graecina , <$$font> because she
entertain'd a stranger Religion , was permitted to the judgment of her
Husband <font> Plautius : <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.227

And this whole affair is no stranger to Christianity ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.228

for the Christian woman was not suffered to marry an Unbelieving man ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.229

and although this is not to be extended to different Opinions within the
limits of the common Faith : yet thus much advantage is wone or lost by
it ; that the compliance of the Wife , and submission of her
understanding to the better rule of her Husband in matters of Religion ,
will help very much to warrant her , though she should be misperswaded
in a matter less necessary ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.230

yet nothing can warrant her in her separate rites and manners of
worshippings , but an invincible necessity of Conscience , and a curious
infallible Truth ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.231

and if she be deceived alone , she hath no Excuse ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.232

if with him , she hath much Pity , and some degrees of Warranty under
the protection of humility , and duty , and dear affections ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.233

and she will find that it is part of her Priviledge and Right to partake
of the mysteries and blessings of her Husband's Religion .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.234

A Woman by the Holy Laws hath right to partake of her Husbands Goods ,
and her Husbands Sacrifices , and holy things .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.235

Where there is a Schism in one Bed , there is a Nursery of temptations ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,35.236

and Love is persecuted and in perpetual danger <P_36> to be destroyed ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.237

there dwell Jealousies , and divided Interest , and differing Opinions ,
and continual Disputes , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.238

and we can@ @not love them so well , whom we believe to be less beloved
of God ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.239

and it is ill uniting with a person , concerning whom my perswasion
tells me , that he is like to live in Hell to eternal ages .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.240

2 . The next line of the womans duty is <font> compliance <$$font>
which S. <font> Peter <$$font> calls , <font> the hidden man of the
heart , the ornament of a meek and a quiet spirit , <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.241

and to it he opposes <font> the outward and pompous ornament of the body
; <$$font> concerning which as there can be no particular Measure set
down to all persons , but the proportions were to be measured by the
customs of wise People , the quality of the Woman , and the desires of
the Man ; yet it is to be limited by Christian Modesty , and the usages
of the more excellent and severe Matrons . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.242

<font> Menander <$$font> in the Comedy brings in a man turning his Wife
from his house because she stain'd her hair yellow , which was then the
beauty . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.243

A wise Woman should not paint . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.244

A studious gallantry in Clothes can@ @not make a wise Man love his Wife
the better . {COM:greek_omitted} , said the Comedy ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.245

such gaieties are fit for Tragedies , but not for the uses of Life :
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.246

<font> Decor occultus , & tecta venustas , <$$font>
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.247

that 's the Christian Womans Fineness , <font> the hidden man of the
heart , <$$font> Sweetness of manners , humble Comportment , fair
Interpretation of all addresses , ready Compliances , high Opinion of
him , and mean of her self . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,36.248

{COM:greek_omitted} , To partake <P_37> secretly , and in her heart of
all his joys and sorrows , to believe him comely and fair , though the
Sun hath drawn a Cypress over him , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.249

<paren> for as marriages are not to be contracted by the hands and eye ,
but with reason and the hearts : so are these judgments to be made by
the mind , not by the sight : <$$paren> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.250

and Diamonds can@ @not make the Woman vertuous , nor him to value her
who sees her put them off then , when Charity and Modesty are her
brightest Ornaments . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.251

{COM:greek_omitted}

And indeed those Husbands that are pleased with undecent Gaieties of
their Wives , are like Fishes taken with Ointments and intoxicating
Baits , apt and easie for sport and mockery , but useless for food ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.253

and when <font> Circe <$$font> had turned <font> Ulysses <$$font> s
Companions into Hogs and Monkies , by pleasures and the inchantments of
her bravery and luxury , they were no longer useful to her ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.254

she knew not what to do with them ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.255

but on wise <font> Ulysses <$$font> she was continaully enamour'd .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.256

Indeed the outward ornament is fit to take Fools ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.257

but they are not worth the taking ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.258

but she that hath a wise Husband , must entice him to an eternal
Dearness by the vail of Modesty , and the grave Robes of Chastity , the
ornament of Meekness , and the jewels of Faith and Charity ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.259

she must have no <font> fucus <$$font> but blushings ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.260

her brightness must be Purity , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.261

and she must shine round about with sweetnesses and Friendship ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.262

and she shall be pleasant while she lives , and desired when she dies .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.263

If not , {COM:greek_omitted} , Her Grave shall be full of Rottenness and
Dishonour , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.264

and her Memory shall be worse after she is dead : <font> after she is
dead : <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,37.265

<P_38>

For that will be the End of all merry Meetings ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.267

and I chuse this to be the last Advice to both .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.268

3 . <font> Remember the days of darkness , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.269

for they are many : <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.270

The joys of the bridal chambers are quickly past ,
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.271

and the remaining portion of the state is a dull progress without
variety of joys but not without the change of sorrows ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.272

but that portion that shall enter into the grave must be eternal .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.273

It is fit that I should infuse a bunch of Myrrhe into the festival
Goblet , and after the Egyptian manner serve up a dead man's Bones at a
Feast ; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.274

I will only shew it , and take it away again ;
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.275

it will make the Wine bitter , but wholsome .
JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.276

But those married Pairs that Live , as remembring that they must Part
again , and give an Account how they treat themselves and each other ,
shall at that day of their Death be admitted to glorious Espousals ; and
when they shall live again , be married to their Lord , and partake of
his Glories , with <font> Abraham <$$font> and <font> Joseph , <$$font>
S. <font> Peter <$$font> and S. <font> Paul , <$$font> , and all the
married Saints . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.277

All those things that now please us shall pass from us , or we from them
; JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.278

but those things that concern the other life , are permanent as the
numbers of eternity : JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.279

and although at the Resurrection there shall be no relation of Husband
and Wife , and no Marriage shall be celebrated but the marriage of the
Lamb ; yet then shall be remembred how Men and Women pass'd through this
state which is a Type of that , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.280

and from this sacramental Union all holy pairs shall pass to the
spritual and eternal , where Love shall be their Portion , and Joys
shall crown their Heads , JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.281

and they shall lie in the bosome of Jesus , and in the heart of God to
eternal Ages . JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.282

<font> Amen . <$$font> JETAYLOR-1673-E3-P1,38.283

