<BEGIN_jopinney-1688-e3-p1>

<P_54>

<heading:edcomment:29_TO_HESTER,_HOLYHEAD,_FEB._16,_1688>

Dear Hester the many & suddain troubles y=t= come on yo=r= Aged Parents
are enough to sink them JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,54.4

& these 2 monthes uneasy wandering hath bin a great trouble & sorrow to
us Especially for yo=r= mother to be in Dublin & I in this place from
whence I intend to goe to her by y=e= ferst vessell y=t= goes hence ,
here being 5 y=t= lye wind_bound . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,54.5

This inclosed give yo=r= brother JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,54.6

or send & <P_55> supscribe it for him . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.7

I left all when I came of Dublin by y=e= Instigation of yong Damer a
very Rascall . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.8

his Uncle was allwayes civill to me JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.9

but y=e= young villaine hath abused yo=r= Mother & me to a great degree
In_so_much that I once gave him a box on y=e= ear to y=e= purpose .
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.10

you may see what I have writ more fully to yo=r= brother .
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.11

& shall not enlarge to you only Praying God to Bless you & to continue
to be a comfort to you JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.12

yo=r= Aged p~ents Jo Penney JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.13

<heading:edcomment:30_TO_HESTER,_JULY_7,_1688>

My dear Hester Yours of June 21 I rec=d= July 4=th= present :
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.15

But hear not of your Mothers comming hither JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.16

& if she doe come , it@ @s strang to me you had not come with her . A
woeman now in the 70=th= year of her age . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.17

from your Brother I rec=d= a l=r= from Bristol intending to goe into the
West . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.18

I hope all thinges there are composed . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.19

The death of Rachels husband I heard off , who I think hast wasted her
substance . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.20

If Children will ruin themselves without the Advice & against the minde
of their parents they must suffer for it . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.21

one lost her life ; another his liberty ; & her the substance which she
had by marrying against our Advice . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.22

take you heed that have seen so many Instances of it & Warnings .
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.23

I should have bin glad to have seen you here .
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.24

My going hence will be Impossible as yet : JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,55.25

I can@ @not <P_56> disoblige them that have bin so kinde to me & ruin
them that have succoured me . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.26

I know our Dangers here are many and apparent what will be the Issue
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.27

God knowes & orders all . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.28

I think it@ @s a great mercy to your sister that she is delivered from
such a vile monster : JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.29

I hope she will be more carefull . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.30

If you have any minde to come hither you have good Company to come with
the Lady Sands that is now in London . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.31

Somebody I want here JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.32

for my linnen is all torn : JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.33

As for the Scot that is {COM:preceding_word_"is"_emended} gon to London
, let her shift for herselfe as she did before .
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.34

I know what an unhappiness she hath bin to us all .
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.35

I have not tyme to write long nor strenght {COM:sic}
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.36

But doe charge you to live in the fear of God : not to dispose of
yourselfe without our Advise JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.37

We may have comfort in you through Gods Blessing on you which is Dayly
the prayer of the longing Soul of your Aged & infirme father John Pinney
JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.38

I recd allso a letter from Rachel not long since , to whom I would be
Remembred . JOPINNEY-1688-E3-P1,56.39

