<BEGIN_jotaylor-1630-e2-p1>

<P_3,77.C1>

<heading>

TAYLORS TRAVELS , THREE WEEKES , THREE DAYES , AND THREE HOURES
OBSERUATIONS , FROM LONDON TO HAMBURGH IN GERMANIE .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C1.4

<$$heading>

Amongst Iewes and Gentiles , with Descriptions of Townes and Towers ,
Castles and Cittadels , artificiall Gallowses , Naturall Hangmen :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C1.6

And Dedicated for the present to the absent Odcombian Knight Errant ,
S=r=. Thomas Coriat , Great Brittaines Error , and the worlds Mirror .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C1.7

Upon Saturday the 17. of August , 1616. <paren> after I had taken
leaue of some friends that would hardly giue me leaue to leaue them
<$$paren> I was associated with fiue or sixe courteous Comrades to the
Hauen of Billingsgate , where I was no sooner come , but I was shipt in
a wherry for the Port of Grauesend , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C1.8

and hauing two Women and three Men in my company thither , wee past the
way away by telling tales by turnes . Where one of the women tooke upon
her very Logically to defend the honestie of Brokers ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C1.9

and she maintained her paradoxicall Arguments so pithily , as if her
selfe like a desperate pawne had layne seauen yeares in Lauender on
sweeting in long Lane , or amongst the dogged inhabitants of Houndsditch
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C1.10

And one of the men replyed that he thanked God hee neuer had any need of
them , whereupon I began to suspect him to bee a crafty knave , because
the proverbe saies , <font> A crafty knaue needs no broker <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C1.11

and indeed after I had inquired what countriman hee was , he told me he
was a Welch man , and a Iustices <P_3,77.C2> Clarke .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C2.12

I left him as I found him , hoping neuer to be troubled with his binding
ouer , and withdrawing : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C2.13

and so at Grauesend , we all went to the <font> Christopher <$$font>
where wee tooke a Bachanalian farewell one of another , where I remained
till the Munday following , awayting the comming down of the ship that I
was to be transported in . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C2.14

About the houre of three in the afternoone , with good hope we weighed
Anchor , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C2.15

and with a curteous tide and a gentle winde we sailed downe the river of
Thames , as farre as the grand Oyster hauen of <font> Quinborough
<$$font> , where though our ship was not Sea-sicke , yet shee cast ,
<paren> Anchor I meane . <$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C2.16

On the morrow , being Tuesday , we weighed ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C2.17

and with the friendly breath of <font> Zephirus <$$font> , alias a
Westerne wind , our sailes being swolne , our ship called the <font>
Judith <$$font> , who with her sterne cut the liquid mounting mountaines
of <font> Neptunes <$$font> wauering territories , as nimbly as Hebrew
<font> Iudith <$$font> beheaded <font> Holofernes <$$font> , so that by
the bountifull fauour of him that rules both Windes and Seas , the
Thursday following wee espied the coast of Freezeland ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,77.C2.18

and the next day wee sailed by an Iland <P_3,78.C1> called the Holy Land
, which may be called the Land of Lobsters , or the Countrie of Crabs
for the plenty of those kind of crawling creatures that are taken there
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C1.19

But we , taking time by the fore-top , let no aduantage slip ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C1.20

but with a merry Gale , and a friendly floud , on the Friday wee sailed
vp the Riuer of Elue , as far as Stoad , where we Anchoured till the
morrow , being Saturday , and the feast of S. Bartholmew the Apostle ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C1.21

wee ariued at a bleake alias , a towne an English mile from <font>
Hamburgh <$$font> , called <font> Altonagh <$$font> , which is so called
by the <font> Hamburgers <$$font> because it stands all too nigh
{SIC:all-too-nigh} them for their profit , being inhabited with diuers
tradesmen which doe hinder their freedome .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C1.22

I was no sooner landed there , but my company and my selfe went to a
Dutch drinking-schoole , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C1.23

and hauing vpsefreez'd foure pots of boone beere as yellow as gold , our
host said we had foure shilling to betall , or to pay , which made me
suspect it to bee a bawdy house by his large reckoning , till at last I
vnderstood that the shillings he meant were but stiuers , or three halfe
pence a peece . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C1.24

So this terrible {TEXT:tirrible} shot being discharged <paren> which in
the totall amounted to the sum of sixepence English , <$$paren> we
departed towards Hamburgh , when by the way I noted some 20. men ,
women , and children in diuers places of Altonagh , all deformed , some
with one eye , some with hare-lips , crooke-backt , splay-footed ,
halfe-nosed , or one blemish or other . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C1.25

I admiring at them , was told they were <font> Iewes <$$font> , wherein
I perceiued the Iudgement of the high Iudge of all , that had permitted
Nature to deforme their formes , whose Gracelesse mindes were so much
mishapen through want of Grace . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C1.26

But I being entred the Citie of <font> Hamburgh <$$font> on the Saturday
, I was presently conducted to the English house , where I found a kind
Host , an honest Hostesse , good company , store of meat , more of
drinks , a true Tapster , and sweet Lodging .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C1.27

And , being at dinner , because I was a stranger , I was promoted to the
chiefest place at the table , where to obserue an old custome , euery
man did his best endeauour to hauns mee for my welcome , which by
interpretation is , to giue a man a loafe too much out of the Brewers
bsaket {COM:sic} ; in which kind of potshot , our English are growne
such stout Proficients , that some of <P_3,78.C2> them dares bandy and
contend with the Dutch their first teachers .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C2.28

But after they had hanced me as well as they could , and I pleas'd ,
they admininistred an oath to me , in Manner and forme as followeth ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C2.29

<font> Laying my hand on a full pot <$$font> . I sweare by these
contents and all that is herein contained , that by the courteous fauour
of thesee Gentlemen , I doe finde my selfe sufficiently hanced , and
that henceforth I shall acknowledge it ; and that whensoeuer I shall
offer to bee hanced againe , I shall arme my selfe with the craft of a
Fox , the manners of a Hogge , the wisdome of an Asse , mixt with the
ciuility of a Beare . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C2.30

This was the forme of the oath , which as neare as I can shall bee
performed on my part ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C2.31

and heere is to bee noted that the first word a Nurse or a Mother doth
teach her children if they bee Males , is Drinke , or Beere : So that
most of them are transformed to Barrels , Firkings , and Kinderkins ,
alwayes fraight with <font> Hamburge <$$font> beere .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C2.32

And though the City is not much more then halfe the bignes as London is
within the wals , yet are there in it almost 800. Brewhouses ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C2.33

and in one dry {COM:sic} thare hath beene shipped away from thence ,
337. brewings of beere , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C2.34

besides 13. or 14. brewings haue beene wrackt or stayed in the Towne ,
as not sufficient to bee beezeled in the Country .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C2.35

The Saturday beeing thus past , and Sunday come , I went toward the
English Church , where I obserued many shops open , buying and selling ,
chopping and changing of all manner of wares , with the streets
furnished with Apples , Peares , Plums , Nuts , Grapes , or any thing
else that an ordinary Market can affoord , as commonly as if the
Sabbaoth were but a bare Ceremony without a Commandemente . In which I
note the Iewes in their execrable superstition , to be more deuout and
obseruant , then these Pedlars in their profession ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C2.36

for on the Saturday <paren> being the Iewes Sabbath <$$paren> they
neglect all humane affaires , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C2.37

and , betake themselues irreligiously to their misbeleeuing faithlesse
religion . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,78.C2.38

The Sermon beeing ended at the English Church , I walked in the
afternoone with a friend of mine , <paren> an Inhabitant of the Towne
<$$paren> to see and <P_3,79.C1> to be seene , where at one of the gates
was placed a strong guard of Souldiers with Muskets , Pikes , Halberts ,
and other warlike accoutrements , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.39

I asked the cause , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.40

and I was informed it was because of the building of new mounts and
Bulwarks which were partly erected without the old wall :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.41

And when I perceiued these fortifications , I was amazed ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.42

for it is almost incredible for the number of men and horses that are
dayly set on worke about it , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.43

besides the worke it selfe is so great that it is past the credit of
Report , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.44

and as I suppose will prooue most inexpugnable and inuincible Rampiers
to strengthen the Towne on that side against the inuasiue attempts of
the greatest Monarke that should assaile them .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.45

But after much musing , walking further towards the fields , I espyed
foure or fiue pretty parcels of modesty goe very friendly vp into a
Councell-house by the wayes side , as wee and thousands of people vied
to passe ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.46

they were handsome young Girles of the age of 18. or 20. yeares a
peece , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.47

and although they had a doore to shut , yet they knowing their businesse
to bee necessary , and naturall , sate still in louing and neighbourly
manner , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.48

so hauing traced a turne or two we returned into the Towne againe ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.49

and entring a long Garden within the Wals , some of the Townesmen were
shooting for wagers at a marke with their muskets : some bowling : some
at slide-thrift , or shouel-boord : some dancing before a blind Fidler ,
and his cow-bellied , dropsie , dutty Drab : some at one game , some at
another , most of them drinking , and all of them drunke , that though
it was a Sabboth , which should wholly be dedicated to God , yet by the
abuse of these bursten-gutted bibbers , they made it an after-noone
consecrated , or more truely execrated to the seruice of hell , and to
the great amplification of the Devils kingdome .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C1.50

{COM:verse_omitted} <P_3,79.C2> But leauing them to their drunken
designes , I return'd toward my Lodging , where by the way I saw at the
common Iayle of the Towne , a great number of people were clustred
together , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.51

I asked the cause of their concourse , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.52

and I was certified that there was a Prisoner to be broken upon the
wheele the next day , and that these idle Gazers did prease {COM:sic} to
gape upon him for want of better imployments ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.53

I being as inquisitiue after nouelties , as a Trauailer of my small
experience might be , enquired earnestly the true cause of the next
dayes execution : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.54

My friend told me that the prisoner was a poore Carpenter dwelling in
the Towne , who lately having stolne {COM:sic} a Goose , and plucking it
within his doores , a little Girle , <paren> his daughter in Law
<$$paren> went out of his house , and left the doore open , by which
meanes , the owner of the Goose passing by , espyed the wretched Theefe
very diligently picking what hee before had beene stealing , to whom the
owner said : Neighbour , I now perceiue which way my Geese vse to goe ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.55

but I will have you in question for them ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.56

and so away hee went : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.57

the Caitiffe beeing thus reprooued grew desperate ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.58

and his child comming into his house ; ye yong whore , quoth he , must
ye leaue my doore open for folkes to looke in upon me ?
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.59

and with that word , he tooke a Hatchet JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.60

and with a cursed stroake , he cloue the childes head : for the which
murther he was condemned and iudged to be broken aliue upon the wheele .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.61

Close by the Iayle I espyed a house of free stone , round and
flat_roofed , and leaded , vpon the which was erected the true picture
of a most vnmatchable Hang-man : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.62

and now I am entered into a discourse of this braue abiect , or subiect
, you must vnderstand that this fellow , is a merry , a mad , and a
subsidie Hangman , to who~ our Tyburne Tatterdemalian , or our Wapping
winde-pipe stretcher , is but a Raggamuffin , not worth the hanging :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.63

for this teare-throat Termagant is a fellow in Folio , a Commander of
such great command , and of such greatnesse to command , that I never
saw any that in that respect could countermand him :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.64

for his making is almost past description ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,79.C2.65

no Saracens head seemes <P_3,80.C1> greater ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.66

and sure I thinke his brainepan if it were emptied , <paren> as I thinke
he hath not much braine in it , <$$paren> would well containe halfe a
bushell of mault , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.67

his shaggie haire and beard would stuffe a Cushion for <font> Charons
<$$font> boate , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.68

his Imbost nose and embroydered face , would furnish a Ieweller ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.69

his eyes well dryed , would make good Tennis-balls , or shot for a small
pecce of Ordinance , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.70

his yawning mouth would serve for a Conni-borrow , and his two ragged
rowes of teeth , {COM:would_serve} for a stone wall , or a Pale ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.71

then hath he a necke like one of <font> Hercules <$$font> his pillars ,
with a winde-pipe , <paren> or rather a beere pipe <$$paren> as bigge as
the boare of a Demiculuering , or a wooden pumpe ; throvgh which conduit
half a brewing of <font> Hamburgh <$$font> beere doth runne downe into
his vnmeasurable paunch , wherein is more midriffe , guts and garbage
then three tripe-wiues could be able to vtter before it stunke .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.72

His post-like legges were answerable to the rest of the great frame
which they supported , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.73

and to conclude sir <font> Beuis <$$font> , <font> Ascapart <$$font> ,
<font> Gogmagog <$$font> , or our English sir <font> Falstaff <$$font>
were but shrimps to this bezzeling Bombards longitude , latitude ,
altitude , and crassitude , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.74

for he passes , and surpasses the whole Germane multitude .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.75

And as hee is great in corpulencie , so is hee powerful in potencie ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.76

for figuratiuely hee hath spirituall resemblance of Romish authority ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.77

and in some sort he is a kind of demy-Pope ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.78

for once a yeere in the dogge-dayes he sends out his men with bates in
stead of Buls , with full power from his greatnesse , to knocke downe
all the curs without contradiction , whose masters or owners will not be
at the charge to buy a pardon for them of his mightinesse , which pardon
is more dureable then the Popes of waxe or parchment ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.79

for his is made of a piece of the hide of an Oxe , a Horse , or such
lasting stuffe , which with his stigmiticall stamp or seale is hanged
about euery dogs necke who is freed from his furie by the purchase of
his pardon . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.80

And sure I am perswaded that these dogges are more sure of their liues
with the hangmans pardon , then the poore besotted blinded , papists are
of their seduced soules from any pardon of the Popes .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C1.81

The priuiledges of this graund haulter-master are many , as hee hath the
emptying of all the <P_3,80.C2> vaults or draughts in the city , which
no doubt hee gaines some fauour by . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.82

Besides all Oxen , Kine ; Horses , Hogs , Dogs , or any such beasts , if
they die themselues , or if they bee not like to liue , the hang-man
must knocke them on the heades , and haue their skins :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.83

and whatsoeuer inhabitant in his iurisdiction doth any of these things
aforesaid himselfe , is abhorred and accounted as a villain without
redemption . So that with hangings , headings , breakings , pardoning
and killing of dogges , flaying of beasts , emptying vaults , and such
priuie commodities , his whole reuenue sometimes amounts to 4. or
5._hundred pounds a yeere . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.84

And hee is held in that regard and estimation , that any man will
conuerse and drinke with him , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.85

nay sometimes the Lords of the Towne will feast with him ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.86

and it is accounted no impeachment to their honours ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.87

for he is held in the ranke of a Gentleman , <paren> or a ranke
Gentleman <$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.88

and hee scornes to be clad in the cast weedes of executed offenders :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.89

No , he goes to the Mercers , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.90

and hath his Sattin , his Veluet , or what stuffe he pleases , measured
out by the yard or the ell , with his gould and siluer lace , his silke
stockings , laced spangled garters and roses , hat and feather , with
foure or fiue braue villaines attending him in Liuery cloakes , who haue
stipendary meanes from his ignominious bounty .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.91

Munday the 19 of August , about the houre of 12. at noone , the people
of the town in great multitudes flocked to the place of execution ;
which is halfe a mile English without the gates , bilt more like a
sconce then a Gallowes , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.92

for it is walled and ditched about with a draw-bridge
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.93

and the prisoner came on foote with a Diuine with him , all the way
exhorting him to repentance , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.94

and because death should not terrifie him , they had giuen many rowses
and carowses of wine and beere : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.95

for it is the custome there to make such poore wretches drunke , wherby
they may@ @be sencelesse eyther of Gods mercy or their owne misery ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.96

but being prayed for by others , they themselues may die resolutely , or
<paren> to be feared <$$paren> desperately .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,80.C2.97

But the prisoner being come to the place of death , he was by the
officers deliuered to the hangman , who entring his strangling
fortification <P_3,81.C1> with two grand Hangmen more and their men ,
which were come from the City of <font> Lubeck <$$font> , and another
Towne <paren> which I can@ @not name <$$paren> to assist their <font>
Hamburghian <$$font> brother in this great and weightie worke : the
draw-bridge was drawne vp , and the Prisoner mounted on a mount of earth
, built high on purpose that the people without may see the execution a
quarter of a mile roundabout : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.98

foure of the Hangmans men takes each of them a small halter ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.99

and by the hands and the feet they hold the Prisoners extended abroad
lying on his backe : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.100

then the Arch-hangman , or the great Master of this mighty businesse
tooke vp a wheele , much about the bignesse of one of the fore-wheeles
of a Coach : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.101

and first , hauing put off his doublet , his , {COM:sic} hat , and being
in his shirt , as if he meant to play at tennis , he tooke the wheele ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.102

and set it on the edge , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.103

and turnd it with one hand like a top or a whirligig ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.104

then he tooke it by the spoakes , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.105

and lifting it vp with a mightie stroake he beare one of the poore
wretches leggs in peeces , <paren> the bones I meane <$$paren> at which
he rored grieuiously ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.106

then after a little pawse he breakes the other leg in the same manner ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.107

and consequently breakes his armes , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.108

and then he stroke foure or fiue maine blowes on his brest ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.109

and burst all his bulke and chest in shiuers ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.110

lastly he smoate his necke , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.111

and missing , burst his chin and iawes to mammockes ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.112

then he tooke the broken mangled corps , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.113

and spread it on the wheele , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.114

and thrust a great post or pile into the Naue or hole of the wheele ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.115

and then fixed the post into the earth some sixe foot deepe , beeing in
height aboue the ground , some ten or twelue foote ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.116

and there the carkasse must lye till it bee consumed by all-consuming
time , or rauening Fowles . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.117

This was the terrible manner of this horrid execution ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.118

and at this place are twenty posts with those wheeles or peeces of
wheeles , with heads of men nailed on the top of the posts , with a
great spike driuen through the skull . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.119

The seuerall kinds of torments which they inflict upon offenders in
those parts makes mee to imagine our English hanging to be but a
flea-biting . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C1.120

Moreouer , if any men in those parts are to be beheaded , the fashion is
, that the Prisoner kneels downe , and being blinded with a Napkin , one
<P_3,81.C2> takes hold of the haire of the crowne of the head , holding
the party vpright , whilst the hangman with a backeward blow with a
sword will take the head from a mans shoulders so nimbly , and with such
dexteritie , that the owner of the head shall neuer want the misse of it
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.121

And if it be any mans fortune to be hanged for neuer so small a crime ,
though he bee mounted whole , yet he shall come downe in peeces ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.122

for he shall hang till euery ioynt and limbe drop one from another .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.123

They haue strange torments and varieties of deaths , according to the
various nature of the offences that are committed :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.124

as for example , hee that counterfeits any Princes coyne , and is
prooued a Coyner , his iudgement is to be boyled to death in oyle , not
throwne into the vessell all at once , but with a pulley or a Rope to
bee hanged vnder the Arme pits , and let downe into the oile by degrees
: first the feete , and next the legs , and so to boyle his flesh from
his bones aliue . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.125

For those that set houses on fire wilfully , they are smoaked to death ,
as first there is a pile or post fixed in the ground ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.126

and within an English Ell of it is a peece of wood nailed crosse
wherupon the offender is made fast sitting ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.127

then ouer the top of the post is whelmed a great tub or Dryfat , which
doth couer or ouerwhelme the Prisoner as low as the middle .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.128

Then vnderneath the executioner hath wet straw , hay , stubble , or such
kind of stuffe , which is fired , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.129

but by reason it is wet and danke , it doth not burne but smolder and
smoake , which smoake ascends vp into the tub where the prisoners head
is , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.130

and not being able to speake , he will heaue vp and downe with his belly
; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.131

and people may perceiue him in these torments to liue three or foure
houres . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.132

Adultery there , if it bee prooued , is punished with death , as the
losse of both the parties heads , if they bee both married ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.133

or if not both , yet the married party must dye for it ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.134

and the other must endure some easier punishment , eyther by the purse
or carkasse ; which in the end proues little better then halfe a hanging
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,81.C2.135

But as after a tempest a calme is best welcome ; so I imagine it not
amisse after all this tragicall harsh discourse , to sweeten the Readers
pallat with a few Comicall reports which were <P_3,82.C1> related vnto
me , wherein if {TEXT:missing_"if"} I seeme fabulous , it must be
remembered that I claime the priuiledge of a traueller , who hath
authority to report all that he heares and sees , and more too .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.136

I was informed of a fellow that was hanged somwhat neere the high way ,
within a mile or two of <font> Collein <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.137

and the fashion being to hang with a halter and a chaine , that when the
haulter is rotten with the weather , the carkasse drops a butten hole
lower into the chaine . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.138

Now it fortuned that this fellow was executed on a winters afternoone
towards night , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.139

and being hanged , the chaine was shorter then the halter , by reason
whereof he was not strangled , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.140

but by the gamming of the chaine which could not slip close to his necke
, he hanged in great torments vnder the Iawes ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.141

it happened that As soone as hee was trust vp , there fell a great
storme of raine and winde , whereupon all the people ran away from the
Gallowes to shelter themselues . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.142

But night being come , and the moon shining bright , it chanced that a
Country Boore , or a waggoner and his Sonne with him were driuing their
empty waggon by the place where the fellow was hanged , who being not
choaked , in the extremity of his paines did stirre his legges and
writhe and crumple his body , which the waggoners Sonne perceiued ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.143

and said ; Father looke , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.144

the man vpon the Gallowes doth moue : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.145

quoth the old man he moues indeed , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.146

I pray the let vs make hast ; and put the Waggon vnder the Gibbet , to
see if we can vnhang and saue him . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.147

This being said was quickely done , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.148

and the wretch halfe dead was laid in straw in the Boores waggon , and
carried home , where with good attendance he was in foure or fiue dayes
recouered to his health , but that he had a cricke in his necke , & the
cramp in his iawes . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.149

The old man was glad that he had done so good a deed , <paren> as he
thought <$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.150

began to giue the thiefe Fatherly counsell ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.151

and told him that it was Gods great mercy towards him to make me <paren>
quoth he <$$paren> the Instrument of thy deliuerance ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.152

and therfore looke that thou make good use of this his gracious fauour
towards thee , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.153

and labour to redeeme the time thou hast misspent ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.154

get the into some other Princes countrey , where thy former crimes may
not bring thee into the danger of the Law againe ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C1.155

and there with honest <P_3,82.C2> industrious endeuours get thy liuing .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.156

The thiefe seemed willing to entertaine these good admonitions ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.157

and thanked the Boore and his Sonne , telling them that the next morning
he would be gone : and if euer his fortunes made him able , he promised
to be so grateful vnto them that they should haue cause to say their
great curtesies were well bestowed vpon him ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.158

but all his sugred {COM:sic} sweete promises , were in the proofe but
Gall and wormwood in the performance : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.159

for this gracelesse Caitiffe arose betimes in the morning ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.160

and drew on a paire of Bootes and spurres which were the mans sonnes of
the house , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.161

and slipping out of the doores , went to the stable
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.162

and stole one of his kind hosts best horses ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.163

and away rode hee . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.164

The man and his Sonne , when they were vp and missed the thiefe and the
horse , were amazed at the ingratitude of the wretch ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.165

and with all speed his sonne and he rode seuerall waies in pursuit of
him , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.166

and in briefe one of them tooke him , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.167

and brought him backe to their house againe ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.168

and when it was night they bound him , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.169

and laid him in their waggon <paren> hauing deafe eares , and hardned
hearts to all his intreaties <$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.170

and away to the Gallowes where they found him hanging ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.171

there they with the halter being a little shortned , they left him .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.172

The next day the Country people wondred to see him hanging there again ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.173

for they had seen him hanged , and missed him gone ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.174

and now to be thus strangely & priuately come againe in boots and
spurres , whereas they remembred at his first hanging he had shoes &
stockings , it made them muse what iourney he had beene riding , & what
a mad Ghest he was to take the Gallowes for his Inne , or <paren> as I
suppose <$$paren> for his end . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.175

The rumor of this accident being bruited abroad , the people came far
and neere to see him , all in general wondring how these things should
come to passe . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.176

At last , to cleere all doubts , proclamations were published with
pardon , and a reward to any that could discouer the truth , whereupon
the old Boore & Sonne came in and related the whole circumstance of the
matter . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,82.C2.177

At another place <paren> the hangmans place beeing void <$$paren> there
were two of the bloud , <paren> for it is to be noted that the
succession of that office doth lineally descend from the Father to the
Sonne , or to the next of the bloud <$$paren> which were at strife for
the <P_3,83.C1> possession of this high indignity .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.178

Now it happened that 2 Men were to be beheaded at the same towne , and
at the same time , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.179

and <paren> to auoid sute in Law for this great prerogatiue <$$paren> it
was concluded by the Arbitrators , that each of these new hangmen should
execute one of the Prisoners , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.180

and he that with greatest cunning and sleight could take the head from
the body , should haue the place , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.181

to this they all agreed JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.182

and the Prisoners were brought forth , where one of the Execucioners did
bind a red silke thread double about his prisoners necke the threads
being distant one from another only the bredth of one thread ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.183

and he promised to cut off the head with a backward blow with a Sword ,
betweene the threads . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.184

The other called his Prisoner JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.185

and told him that if he would be ruled by him , he should haue his life
saued , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.186

and besides <paren> quoth he <$$paren> I shall be sure to haue the
office . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.187

The Prisoner was glad of the motion , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.188

and said he would doe any thing upon these conditions ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.189

then said the Hangman , when thou art on thy knees , and hast said thy
prayers ; and that I doe lift vp my Axe , <paren> for I will vse an Axe
<$$paren> to strike thee , I will cry Hem , at which word doe thou rise
and run away , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.190

<paren> thou knowest none will stay thee if thou canst once escape after
thou art deliuered into my custody , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.191

it is the fashion of our Country <$$paren>
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.192

and let me alone to shift to answer the matter :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.193

This being said or whispered , the headsman with the sword did cut off
the Prisoners head iust betweene the threads as hee had said , which
made all the people wonder at the steddinesse of his hand ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.194

and most of them judged that hee was the man that was and would be
fittest to make a mad hangman of . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.195

But as one tale is good till another be told ; and as there be three
degrees of good , better , and best ; so this last hangman did much
exceed and eclipse the others cunning : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.196

For his prisoner being on his knees , and he lifting vp his axe to giue
the fatall blow , <font> Hem <$$font> , <paren> said he according to
promise <$$paren> whereupon the fellow arose and ran away ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.197

but when he had run some seuen or eight paces , the hangman threw the
Axe after him , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.198

and strocke his head smoothly from his shoulders .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.199

now for all this , who shal haue the place is vnknowne ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.200

for they are yet in Law for it ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C1.201

and I doubt not but before the matter bee ended , that the Lawyers will
<P_3,83.C2> make them exercise their own trades upon themselues to end
the controuersie . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.202

This tale doth sauour somewhat Hyperbolicall
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.203

but I wish the Reader to beleeue no more of the matter then I saw ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.204

and there is an end . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.205

At another Towne there stood an old ouerworne despised paire of Gallowes
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.206

but yet not so old but they will last many a faire yere with good viage
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.207

but the Townes-men a little distance from them built another paire , in
a more stately Geometricall port and fashion , whereupon they were
demanded why they would be at the charge to erect a new Gallowes ,
hauing so sufficent an old one ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.208

they answered , that those old Gallowes should serue to hang fugitiues
and strangers , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.209

but those new ones were built for them and their heires for euer .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.210

Thus much for hangmen , theeues , and Gallowses .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.211

Yet one thing more for theeues : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.212

In <font> Hamburgh <$$font> those that are not hanged for theft , are
chained 2. or 3. together , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.213

and they must in that sort sixe or seuen yeares draw a dung-cart , and
clense the streets of the towne , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.214

& euery one of those theeues for as many yeares as hee is condemned to
that slauery , so many Bels he hath hanged at an iron aboue one of his
shoulders , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.215

and euery yeare a Bell is taken off , till all are gone ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.216

and then he is a Freeman againe , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.217

and I did see ten or twelue of these Carts ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.218

and some of the Theeues had 7. Bels , some 5. some 6. some one ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.219

but such a noyse they make , as if all the Diuels in Hell were dancing
the morrice . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.220

<font> Hamburgh <$$font> is a free City , not being subiect to the
Emperour , or any other Prince , but onely gouerned by twenty_foure
Burgomasters , whereof two are the chiefe , who are called Lords , and
doe hold that dignity from their first election during their liues :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.221

The buildings are all of one vniforme fashion , very lofty and stately ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.222

it is wonderful populous ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.223

and the water with boats comes through most of the streets of the towne
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.224

Their Churches are most gorgeously set forth , as the most of them are
{TEXT:missing_"are"} couered with copper , with very lofty Spires ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.225

and withinsides they are adorned with crucifixes , Images and pictures ,
which they doe charily keepe for ornaments , but not for idle or idoll
adoration ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,83.C2.226

In S. <font> Iacobs <$$font> and in Saint <font> Katherines <$$font>
Churches there is in one of <P_3,84.C1> them a Pulpit of Alablaster ,
and in the other a paire of such Organs , which for worth and
workmanship are vnparaleld in Christendome , as most trauailers doe
relate . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.227

The women there are not fashion mongers ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.228

but they keepe in their degrees one continuall habit , as the richer
sort doe weare a Huicke , which is a robe of cloth or stuffe plated ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.229

and the vpper part of it is gathered and sowed together in the forme of
an English potlid , with a tassell on the top , and so put vpon the head
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.230

and the garment goes ouer her ruffe and face if she please , and so
downe to the ground , so that a man may meet his owne wife , and perhaps
not know her from another Woman . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.231

They haue no Porters to beare burdens , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.232

but they haue bigge burly-bon'd knaues with their wiues that doe daily
draw Carts any whether vp and downe the towne , with Marchants goods or
any other imployments : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.233

And it is reported that these Cart-drawers are to see the rich men of
the Towne prouided of milch-nurses for their children , which nurses
they call by the name of <font> Ams <$$font> , so that if they doe want
a nurse at any time , these felllowes are cursed , because they haue not
gotten wenches enough with childe to supply their wants .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.234

But if a man of any fashion doe chance to goe astray to a house of
iniquity , the whilst he is in the house at his drudgery , another of
the whores will go to the Sherif , <paren> which they call the
Right-heere <$$paren> and informe that such a man is in such a suspected
house , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.235

then is his comming forth narrowly watched ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.236

and he is taken and brought before the Right-heere , and examined ,
where if he bee a man of credit , he must , and will pay forty , fifty ,
or sixty Rex_dollers before he will haue his reputation called in
question . Of which money the queane that did informe shall haue her
reward . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.237

A Lawyer hath but a bad trade there , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.238

for any Cause or Controuersie is tryed and determined in three dayes ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.239

Quirks , Quiddits , Demurs , Habeas Corposes , Sursararaes ,
Procedendoes , or any such dilatory Law-tricks are abolished , and not
Worth a button . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C1.240

But aboue all , I must not forget the rare actions and humours of a
Quacksaluer or Mountebanke , <P_3,84.C2> or to speake more familiarly ,
a shadow of a skilfull Chyrurgian . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C2.241

This fellow beeing clad in an ancient doublet of decayed Satin , with a
Spruce Leather Ierkin with Glasse butons , the rest of his attire being
correspondent , was mounted vpon a Scaffold ; hauing shelfes set with
Viols , Gallipots , Glasses , Boxes , and such like stuffe , wherein as
he said , were Waters , Oyles , Vnguents , Emplasters , Electuaries ,
Vomits , Purges , and a world of neuer_heard_of Drugs ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C2.242

and being mounted <paren> as I said <$$paren> he & his man begin to
proclaime all their skill and more , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C2.243

hauing a great number of idle and ignorant gazers on , he began as
followeth <paren> as I was informed by my Interpreter , for I vnderstood
not one word he spake . <$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C2.244

I <font> Iacomo Compostella <$$font> , Practitioner in Physicke ,
Chyrurgery , and the Mathematicks , beeing a man famous through Europe ,
Asia , Affricke , and America , from the Orientall exhaltation of Titan
, to his Occidentall declination , who for the Testimony of my skill ,
and the rare cures that I haue done ; haue these princes hands and
seales ; as first the great <font> Cham <$$font> of <font> Tartaria
<$$font> , in whose Court , onely with this water which is the Elixar of
Henbane , diafracted in a Diurnall of Egredients Hippocraronticke ,
Auicenian , and Catarackt , with this did I cure the great Dutchesse of
<font> Promulpho <$$font> , of the cramp in her tongue :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C2.245

and with this Oyle did I restore the Emperour <font> Gregory Euanowich
<$$font> ; of a Convulsion in his pericranion .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C2.246

From thence I trauailed through <font> Slauonia <$$font> ; where I met
with <font> Mustapha Despot of Seruia <$$font> , who at that time was
intolerably vexed with a <font> Spasmus <$$font> , so that it often
droue him into a Syncope with the violent obstructions of the
conflagerating of his veines . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C2.247

Onely with this precious Vnguent being the Quintessence of <font>
Mugwort <$$font> ; with <font> Auripigmenti <$$font> terragrophicated in
a Limbecke of Chystalline translucency , I recouered him to his former
health , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C2.248

and for my reward I had a Barbary Horse with rich Caparisons , a Turkish
Semitar , a Persian Robe , & 2000. Hungarian Ducats .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C2.249

Besides , here are the hands and Seales of <font> Potohamacke <$$font> ,
<font> Adolantado <$$font> of <font> Prozewgma <$$font> , and of <font>
Gulch Flownderscurse <$$font> chiefe Burgomaster of <font> Belgrade
<$$font> , and of diuers Princes and estates , which to auoid tedious
prolixity I omit . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,84.C2.250

But good people <P_3,85.C1> if you or any other bee troubled with
Apoplexies , Palsies , Cramps , Lethargies , Cataracks , Quinsies ,
Tisicks , Pleurisies , Coughs , Headaches , Tertian , Quartan , and
Quotidian Agues , burning Feauers , Iaundizes , Dropsies , Collicks ,
Illiaca passio's , the Stone , the Strangury , the Poxe , Plague ,
Botches , Biles , Blanes , Scabs , Scurfs , Mange , Leprosies , Cankers
, Magrims , Mumps , Fluxes , Meazels , Murreins , Gouts , Consumptions ,
Tooth-ach , Ruptures , Hernia Aquosa , Hernia Ventosa , Hernia Carnosa ,
or any other maladie that dares afflict the body of man or woman , come
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.251

and buy while you may haue it for money ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.252

for I am sent for speedily to the Emperour of <font> Trapezond <$$font>
, about affaires of great importance that highly concernes his royall
person . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.253

Thus almost two houres did this fellow with embost words , and most
laborious actions , talke and swear to the people , that vnderstood no
more what he said , then he himselfe vnderstood himselfe .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.254

And I thinke his whole takings for simple compounds did amount in the
totall to 9. pence sterling . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.255

But leauing <font> Hamburgh <$$font> , <paren> hauing gathered these few
obseruations aforesaid <$$paren> out of it I went <font> August <$$font>
28. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.256

and my first iaunt of my trauels was by water , to a Towne called <font>
Buckstahoo <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.257

it is a little walled towne , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.258

and stands on the other side of the Riuer , 3. miles as they call it
from <font> Hamburgh <$$font> . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.259

The boat we passed in is called an <font> Iuar <$$font> , not so good as
a Grauesend barge , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.260

yet I thinke it be as great , & the three miles longer then from London
, to Graues-end , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.261

for I am sure that we were going 9. houres before we could be landed :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.262

Our passage cost vs 3. pence a peece , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.263

and one thing I remember well , that the lazie water men will sit still
all <paren> or the most part of the way <$$paren> whilst their
Passengers , <paren> be they neuer so rich or poore , all is one to them
, be they men or women <$$paren> they must rowe by turnes an houre or
such a matter : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.264

and we landed in the night at a place called <font> Crants <$$font> ,
where al the passengers were to go to Supper ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.265

but such dver {COM:sic} we had , that the Prouerbe was truly verified
<font> God sent meat , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.266

and the Diuel sent Cookes : <$$font> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.267

for as there was no respect of persons in the boat , so all were
{TEXT:missing_"were"} fellowes at the Table ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.268

and all one price , the Palatine and the Plebeian :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C1.269

our first messe was great <P_3,85.C2> platters of blacke broth , in
shape like new ratte , and in tast Cosen Germane to slut pottage ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.270

our second were dishes of Eeles , chop'd as small as hearbs , and the
broth they were in as salt as brine : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.271

then had we a boyld Goose , with choake_peares and carrets buried in a
deepe dish ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.272

and when we demanded what was to pay , it was but three pence a man ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.273

I mused at the cheapenesse of it , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.274

but afterward they came vpon vs with a fresh reckoning of fiue pence a
man for beere , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.275

for they neuer count their meat and drinke together ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.276

but bring in seuerall reckonings for them :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.277

but the morning being come , we hired a Boores Waggon , to carry vs to a
place called <font> Citezen <$$font> , three miles there , or 12.
English miles from <font> Buckstahoo <$$font> :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.278

a little bald dorp it is , where we came about noone , and found such
slender entertainement , that we had no cause to boast of our good
cheere or our Hostesse Cookery . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.279

We hauing refreshed our selues , and hyred a fresh Waggon , away we went
two miles further to a Dorp called <font> Rodonburgh <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.280

this village belongeth to the Byshop of <font> Rodonburgh <$$font> , who
hath a faire house there , strongly walled and deepely ditched and
Moated about very defensible , with drawbridges , and good Ordinance .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.281

This Bishop is a temporall Lord , notwithstanding his sprituall title ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.282

and no doubt but the flesh preuailes aboue the Spirit with him ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.283

So the Bishops of <font> Breame <$$font> , <font> Lunningburgh <$$font>
, and diuers other places in Germany , doe very charitably take the
fleece , <paren> for they themselues neuer looke to the flocke <$$paren>
by reason they vse no Ecclesiastick function , but onely in name .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.284

Being lodged at <font> Rodenburgh <$$font> , in a stately Inne , where
the Host , Hostesse , Guests , Cowes , Horses , Swine lay all in one
Roome ; yet I must confesse their beds to be very good , and their
linnine sweet , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.285

but in those parts they vse no couerlet , rug , or blanket , but a good
featherbed vndermost , with cleane sheets , pillowes , and pillowbears ,
and a nother {COM:sic} featherbed vppermost , with a faire sheet aboue
all , so that a mans lodging is like a womans lying In , all white .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.286

<font> August <$$font> , the 30. wee went from <font> Rodenburgh
<$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.287

and about noone wee came to an old walled towne , called <font> Feirden
<$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,85.C2.288

it hath two Churches in it , and the hangmans statue very artificially
carued <P_3,86.C1> in stone , and set on a high pillar ; with a rod
rampant in his hand , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.289

at this Towne I met with sixe strangers , all trauilers , where wee went
to dinner together all at one Table , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.290

and euery man opened his knapsacke or budget with victuals ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.291

<paren> for he that carries no meat with him , may fast by authority in
most places of that Country <$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.292

but to note the kindnesse of these people one to another , some had
bread and a boxe of salt butter , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.293

some had raw bacon , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.294

some had cheese , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.295

some had pickled herring , some dryed beefe ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.296

and among the rest I had brought three ribs of rost beefe , and other
prouision from <font> Hamburgh <$$font> :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.297

to conclude we drew all like fidlers , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.298

and fed <paren> for the most part <$$paren> like Swine ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.299

for euery man eat what was his own JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.300

and no man did proffer one bit of what he had to his neighhour ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.301

so he that had cheese must dine with cheese ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.302

for he that had meat would offer him none ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.303

I did cut euery one a part of my rost beefe which my guide told me they
would not take well , because it is not the fashion of the Countrey :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.304

I tryed , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.305

and found them very tractable to take any thing that was good , so that
I perceiued their modesty to take one from another , proceeds from their
want of manners to offer . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.306

But dinner being done , away we went ouer a bridge , in the midst
whereof is a lynn , made in the likenesse of a great Lanthorne ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.307

it is hanged on a turning Gybbet like a Crane : So that it may bee
turned on the bridge and ouer the Riuer , as they shall please that haue
occasion to vse it . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.308

It is big enough to hold two men , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.309

and it is for this purpose if any one or more do rob Gardens or Orchards
, or Corne fields , <paren> if they be taken <$$paren> he or they are
put into this same whirligig , or kickumbob ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.310

and the gybbet being turned , the offender hangs in this Cage from the
Riuer some 12. or 14. foot from the water ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.311

then there is a small Line made fast to the party some 5. or 6. fadome
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.312

and with a tricke which they haue , the bottome of the Cage drops out ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.313

and the thiefe fals sodenly into the water .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.314

I had not gone farre , but at the end of the bridge I saw an old
Chappell , which in old time they say was dedicated to S. <font>
Frodswicke <$$font> , which hath the day after Saint Luke the Euangelist
: JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.315

I entering in , perceiued it was a charitable Chappeil ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.316

for the doores and windowes were alwayes open , by reason there were
none to shut , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C1.317

<P_3,86.C2>

and it was a common receptacle for Beggars and Rogues .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.319

There was the Image of our Lady with a vaile ouer her , made as I thinke
of a Baskets bolter , and Saint Peter holding a candle to her .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.320

I cut a peece of her Vaile , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.321

and taking <font> Peter <$$font> by the hand at my departure , the kind
Image <paren> I know not vpon what acquaintance <$$paren> beeing
loose_handed , let me haue his hand with mee , which beeing made of wood
, by reason of ruinous antiquitie , burst off in the handling : which
two precious relickes I brought home with me to defend me and all my
friends from Sparrow-blasting . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.322

From this place we were glad to trauaile on foot 1. Dutch mile to a
Dorpe called <font> Durfurne <$$font> , where we hired a Boores Waggon
to a Towne called <font> Neinburgh <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.323

but we could not reach thither by 2. English miles , so that we were
glad to lodge in a Barne that night : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.324

on the morrow early we arose JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.325

& came to <font> Neinburgh <$$font> , which is a little walled towne ,
belonging to that Byshopricke from whence it is so named .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.326

There we stayed 5. houres before we could get a Waggon ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.327

at last wee were mounted to a Dorpe called <font> Leiz <$$font> , 2.
Dutch miles ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.328

I would haue bargained with the Boore to haue carried vs to <font> Dorne
<$$font> , which I bade my guide tell him it was but a mile further ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.329

a mile quoth the Boore , indeed we call it no more ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.330

but it was measured with a Dog , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.331

and they threw in the taile and all to the bargaine ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.332

so to <font> Leize <$$font> he carried vs ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.333

and there we found a Waggon of <font> Dorne <$$font> homeward bound ,
which made vs ride the cheaper ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.334

but it was the longest mile that euer I rode or went ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.335

for surely it is as much as some ten of our miles in England .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.336

But hauing ouercome it at last , from thence I tooke a fresh Waggon to
carry me two miles further to a towne called <font> Buckaburgh <$$font>
, where I had , and haue I hope , a Brother residing ; to whom my iourny
was entended , and with whom my perambulation was at a period .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.337

This towne of <font> Buckeburgh <$$font> is wholely and solely belonging
to the Graff or Graue of <font> Shomburgh <$$font> , a Prince of great
command and eminence , absolute in his authoritie and power , not
countermanded by the Emperour , or any other further then courtesie
requires ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.338

and in a word , he is one of the best accomplished Gentlemen in <font>
Europe <$$font> for his person , port , and Princely magnificence .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,86.C2.339

<P_3,87.C1>

He hath there to his inestimable charge , built the Towne , with many
goodly Houses , Streets , Lanes , a strong wall , and a deepe ditch ,
all well furnished with munition and Artillerie , with a band of
Souldiers which he keepeth in continuall pay , allowing euery man a
Doller a Weeke and double apparell euery yeare .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C1.341

Besides , he hath built a stately Church , being aboue 120. steps to
the Roofe , with a faire paire of Organs , a curious carued Pulpit , and
all other Ornaments belonging to the same .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C1.342

His owne Pallace may well be called an earthly Paradice , which if I
should run into the praise of the description of , I should bring my
wits into an intricate Labyrinth , that I should hardly finde my way out
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C1.343

yet according to the imbecility of my memory I will only touch a litle
at the shadow of it , and let the substance stand where it doth .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C1.344

At the front or outward gate is a most stately Arch , vpon the top
whereof is erected the image of Enuy , <paren> as great as a demy
Colossus <$$paren> betweene two Dragons , all guilt with gold ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C1.345

before the gate is an iron grate to open and shut as it were of flowers
or worke of Embroydery , at which gate stands alwayes a Court of Guard ,
and a Sentinel , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C1.346

and at the Lower part of the Arch is the Princes title or in Capitall
Letters as followeth ; Ernestus Dei gratia , comes Holst , Scomburgh
Spernburgh , etc. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C1.347

After I was entred within the outward gate , I was shewed his stables ,
where I saw very faire and goodly horses , both for warre and other vses
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C1.348

amongst the rest there was one naturally spotted like a Leopard or
Panther , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C1.349

and is called by the name of Leopard , a stately couragious beast , and
so formed as if Nature had layd all her cunning aside , onely to compose
that Horse , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C1.350

and indeed I must acknowledge he was made for the Seruice of some great
prince , and not for any inferiour Person .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C1.351

Passing further , I came to another Court of Guard , and ouer a
Draw-bridge , into the inner Court , where on the right hand , I was
conducted into the Chappell , in which Chappell , if it <P_3,87.C2> were
possible that the hand of mortall men <paren> with artificiall
workemanship <$$paren> could visibly set forth the magnificent glory of
the immortal Creator , then absolutely there it is .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.352

but being impossible so to doe , <paren> as neere as I can <$$paren> I
will describe it ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.353

the pauement is all of blacke and gray marble , curiously wrought with
Chequer-works , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.354

the Seats and Pues are carued wainscot of wonderful cunning and
workemanship : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.355

the roofe is adorned with the statues of Angels and Cherubims , many in
number , all so richly guilded , as if Gold were as plentifull as pewter
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.356

there could not bee more liberality bestowed ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.357

besides there are a faire set of Organs , with a braue sweet Quire of
Quiristers : so that when they sing , the Lutes , Viols , Bandoraes ,
Organs , Recorders , Sagbuts , and other musical instuments , all strike
vp together , with such a glorious delicious harmony , as if the
Angelicall musicke of the Spheares were descendid into that earthly
Tabernacle . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.358

The Prince himselfe is a Protestant , very zealous in his Prayer , and
diligent in his attention to the Preacher , who although I vnderstood
not , yet I perceiued he was a good Diuine , who grauely and sincerely
with reuerence and eloquent Ellocution , deliuered the bread of life to
the vnderstanding Auditors . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.359

In this Towne I stayd with my brother from Saturday the last of <font>
August <$$font> , till the Thursday following which was the fifth of
<font> September <$$font> . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.360

When I was conducted an English mile on my way by certaine of my
Countrey men my Lords Musicians , where wee dranke and parted , onely my
Brother and my Guide brought me that night to a strong walled Towne
called <font> Minden <$$font> , which standeth on the Riuer of <font>
Weazar <$$font> , and belongeth to the Byshop of that See .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.361

On the morrow I walked to see the Towne , where I bought thirty_sixe
Cheeses for eight pence , and a yard and a halfe of pudding for fiue
pence , which I brought into <font> England <$$font> for rarities .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.362

So about noone we tooke a Boat to passe downe the Riuer , which boat is
much longer then any Westerne Barge , but nothing neere so broad ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.363

it was halfe laden with Lime and Chalke ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.364

and by reason the Wind blew hard , we were almost choaked with the
flying and scattering of that dustie commodity .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,87.C2.365

Besides the Water was so <P_3,88.C1> shallow , that we ran aground three
or foure times , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.366

and sometimes an hour , sometimes lesse before we could get a_float
againe : which made mee and my Guide goe a shore at a village called
<font> Peterhaghen <$$font> , where we hired a Waggon to <font> Leize
<$$font> , where we stayed all night , <paren> being come into our old
way againe where were a crew of strowling Rogues and Whores that tooke
vpon them the name of AEgyptians , Iuglers , and Fortune-tellers ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.367

and indeed one of them held the Goodwife with a tale , the whilst
another was picking her chest , and stole out ten dollers which is forty
shillings and she that talked with her , looked in her hand , and told
her that if she did not take great heed she knew by her Art that some
mischance was neere her : which prooued true ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.368

for her money was gone , the whilst her fortune was telling .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.369

But I appointed a Waggon ouer night to bee ready by three of the Clocke
in the morning , when I arose and applied my trauaile so hard by
changing fresh Waggons , so that that day I came as farre as <font>
Rodenburgh <$$font> , which was nine Dutch miles , where I stayed that
night : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.370

The next day being Sunday the eighth of <font> September <$$font> , we
took Waggon toward <font> Buckstahoo <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.371

we {COM:preceding_word_"we"_emended} had
{COM:preceding_word_"had"_emended} a merry Boore , with an_hundred
tatters about him JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.372

and now I thinke it fit to describe these Boores , their natures ,
habits , and vnmannerly manners . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.373

In our English tongue the name Bore or Boore doth truely explaine their
swinish condition , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.374

for most of them are as full of humanity as a Bacon-hog , or a Bore ,
and their wiues as cleanly and courteous as Sowes .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.375

For the most part of the men they are clad in thin buckerom , vnlined ,
barelegged and footed , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.376

neyther band nor scarce shirt , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.377

no woollen in the world about them , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.378

and thus will they run through all weathers for money by the Waggons
side , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.379

and though no better apparelled , yet all of them haue Houses , Land ,
or manuall meanes to liue by . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.380

The substantiall Boores I did meet aboue 120. of them that Sunday ,
euery one with {SIC:with_euery_one} a Hatchet in his hand ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.381

I mused at it , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.382

and thought they had beene going to fell Wood that day ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C1.383

but my Guide told me they were all going to Church , and that instead of
Cloakes , they carried Hatchets , and that it was the fashion of the
Country : whereupon it came <P_3,88.C2> to my mind , Cloake , <font>
quasi <$$font> Cleaue-oake , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.384

<font> ergo <$$font> the Boores weare Hatchets in steed of Cloakes .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.385

There are other fashion Boores , who weare white Linnen breeches as
close as Irish touzes , but so long , that they are turned vp at the
shooe in a role like a Maides sleeues {COM:are_turned_up} at the hand ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.386

but what these fellowes want in the bignesse of their Hose , they haue
in Dublets , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.387

for their sleeues are as big as Breeches , and the bodies great enough
to hold a Kinderkin of beere , and a barrell of Butter .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.388

The Country is very full of Woods , and especially Oakes , which they
very seldome cut down , because of the Mast for their Swine , which liue
there in great abundance . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.389

If any man bee slaine or murthered in the way , they vse to set vp a
wooden Crosse in the place , for a memoriall of the bloudie fact
committed there , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.390

and there were many of those woodden Crosses in the way as I trauailed .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.391

They seldome haue any Robbery committed amongst them , but there is a
murther with it , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.392

for their vnmannerly manner is to knocke out a mans braines first , or
else to lurke behind a Tree , and shoot a man with a peece or a Pistol ,
and so make sure worke with the passenger , and then search his pockets
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.393

It is as dangerous to steale or kill an Hare in some places there as it
is to rob a Church or kill a man in <font> England <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.394

and yet a two-penny matter will discharge the offender ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.395

for the best and the worst is but an Halter ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.396

and I was enformed that an English Marchant <paren> not knowing the
danger <$$paren> as he was riding on the way , hauing a peece charged in
his hand <paren> as it is an ordinary weapon to trauaile with there
<$$paren> by chance he espeyed an hare , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.397

and shot at her JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.398

and killed her ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.399

but hee was apprehended for it , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.400

and it was like to haue cost him his life ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.401

but before he got out of the trouble , he was faine to vse his best
friends and meanes , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.402

<paren> and pleading ignorance for his innocency , at last with the
losse of a great deale of liberty , and fiue_hundred pound in money he
was discharged : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.403

The reason of this strict course is , because all the Hares in the
Country doe belong to one Lord or other ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,88.C2.404

and being in aboundance , they are killed by the owners appointment ,
and carried to the markets <P_3,89.C1> by Cart-loads , and sold for the
vse of the honourable owners : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C1.405

And no Boore or Tenant that dwels in those parts where those Hares are
plenty , must keepe a Dogge , except hee pay fiue shillings a yeere to
the Lord , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C1.406

or else one of his fore-feet must be cut off , that hee may not hunt
Hares . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C1.407

A man is in almost as high proportion to be a knaue in England , as
{COM:to_be} a Knight in Germany , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C1.408

for there a Gentleman is called a Youngcur , and a Knight is but a
Youngcurs man , so that you shall have a scuruy Squire command a Knight
to hold his stirrop , plucke off his boots , or any other vnknightly
peece of seruice : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C1.409

and verily I thinke there are an_100. seuerall Princes , Earles ,
Byshops , and other Estates , that doe euery one keepe a mint , and in
their owne names stampe Money , Gold , Siluer and Brasse ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C1.410

and amongst 23. two_pences <P_3,89.C2> which I had of their brasse
money , <paren> which they call Grushes <$$paren> I had 13. seuerall
coynes . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C2.411

Many more such worthie iniunctions and honourable ordinances I obserued
, which are hardly worth pen and inke the describing ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C2.412

and therefore I omit them , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C2.413

and draw toward an end , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C2.414

for on the Wednesday morning I was at an anchor at <font> Stoad <$$font>
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C2.415

and on the Friday night following I was <paren> by Gods gracious
assistance <$$paren> Landed at London . So that in three weekes and
three dayes I sayled from <font> England <$$font> to <font> Hamburgh
<$$font> and backe againe , staying in the Countrey 17. dayes , and
trauailed 200. miles by Land there : gathering like a busie Bee all
these honied obseruations , some by sight , some by hearing , some by
both , some by neither , and some by bare supposition .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C2.416

Finis . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P1,3,89.C2.417

