<BEGIN_joxinden-1633-e2-p1>

<P_48>

<heading:edcomment:XXXV_JAMES_OXINDEN_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Loving Brother , I received your last letter by which I understand that
you would have me send you a Note of the money which my Mother and you
and my sisters sent me , which I have sent you inclosed in this letter .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.4

Allso you would have me send you word how I speede with the
schollersship , of which I can write noe certainty unto you , onely
expect the best , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.5

for the Election will not be till a month after Michaelmas .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.6

You write unto me to send you word whether I can live for 20@ @=ll= the
yere , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.7

or ellse you will guide som other course that I may live cheaper ,
touching which thinge I thinke I shall hardly live this year for soe
much , by reason that being new come I have had soe many thinges to buy
. JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.8

But I hope that the next yeare I shall , when all thinges are setled .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.9

I assure you that I spend none of your money idlely , still remembringe
your love and kindnes , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.10

for if I should , I should shew myselfe unthankfull unto you for your
soe great love , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.11

for nothing can seeme more odious unto you then to heare it .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.12

I hope as yet that you heare nothing of my Tutor but that I am a good
husband , which god grant I may continue , to requite your kindnesses .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.13

I pray you to send me your lexicon by this Carryer , if you can spare it
, JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.14

for I stand in greate neede of it , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.15

and I pray you to send me your Aristotle's Ethicks , if you can spare it
, JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.16

for it is the next book I shall use JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.17

and it were a folly for me to buy them before I here from you ,
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.18

and I pray you to send me your Ovid's Metamorphosis in English ,
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.19

and I pray you to pray my mother to send me a payre of stockinges and a
Cupple of caps . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.20

Soe remembring my love and servise unto you and my duty unto my Mother
and my love unto my sistars . Hopinge that you will be mindfull of me .
I rest Your loving Brother and willing to please you in all thinges
James Oxinden JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.21

From St. John's Colledge in Cambridge JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.22

this 15th day of September 1629 JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,48.23

<P_52>

<heading:edcomment:XL_JAMES_OXINDEN_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Loving Brother , I remember my love unto you hoping that you ar in good
health as I , thanks be unto God , am at this present ;
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,52.26

my occasion of writing unto you is that you would send me by this
Carryar the lexicon which you promised to send me the last time .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,52.27

Also because it begins now to be cold I desire you to be mindfull of
your promise to Mr. Nichols to send me a winter goune ,
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,52.28

and I shall have neede of noe more gounes before I be Batchellar .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,52.29

I did think to have prolonged the time not to have sent to you till I
should have sent you word of the gettinge of the schollar's place .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,52.30

But seing my Tutor hath writ unto you I have made bold to trubble you
with these few lines , desieringe you , if you can possible , to helpe
me to a winter goune , <P_53> of which the winter approching I stand in
very great neede . For which your kindnesse I shall not be able to
thank you for sufficiently , onely but by labouring to be a good husband
. JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,53.31

I hope as yet you here nothing of my Tutor to the contrary as yet ,
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,53.32

and I hope you never shall , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,53.33

soe not to trouble you with to many of inconsiderate words , onely
remembring my duty to my loving Mother , and to thanke her for her last
kindnes , and my love to my sister Katherine and to my sister Elizabeth
and to my Brother Adam , I rest Your loving Brother Jam: Oxinden
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,53.34

From Cambridge JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,53.35

this 23 of Octobar 1629 JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P1,53.36

