<BEGIN_jubarring-1630-e2-p1>

<P_68>

<heading:edcomment:39_LADY_JUDITH_BARRINGTON,_N._D.,_JUNE_1629>

Madam By Tobie's being in toune I understood your intention the
beginning of next week to goe to Harrow , sence which time I have been
much perplexed in my thoughts that you should the same week goe awaye
wherin we resolved to attend you , which hath had the slower publishing
by reason of my husband's soe longe unexpected staye I know not whear ,
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,68.4

for sence his goeing into Bedfordsher on Whitsun Monday I have not heard
one word whear he is although I have written 2 letters to him ,
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,68.5

and I have defered this my writing heatherto hoping of his cominge home
. JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,68.6

And now I see Saterday come time is so pretious that I must not delaye
this sending unto you , which is onely to be an humble suitor to you
that you would not now leave <P_69> us before my actions may assure you
of my faithfull respect and love in my attendance of you , wherin you
shall not want , God willing , all comfort and contentment that lyeth in
my power . JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,69.7

And if you should goe now awaye I know it would be such a greife to your
sonne that his hart will not easily be quieted againe , he beleeving ,
it seemes by some encoragedment from your selfe , that you would have
patience untill the beginning of this terme , and then all our
businesses would be put into some good order that we might leave London
. JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,69.8

You may very well think that though my husband could not come hetherto
yett I might , JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,69.9

and I had a hart forward enough had I not been prevented by taking care
to make my self perfectly in health by my perserverance in my coorse of
phisick to the last prescription which held untell the Fryday before
Whitsuntide , so that in truth before that time I could not stirr
without hazarding my health , which hath been but crazy at the best ever
sence Christmas . JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,69.10

I know you have cause enough to complaine to be left soe longe upon
uncertainties ; JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,69.11

I have been sencible of it , JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,69.12

but it must be my part to try to procure your forgetfulnes of all errors
or offenses that are past and to entreat you will be pleased to make us
happy in your company at Hatfeeld at least this sommer ,
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,69.13

or ells I shall have litle joye to come thether .
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,69.14

And thus hoping to receave a comfortable answear from you , with all
affectionate wishes and trew service I rest Your most respectively
loving daughter to command Judith Barrington JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,69.15

Fryday night JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,69.16

{COM:Endorsed:} To my most honored mother the Lady Joan Barrington at
her house at Hatfeeld Pryory this JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,69.17

<P_88>

<heading:edcomment:61_LADY_JUDITH_BARRINGTON,_23_SEPTEMBER_1629>

Madam This night I receaved a letter from my husband , whoe is at my
brother Lytton@ @'s whearby I perceave the favour you intend us of
affoording us your company heer on Tuseday next , which I profes
seariously I much rejoyce at , JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,88.20

for yett the wayes are not very bad and the dayes of a resonable length
, soe that I hope the jorny will not be troublesum unto you .
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,88.21

And I am the gladder that you please now to make some hast to us that I
may attend you the longer time before my jorny to London some fortnight
or 3 weeks after Michlemas , whear I hope to finish a good worke that I
am interested in aboute my neece Wallop and Mr Heningham , who both ,
and her father , have much importuned my not failing of meeting of them
for some neer consernments to them . JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,88.22

I promised them alwayes I would be ready at that call ,
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,88.23

but knew not the certaine time tell this week that Dickeson came from
thence . JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,88.24

But I hope a fortnight will dispatche all that is to be done .
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,88.25

I am very sorry that my coach can@ @not attend you as I would , by
reason of my man's being now in Suffolk , I kno not whear , who returns
not tell the latter end of next week , JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,88.26

but if you please to lett Ned Lytton drive , the coach and horses are
most willingly at your service , JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,88.27

and to this end I have sent this messenger to know .
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,88.28

And soe beseeching you to remember my best love and wishes to my brother
Gererd and his lady , my sister Lamplugh , with the rest of my good
frends , I shall thinge it now longe untell I see you heer
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,88.29

and therfore <P_89> breifly hasten the tendor of those diew respects
which you shall finde ever from Your most faithfull loving daughter to
command Judith Barrington JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,89.30

Thursday night , September 23 JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,89.31

Your daughter John remembers her duty to you .
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,89.32

{COM:Endorsed:} To my most honored mother the Lady Barrington at Harrow
Hall this JUBARRING-1630-E2-P1,89.33

