<BEGIN_knyvett-1624-e2-p1>

<P_63>

<heading:edcomment:10>

Sweet harte , you scould terribly before you knowe a cause ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.4

but , to give you an accounte of all my actions , I would have you knowe
that I was then at Staines when I showld have writt , where I was very
kindely intertainde amongst the Tenants , who seemd to be redy to give
me all satisfaction that I desird , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.5

but I feare thay will delaye me . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.6

If thay doe I hope to have a very good chapman for it .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.7

My busines goes so slowely on , as I feare it will be longer before I
can come then I expected , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.8

for doe what I can , for my life I can@ @not gett my cosin Knyvett to
dispatch my Answeares yett , which makes me sweare if ever I gett out of
his fingers I will goe to any Lawyer in the world before I will trouble
him . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.9

M=r= Seriant Richardson and I am almost agreed for thy part in
Starbourgh , if he will vndertake to free me of y=r= wardship and all
molestation and trouble which may anyway come by that ;
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.10

otherwise I will not meddle with him . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.11

Y=r= mother is very well as ever she was in her life .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.12

I was to have seene her KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.13

but she continues constant . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.14

I spake with y=r= sister Drury who is most fayer .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.15

Y=r= Nephewe Brooke hath almost occup: his fine wife to death .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.16

Heer is a great deale of vncertaine newes . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,63.17

The towne is full of embassodores , every man expecting what wil@ @be
the conclusion of our <P_64> princes match , no man knowing yett any
certainty ther of . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.18

I hope vpon saturday to tell you more certaine newes my selfe .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.19

I praye , if any of those men which weare to pay me mony doe refuse ,
send me worde and I will take a course with them .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.20

If you lacke mony , Gorge {COM:sic} Keeper was to gather vp mony for me
- KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.21

send to him for it . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.22

So in hast , my everlasting love rest with thee .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.23

Thy faithfull loving husband till death Tho: Knyvett .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.24

I pray remember my servis to my Aunte Bell and my vergins .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.25

You weare so Angrye that you could not send me word howe my little boy
and girle doe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.26

I pray god bless them , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.27

farwell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.28

{COM:?_late_oct._or_nov._1623} {COM:address} To his most assuered loving
wife m=is= Knyvett at Hapton give these . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.29

Leave this at Windham to be sent . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.30

<heading:edcomment:11>

Sweet harte , in continuance of my Love , w=ch= shall never be wanting
to thee so long as we live together , I send these feawe lines , the
messenger of my speedy retourne . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.32

So it is , my busines falls out so as I can@ @not possibly returne this
weeke as I thought , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.33

but , god willing , I hope with_out fayle to see you the nexte .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.34

My cousin Abrahall is but newely come vp , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.35

and I hope we shall make a very good ende with that base troublesome
busines , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.36

for we haue beene with my Lord Hubberd , who is chancelore of the
princes courte , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.37

and he vsd my cousin Abrahall , and my selfe esspecially , very kindly ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.38

and hath given order that no proceedings shall goe on on ther behalfe
vntill wee be heard . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.39

It weare to long to tell you all the passages betwixt vs .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.40

I have followed the busines of y=r= wardshippe KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.41

and have got it granted to me , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.42

therfore nowe you must not marry without my concent .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.43

Other things I have to tell thee , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.44

but it weare to longe to enter into them concidering we shall , I hope ,
so soone meete . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.45

I have sent you by these carts a payer of silke stokings , and riband of
all sorts that are worne . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.46

The ose that I sent the last week weare righte silver .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.47

Thay wear in severall papers . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.48

One of them weare for my Aunte Bell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.49

It containd an ounce and halfe of the same sise she writte for .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.50

The white Damaske which I brought vp to match can@ @not be patternd in
all the towne , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.51

therfore , if you will send me word whate you will haue a gowne of , I
will see itt done . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.52

All that I see worne is blacke , with rich peticoksts and such ribands
as you haue . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.53

Thus with my unfainde love to thee I rest , being full of busines .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.54

My best respecte to my Aunte Bell , and love to my sweet harte .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,64.55

If all the <P_65> pothecarys shopps in lotheberry would haue afforded
but scabbe greass I had sent her a token . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.56

Thy true loving husband for ever Tho: Knyvett .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.57

{COM:1624}

I pray dispose of y=r= Dayry as you please ; KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.59

I will stand to it . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.60

My Parke is at y=r= servis , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.61

and pray tell them thay may find some other pasture for those Jades .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.62

If thay can@ @not , I will at my return . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.63

God blesse thee and litle Pudde , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.64

farewell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.65

{COM:address} To his truly loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Hapton give
these . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.66

Leave this at Windham to be sent according to the Direction .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.67

Norfolke . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.68

<heading:edcomment:12>

Sweet hart , towe or three words and away , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.70

for the carrier stays . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.71

Concerning the feare you had of my vnlkles {COM:sic} coming downe , it
is so farr of from that as it never was thought of ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.72

nether would I ever agree to it vpon any tearmes , knowing him so well
as I doe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.73

Y=r= stuff shal@ @be sent downe presenly . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.74

I wil@ @be with y=e= , god willing , vpon satturday night ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.75

so god bless vs and ours , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.76

farwell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.77

Thy deere loving husband Tho: Knyvett
{COM:preceding_word_"Knyvett"_emended} . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.78

{COM:address} To his deare and loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Ashwell
Thorp these . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.79

<heading:edcomment:13>

My deerest Love , I am infinightly gladd to heare that y=ee= are all
well . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.81

<paren> God be praysed <$$paren> , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.82

so am I , if I could gett out of this Towne , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.83

but yet it will not be , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.84

for I have very good hope that my cause will hould the hearing , which
is sett downe the 21=th= of this month . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.85

I have heard nothinge of my vnckle nor Judde , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.86

only I se my Aunte walke in the street with her vsher , Will: Faulkener
. KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.87

She hath to all our Joyes got a great Bellye , if it be not a plotte to
move pittye . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.88

I have mett with Abrahall , who is as wearye of this sute as I , and
could be content to come of with a good summe to be at quiett .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.89

If my cosin Nedd Hunne wear in Towne nowe I thinke he mighte doe a great
deale of good in this busines , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.90

for we lacke one to goe betwixt vs in the agreement ;
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.91

for if we knewe what thay would demaund I thinke we showld soon agree .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.92

I have delivered y=r= letter to m=is= Hambden who did aske very kindely
for you . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,65.93

I have not been at y=r= <P_66> mothers yet , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.94

but I doe thinke to se her this day . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.95

My mother doe vse me as kindely as can be . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.96

At my first coming she came KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.97

and kist me , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.98

and when I came away she carried me into her little clossett
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.99

and made me drinke a whole glass of wine . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.100

I thinke she knewe my Diett . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.101

She did Aske very kindly for you & all our chilldren .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.102

If you have any good cheeses you shall doe very well to send vs some .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.103

I did se the Funerall for nothinge . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.104

If it had cost me any monye I showld have been very sorye ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.105

for I never sawe a thinge worss performd for the order of it ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.106

and that which was most vnsufferable , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.107

some of the Duke of Buck: men tooke away the cloth of state which the
kings bodye showld have layen vpon in the charriot that it was fain
{TEXT:fainte} to lye vpon the bare charrit . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.108

Ther is the statelyest hearse in the Abbye I thinke that ever was made .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.109

The King goes towards Dover vpon the wednesday next weeke .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.110

I am in hast KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.111

therfore can@ @not write so much as I would . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.112

Concerning Write I would have Gorge to chuse out a tree in Broomewoode ,
or in the Bayes . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.113

For m=r= Bootye , I pre@ @thee tell him if it be to build or repayer any
houses vpon his copiehould , I am content he shall take what is fitting
, KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.114

but if thay be to sell & make the benefitt of them into his owne purss ,
I will not , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.115

for I knowe no reason why I showld give him that which is mine ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.116

& if he thinkes himselfe hardly dealt withall in his fine , he is very
vnthankfull , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.117

for I did not take so much as I might have Justified , by 5@ @=l= & more
, KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.118

but rather then he shall crye , when I come home I will yeeld to that
shal@ @be reasonable . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.119

Thus desiering god to blesse vs all , in all our Actions , I rest Thy
true loving husband till death Tho: Knyvett . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.120

My best respect to my Aunte Bell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.121

M=r= Recorder hath promised to doe the best he can for me for her sake .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.122

Direct y=r= letters to me at m=r= Sellmans house , a stationer in
Fleetstreet over against the Temple . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.123

{COM:aft._7_may_1625}

{COM:address}

To his deerest loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Ashwell Thorpe give these .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.126

Norf. KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,66.127

<P_67>

<heading:edcomment:14>

Sweet Harte , I can@ @not lett any messenger goe emptye_handed that may
convaye my love to the . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.130

This morninge is our cause to be heard if it hould , which I much feare
, KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.131

but if it be not hearde to_daye I hope I shall gett it dispatcht on
munday or Tuesdaye . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.132

I am in hast , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.133

therfore can onlye salute thee praying god of his mercye to Blesse &
keepe vs all . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.134

The plauge doe much increase heare , which make my cosin & I to keepe
our selves in our chamber but when we must needs .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.135

I have dined & supped but 3 times out of my chamber since I came .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.136

I have been at y=r= mothers KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.137

but could not see her . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.138

Y=r= sister Drury is growne huge olde KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.139

but very faier still . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.140

I thinke I shall bringe downe a payer of coachehorsses
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.141

& Anthonye hath a coache , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.142

so we doe meane to take our ease . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.143

I have forgot my selfe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.144

Farewell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.145

When you see this , wish me a kisse . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.146

Thy true loving husband Tho: Knyvett . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.147

Fleetstreet , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.148

May 21 . 1625 . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.149

{COM:address} To his deerest loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Ashwell Thorpe
give these . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.150

<heading:edcomment:15>

Sweet Harte , I am nowe dispatching to come home ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.152

for this morninge I received cold comforte , which was that our cause
can@ @not be hearde this tearme , so that I might have been at home all
this while as well as heer . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.153

Nowe we have no way but to gett a day sett downe for mihillmas tearme .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.154

It is most vnconscionable dealeing that men showld be forst to attend a
whole tearme & disbursse his monye for nothinge ;
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.155

<paren> god send an end to these our crosses <$$paren> .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.156

I am not greevd alone in this , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.157

for ther weare above 20 petioners {COM:sic} as@ @well as I in the like
kinde that hath the same Answeare , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.158

such are the delayes of this Lo: Keeper . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.159

Ther is no remedye but patience , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.160

for ther is no hope of makeing any frendly end , thay are so perverse .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.161

I have been ill since I came vp , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.162

but <paren> god be praysed <$$paren> I was never in better health then I
am nowe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.163

I have sent my Aunte Bell downe those things which she writt for .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.164

The pattern of the ose wear of three severall sorts , wherfore I have
sent of everye one some . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.165

Everye one of those papers have 2 ounces in them which makes 40 in all .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.166

If she mislikes anye of the sorts I can change them ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.167

but lett them not be mingled ; KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.168

thay are markte which are w=ch= . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.169

I praye send me y=r= imployments by the nexte post ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.170

for I thinke it wil@ @be tuesday or wedensday before I set out .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.171

I thanke you for putting of me in minde of the rouller & diall for the
garden , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.172

for I feare I showld have forgotten it . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.173

Thay Dye apace heer . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,67.174

The fine Ladye Bartlett lyes dangerousely sicke of the spotted fever ,
some <P_68> say the plauge . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.175

God Blesse vs all KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.176

and send vs a happye meetting , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.177

farewell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.178

Thy True loving husband for ever Tho: Knyvett .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.179

I have alsoe sent 3 ounces of twist KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.180

but I fear it is not so good as I would it wear .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.181

It was the best I could finde . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.182

{COM:june-july_1625}

{COM:address}

To his true loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Ashwell Thorpe give these .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.185

Leave this at Windham in Norf. KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.186

<heading:edcomment:16>

My deere sweet harte , I thanke the for thy kinde letter .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.188

I hope I shall not write above another letter before I be with the .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.189

I was in good hope we showld have made an end ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.190

but my vnckle doe make such vnreasonable demaunds as I , for my parte ,
will never yeeild vnto . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.191

All my councell is verye confident that my Lo: will never order so much
against me as I would have been content to , for quiet , to have yeelded
him , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.192

but nowe I have retained all my councell KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.193

& have disbursed all the monye I shall {GLOSS:owe} before the heeringe ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.194

therfore will stand to an order ; KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.195

<paren> god send vs good luck <$$paren> . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.196

Sweet mother , I am nowe in a course of Phisicke for a day or 2 ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.197

for I have been somewhat ill , since my comeing vp , of my olde greefe ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.198

but I hope to be very well after a vomitt . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.199

I can@ @not write so@ @much as I would to thee ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.200

for I am even to take some Phisicke . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.201

The Lord of heaven bless vs all KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.202

& putt an end to all my troubles . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.203

So in hast commendinge my everlasting true affection to thee , I rest
Thy true loving husband for ever Tho: Knyvett .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.204

{COM:1625-1626}

{COM:address}

To his most assuered loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Ashwell Thorpe give
these . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.207

Leaue this {COM:preceding_word_"this"_emended} at Windham .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.208

Norf. KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.209

<heading:edcomment:17>

My deer Hart , I am infinitly sorye to heer that you have
{COM:preceding_word_"have"_emended} been so ill of y=r= olde trouble .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.211

I praye god blesse thee & that thou art with , & send thee a perfect & a
safe delivery . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.212

Concerninge my newe honor so vnlookt_for put vpon me , I praye lett it
not trouble you that I am come of it with more honor then that would
have Added to me . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.213

Towe maine reasons I was forst to vrge , the one concerninge my selfe &
the other touching you . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,68.214

<P_69>

For my selfe I vrgde my owne title to a greater honor , which none
coulde denye but that it was so trulye my righte as I may attaine it
when I will , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.216

and have sett it on foote . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.217

For you , you must have lost of that place that nowe you have , by the
verditt of the Heraulds . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.218

And for me to be at the charge of 5 or 600 to no purpose , I sawe no
great reason ; KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.219

but these reasons did so prevaile with my Lord of Arundell as , I thanke
him , he excusde me with a great deale of love & grace .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.220

I have a crowe to pluck with S=r= Tho: Hollande whoe knewe of this
busines before Christmas & would never tell me of it ;
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.221

but , I praye , saye nothing of that till I come downe .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.222

My Lo: of Arundell hath done me a great deale of Honor in this busines
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.223

& hath promised to further any thinge that I shall have occasion to vse
him in the best he can . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.224

Since thay have putt me into an humor of honor , I will have my right
before I have done , which is in a good forwardnes ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.225

but keep this to y=r= selfe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.226

Nowe sweet Harte , concerninge my Lawe busines . It was heard this day
, KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.227

and I thanke god hath gone as well of my side as I could exspect ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.228

for my vnckle hath absolutely lost his parte at Lambeth ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.229

and I am freed from the covenant , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.230

and his Anuitye & the Arrearages are referd to Arbitrators on both sides
to sett downe what he shall have , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.231

for my Lo: Keeper would not order any thinge touching that .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.232

We shall make a full end with_in this 3 or 4 dayes
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.233

& then I make hast home . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.234

Judde hath done my vnckle very good servis , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.235

for he hath lost him above 200 =l= . which he might have had a yeer
agoe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.236

I was much behoulding to Seri=t= Richardson KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.237

for he was the onely man that spake to any purpose in my cause .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.238

My vnckle & his wife weare both in court very handsome , in_so_much that
when my Lo: Keeper & the court heard that thay sued in forma pauperis
thay all laught , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.239

but thay cride like chilldren , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.240

& when thay sawe that would not worke , thay badde the divell take vs
all . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.241

Judde is like to paye 40@ @=l= costs . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.242

So this is the end of an vnlukye & expensive sute .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.243

I pray God keep me out of the like . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.244

Heer is like to be no doings at the coronation or very little .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.245

Many are disapointed of ther expectation , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.246

for the King will make verye feawe or no Knights Bachellers .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.247

I am not the onely man that hath refusde to be bathed ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.248

for ther are above 20 more besids my selfe , & as manye that have sought
it but can@ @not be Addmitted . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.249

I am affeard you will see some of our contrimen come downe as thay went
vp . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.250

The Kinge can@ @not induer to heer of the makeing of a Baronett
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.251

& thay say he will not allowe the title to discend to posterity of them
which are made alredye . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.252

Newes heer is none , but that the Queen refuses to be crowned vnless she
may be crowned after the French Fashion with her preests .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,69.253

Howe it will be agreed on is <P_70> not yett knowne .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.254

I can write no more for want of time , wherfore praying our good god to
Bless vs all And our honest Actions & indeavors , I rest Thy true &
Faithfull loving Husband Tho: Knyvett , no Kt .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.255

I praye excuse my not wrighting to my mother at this time ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.256

for busines calls me away , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.257

but tell her and my sister that the ser=t= and his sonne are indevoring
to give them the best satisfaction thay can devise ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.258

& then if shee will goe on , she may . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.259

Remember my humble dutye to her . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.260

I have had no time to doe any thinge but tend my busines since I came .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.261

I was never so toyld in a weeke in my life . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.262

I was thrise at court in my cloth sute as confidently as if I had been a
Lord . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.263

Farewell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.264

You shall have more the next week . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.265

Commend my Beautye to my sister & the Virgins & my delicate brother .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.266

{COM:30_Jan_1626_N.S.}

<heading:edcomment:18>

Sweet Harte , it ioyes my harte to heere thou and thy companye are well
. KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.269

I am infinitly greevd to heer of S=r= Tho. Hollands death ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.270

for this verye instant I heard he is dead , which much distracted me .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.271

We have lost the truest freinde in the worlde ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.272

& the country hath lost a great losse . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.273

God give vs patience to take these crosses patiently ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.274

for I valew the losse of a freind aboue all fortune in the worlde ,
esspetiallye such a freind as his like is not to be founde .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.275

I never looke to have such another . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.276

He is a happye man . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.277

Suer god hath some greate miserye to bring vpon this land , in takeing
awaye the good men from the vengeance to come .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.278

I am not able to wright what I woulde , my hart is so full .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.279

My busines is to be dispatcht this day , which if it be , I come home
presently . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.280

God Bllesse {COM:sic} vs all , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.281

and send vs a Joyefull & a happye meeting . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.282

Farewell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.283

Thy fayethfull loving Husband till death , Tho: Knyvett .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.284

From my lodgeing KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.285

Febr ; 7 . 1625 . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.286

Commend my servis to my Aunte Bell KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.287

& tell her I will doe her commands . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.288

{COM:address}

To his most assuered loving wife m=is= Knyvett at Ashwell Thorpe give
these . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.290

Norf: KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.291

<heading:edcomment:19>

My deer Harte , I can@ @not yet gett a release out of this vngodlye
towne , where a man hath scarce leysure to say his prayers .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.293

I desier thee to have patience because I am in a faier way to make an
end of all my busines . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,70.294

<P_71>

The monye that Jones owes me I shall nowe gett in , thoughe with some
lose , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.296

for m=r= Bancroft hath vndertaken the payement of 500@ @=l= , which wil@
@be suer monye . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.297

Seriant Richardson doe paulter extremlye in our bargaine for Starborugh
. KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.298

I can@ @not yet gett him to conclude KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.299

but he would goe from his bargaine made at Nor:
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.300

A man may have as good & as Just dealing from the Divell himselfe as
from him . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.301

God send me quitt of him , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.302

I will never have to doe with him againe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.303

My vnckle I thinke be madde , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.304

for Notwithstandinge the busines went against him , yett will he not
release his copiehould vnless that my cosin Abrall & I will pay his
debts which comes to almost 400@ @=l= . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.305

My cosin Abrall offers to give him 100 , which is more then he needs to
doe , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.306

& I wil@ @be content to pay the arrearages , all which he refuses .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.307

I am nowe going to my Lo: Keeper about it to petitione him to make an
absolute end that we may have no more trouble about it , which I would
faine dispatch before I come downe . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.308

I would be very gladd to eate a henn with the this Shrovetide ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.309

but if it shall fall out that I can@ @not come , it is not my faulte ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.310

for my hart is with thee . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.311

God of his mercye put an end to All my Troubles ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.312

and send vs a happye meeting . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.313

Farewell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.314

Commend my servis to my Aunt Bell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.315

Thy faithfull loving husband Tho: Knyvett . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.316

{COM:feb_1626} {COM:address} To his most assuered loving wife m=is=
Knyvett at Ashwell Thorpe give these . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.317

<heading:edcomment:20>

My Deere sweet hart , the neewes of thy misfortune hath almost
distracted me , together with other base miscarriages of busines heer by
the Lo: Keeper , who hath made an end of it at Last , such an one as it
is . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.319

My only happines is that I shall nowe be out of Lawe , & ridde from the
mouthes of clamorus people . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.320

Pardon me sweet hart KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.321

& thinke it not any want of Love that I come not downe vpon this newes
so soone as I would . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.322

Thy wellfare <paren> which I hear is in a good forwardnes againe
<$$paren> is the only happines I vallewe in this world , which I trust
God will , amongst all our crosses , suffer me to injoye .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.323

I writt not the Last weeke because I intended to have been at home as@
@soone as my Letter , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.324

but nowe I must staye a day or towe to se this busines quite dispacht .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.325

I have sent you some terra Lemnia , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,71.326

& , because I knowe not howe y=r= stocke of monye houlds out , I have
<P_72> sent by this bearer 30@ @=l= . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.327

You shall not neede to write any more KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.328

for I wil@ @be at home before yo=r= Letter shall come to me .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.329

So , prayinge god to Blesse vs & put an end to All our crosses & give vs
vpright harts to serve him , I rest Thy most faithfull & truly loving
husband till death Tho: Knyvett . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.330

I have almost put a period to all my busines of trouble .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.331

Some goes well & some indifferent . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.332

You shall knowe the particulars when I come . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.333

My servis & true love to my Aunte Bell who I knowe hath been a great
comfort to you in this extremitye . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.334

I pray god we may ever be able to requite her love .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.335

{COM:circ._20_feb_1626} {COM:address} To his most assuered truly Loving
wife m=is= Knyvett at Ashwell Thorpe give these .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.336

<heading:edcomment:21>

My deer sweet harte , I long to heare of thy health & all our companye .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.338

My selfe <paren> god be praysed <$$paren> am very well
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.339

& <paren> god willing <$$paren> wil@ @be with thee the next weeke .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.340

My busines wil@ @be well past be saturdaye . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.341

I have been with yo=r= sisters KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.342

but could not see y=r= mother by reason she was not vp ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.343

therfore I have not yet delivered y=r= token , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.344

but I will see her againe , if I can , before I come downe .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.345

Your sisters & I weare very merrye after the first parlye .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.346

I have benne with s=r=. Roger Townsend , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.347

but have not yet seen his Ladye KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.348

for she is yet at her mothers . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.349

I hope to come down with them , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.350

for he bringes her downe the next weeke . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.351

I praye send me worde concerninge y=r= gowne .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.352

I can assuer thee , heer is not one coullerd gowne of 40 worne , but all
Blacke with coullerd forebodyes & kirtle . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.353

Therfore write thy minde , that I may take order for it .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.354

I have bespoken thee a delicate hatt & white fether
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.355

for so it must be , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.356

only it shall have a little tippe of y=r= captaines coullers .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.357

I have sent downe the best orringes & Lemons & 2 pound of Dates for you
& one for my Aunte Bell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.358

If you lacke anythinge send me worde by this next post or not at all .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.359

I pray lett my Aunt Bell knowe that , according to her command , I
inquiered for my cosin Mun as@ @soone as I came to towne ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.360

but he was gonne to Portsmouth 3 dayes before I came , which I am very
gladd of , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.361

for I heer odde Jiggs of him heer in towne . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.362

I desier her to send me word whether she will have a silver or a gould
band to my cosin Robin@ @s hatt . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,72.363

I dinde with m=is= Hambden on sunday & Jacke Holland with me wher <P_73>
we wear full merrye . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.364

She is mighty pleasant . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.365

Her daughter & little granchilde is with her , who , for thy comforte ,
though it be a prettye girle , yet she must come shorte of her
goddaughter . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.366

Newes is so vncertaine as I knowe not what to write ,
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.367

only for certaine the Kinge & Duke goes to Portsmouth to_morrowe .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.368

I had strangers at my chamber even nowe , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.369

for my Aunte at the tower & her sister wear heer as brave as the sunne .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.370

I could not chose but give them the complement of the towne , which was
in white wine & limon , which went as merryely downe as they that dranke
it vse to goe vp . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.371

I am going abroad , KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.372

therfore I can@ @not remember to write all that I would , wherfore
praying to god to Bless thee & all ours , in hast I rest , commending my
vnfained love to my good Aunt Bell , Thy true loving husband till death
Tho: Knyvett . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.373

{COM:may-june_1627}

M=r= Gallyerd of necessity must come vp instantly
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.375

for I feare ther is some knavery workeing against him .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.376

He must be heer by --nday night if it be possible .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.377

Farewell . KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.378

Hullins hath writt him word howe the busines stands .
KNYVETT-1624-E2-P1,73.379

