<BEGIN_kpaston-1625-e2-p1>

<P_70>

<heading:edcomment:39_LADY_KATHERINE_PASTON_TO_WILLIAM_PASTON_APRIL_1624?>

My good will : Christ Iesus blese the ever : KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.4

I did take thy wrightinge to me in very kinde parte , seinge that at
that time thow mightest haue pretended wearines withe travill yett
woldest not make that any lett to hinder me of thy most louinge and
respectiue lines , the which wear and ever shall be most well_com to me
, KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.5

I was glad to heer of your prosperous Iorny , and of the kind wellcom
which you fownd from that worthy master . <slash> whom , I wold by any
means thou sholdest haue a very reverend respect ofe : <slash>
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.6

and beware good child that thou be not too talketiue befor him , but
only to learne what is fittinge behauiour for you to use before him
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.7

and that observe and doe : KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.8

be louinge to thy tutor honest mr Roberts KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.9

and be ruled by his aduis in all things KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.10

for I repos a spetiall trust in him for thy good : <slash>
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.11

be Carfull in your recreations for over_heatinge your blude .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.12

and if at any time you sweat or be too hote , doe not drinke till you
haue made watter , KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.13

for so you know you wear wont to doe at hom : <slash>
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.14

and now you must haue a mighty care of your self
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.15

ore ells it will be as much as my {COM:preceding_word_"my"_emended} life
is worthe too . <slash> KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.16

medell not good child {COM:preceding_word_"child"_emended} withe any of
the towns_men ther . KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.17

in earnest or Ieast . provke {CODE:sic} non to anger
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.18

Conduct {COM:preceding_word_"Conduct"_emended} your
{COM:preceding_word_"your"_emended} self well and louingly to all sorts
: KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.19

And {COM:preceding_word_"And"_emended} now
{COM:preceding_word_"now"_emended} the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} blesinge of god all_mighty the father
his {COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended} blesed spirite be euer more upon
thy {COM:preceding_word_"thy"_emended} body
{COM:preceding_word_"body"_emended} and sowll KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.20

amen KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.21

farewell good Will {COM:preceding_word_"Will"_emended} :
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.22

in hast written by thy louing {COM:preceding_word_"louing"_emended}
mother {COM:preceding_word_"mother"_emended} Katherine
{COM:preceding_word_"Katherine"_emended} Paston
{COM:preceding_word_"Paston"_emended}

I thanke the good will for thy kinde token . KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.24

I will@ @be in thy dept for it and paye my dept by the next saff
mesinger KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,70.25

<P_71>

<heading:edcomment:41_LADY_KATHERINE_PASTON_TO_WILLIAM_PASTON_11_JUNE_1624>

To my very wellbeloued sonne william Paston these I pray at his lodginge
in Corpus Christy Colledge Cambridge KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.28

My good will : I doe much desire to heer how you doe ,
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.29

I hope you haue receiued my late letters written to mr Roberts and you :
<slash> KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.30

take heed to your selfe good child , that I may here a good report of
your Ciuill and kinde behaiour . towards all .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.31

but cheeffly haue an espetiall care to fear and serue god :
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.32

lett it be the first and last thinge you thinke of .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.33

and then be sure the blesinge of the allmighty will preserue you in all
your ways . KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.34

for he never fayled those who trusted in him and duely served him :
<slash> KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.35

and next beware of violent tennisinge or leapinge or any other thinge
which shall hinder your healthe : KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.36

take heed of frute of all sorts if you eate any .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.37

eate very moderately KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.38

for to much ocation ofte times much sikenes : KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.39

I sent in my last letter , that mr Roberts wold doe so much as by you a
tamill gowne to wear this summer KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.40

I hope it is done : <slash> KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.41

I doe much longe to heer of you KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.42

and god grant I may heer comfortable news : <slash>
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.43

your kinde ante Bell remembers her loue to you KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.44

and send you a boxe of Iuse of likorous . KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.45

it will stay the ruhum . when tobaka will not : <slash>
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.46

I hop to heer you still hate the very smell of tobaca :
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.47

I send you a pece of gowld for a token . KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,71.48

and if thow doest well and be ruled by thy tutore in all things , for
thy good : then thow shalt be <P_72> sur to want nothinge that I can doe
for the : KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.49

and so the Lords blesinge be for euer more upon thy sowle and body
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.50

farwell good will KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.51

thy most Louinge Mother Katherine Paston KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.52

Comend me very kindly to the master and to good mr Roberts .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.53

wright to me as oft as thow canst KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.54

and so agayne farwell : KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.55

friday the 11=th= of Iune 1624 : <slash> KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.56

<heading:edcomment:42_LADY_KATHERINE_PASTON_TO_WILLIAM_PASTON_25_JUNE_1624>

My good will : the mercyfull {COM:preceding_word_"mercyfull"_emended}
blesinge of our heavenly god be euer more upon the ,
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.58

I am not a littell glad , and comforted with thy most louinge linnes ,
by which I see that thow hast a desire to heer often frome me ,
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.59

and thy offten wrightinge to me makes me see , that thow hast a good
minde to speake offten withe me , KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.60

and thy good desire to see me onc a day : eune all these things
springinge from thy dutyfull loue to me : shall make me bethinke me
still , which way I may doe thee most good . yea . and all the good I
cane : KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.61

goe on my good chilld in thy well_doings , KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.62

and allways remember , it is a greater prayse to keep prayse ; then to
gett prayse : <slash> KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.63

Continew thy great respect to that most worthy Master who I heer is so
exedinge louinge and kinde to the , for the which I will not be
vngratefull to him : KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.64

And likewis it dothe mee good to heer that thow doest bothe Carfully
obserue and louingly respecte thy good tutor honest mr Roberts : who I
know will be as glad of thy well_doinge as any frinde can bee : <slash>
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.65

I confes I coolde haue bine content , and I shold haue pleased my self
for the present much better , to haue kepte the allwas at hom with me :
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.66

but how coold that haue bine for thy good in time to come <slash> :
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.67

no , I beleue veryly it might haue bine to bothe our disparagments :
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.68

but now I hope to receue the to me furnished with grassces , as a bee
coms loden to her hiue : even with the best abroad : <slash>
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.69

I hope before this you haue receiued my letter by Iohnsons the Cambridge
Carrier with 5 li 10 s . sent to good mr Roberts for a supply till I
send more to the comencment . KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.70

good child lett not a poor hungery siser want a reward from the .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.71

but lett the poorest and least be_frinded , reape a kindness from the .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.72

lett such not want bread or beer , in a moderat maner .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.73

but be a healp to the healples in ther most need , and the lord will
bless the if thow beest kinde to the poor and nedy ons : <slash>
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.74

remember me very kindly to the worthy Master KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.75

and likewis commend me to good mr Roberts KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.76

I will wright to him the nexte weeke , KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.77

I pray the thanke him for his offten wrightinge .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.78

he can not wright too offt so longe as thow arte so good a boy and be so
well gouerned . KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.79

in my next letter . I will begine to inquier your cominge hom .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.80

but I and thow must leaue it to the Master his good pleasur what time he
shall thinke fitt : KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.81

but more of this heerafter : <slash> KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.82

thy father tooke thy wrightinge to him in good parte :
KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.83

and is very glad that thow arte a good chilld : KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.84

farwell my good child KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.85

and god for his mercy sake send the his grass with a longe healthy and
hapy life KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.86

and so farwell : agayne and agayn KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.87

thy most louinge Mother euer Katherine Paston KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.88

friday : 25. of Iune 1624 <slash> KPASTON-1625-E2-P1,72.89

