<BEGIN_langf-1696-e3-p1>

<P_1>

<heading>

THE INTRODUCTION LANGF-1696-E3-P1,1.4

<$$heading>

Having undertaken in this <font> Book <$$font> to publish all necessary
Directions concerning <font> Planting <$$font> , the first step I am to
take , <paren> to proceed in due <font> order <$$font> <$$paren> is to
give instructions about <font> Seminaries <$$font> , and <font>
Nurseries <$$font> , wherein young <font> Plants <$$font> are to be
raised and cherished in their Infancy . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,1.6

And because men are generally <paren> through ignorance <$$paren> so
indifferent whether they have these of their own or no ; because for a
little Money they can have <font> Plants <$$font> from others ready
brought up to their hands ; therefore I shall here in the first place
present such with reasons , that I suppose can@ @not but make them of
the same mind , that I am my self , That it@ @'s far better to have them
of their own bringing up , and to have <font> Seminaries <$$font> and
<font> Nurseries <$$font> of their own for this purpose .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,1.7

1 . Because this way a Man shall be sure to meet with no failure ,
either in the kind or goodness of his <font> Trees <$$font> , and <font>
Fruit <$$font> ; in both which he shall be often <P_2> disappointed , if
he have his <font> Trees <$$font> upon <font> trust <$$font> from others
, who make a <font> Trade <$$font> of selling them , and are therefore
many times incurious in <font> raising <$$font> them , and instead of
the <font> right <$$font> kind <paren> if they can get any thing by it
<$$paren> will not stick to put him off with another .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,2.8

2 . The <font> trouble <$$font> and <font> expence <$$font> of buying
young Plants , and getting them home , <paren> many times from places
very <font> remote <$$font> <$$paren> and the <font> prejudice <$$font>
they often receive in the <font> carriage <$$font> , will be wholly
prevented . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,2.9

3 . This way a Man shall with almost the same labour and charge , both
furnish himself sufficiently , and have so many more as to defray the
charge he may be at about it , if he will sell them , or to gratify his
Friends if he had rather bestow them . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,2.10

4 . He will this way be provided with <font> Stocks <$$font> for <font>
Apples <$$font> , <font> Pears , <$$font> , <font> Plums <$$font> ,
<font> Cherries <$$font> , and all choice <font> Wall-fruit <$$font>
raised from <font> Kernels <$$font> and <font> Stones <$$font> of <font>
Fruit <$$font> : which are incomparably better than Stocks procured any
other way . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,2.11

The means some use to furnish themselves with <font> Stocks <$$font> for
<font> Apple-trees <$$font> is , by getting young <font> Crab-trees
<$$font> out of <font> Hedges <$$font> , <font> rough Grounds <$$font>
and <font> Woods <$$font> ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,2.12

and with <font> Stocks <$$font> for <font> Pears <$$font> , and <font>
Cherries <$$font> by <P_3> <font> Suckers <$$font> springing from the
Roots of old <font> Trees <$$font> of those kinds ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,3.13

but there is much to be said against both courses .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,3.14

Against using those <font> Crab-trees <$$font> got out of <font> Woods
<$$font> , <font> &c. <$$font> there lie these Objections .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,3.15

1 . The workmen in getting them break some , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,3.16

and hurt others of the principal Roots ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,3.17

and it sometimes falls out that they have been cut down , and sprung up
again out of the remaining stump , or otherwise hurt , which though not
easily discerned because skinned over , yet will be a prejudice to them
for ever . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,3.18

2 . Many of the <font> Stocks <$$font> so got out of <font> Woods
<$$font> , and <font> Hedges <$$font> , have for want of room , and by
reason of shades , and the droping of other trees about them , been
check't and baffled in their growth , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,3.19

and so become crooked , scabby , ill_grown , rough , and unkindly , and
never like to make good Trees . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,3.20

3 . Some that furnish themselves this way with Stocks , chooose such as
are largest , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,3.21

and those having for the most part thick and hard <font> bark <$$font> ,
and old <font> roots <$$font> , come on but slowly when they are removed
to make <font> Apple-trees <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,3.22

4 . If these <font> Stocks <$$font> be not <font> graffed <$$font> very
low <paren> and if they are , a years growth or <P_4> two will be lost
<$$paren> they will put forth branches of their own every year in such
abundance , that without constant pruning of them off , the <font>
graffs <$$font> will be in danger of being starved .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,4.23

5 . A better advantage may be made of <font> Crab-trees <$$font> in
Hedge-rows and rough grounds , by graffing them where they are , <paren>
as you shall be hereafter directed <$$paren> where they will thrive
better . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,4.24

There is but one scruple <paren> that I can foresee <$$paren> that can
here be started ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,4.25

and that is , that a man can@ @not be furnished with <font> Trees
<$$font> of a good largeness to bear so soon by <font> stocks <$$font>
raised by <font> Kernels <$$font> and <font> Stones <$$font> , as by
either those gotten out of Woods , <font> &c. <$$font> or those raised
by <font> Suckers <$$font> , that may be of several years growth before
they are made use of . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,4.26

To this I answer , That if at the same time that you get <font>
Crab-tree-stocks <$$font> , <paren> of six or seven years growth
<$$paren> out of the <font> Wood <$$font> , or <font> Suckers <$$font> ,
and set them in order to be <font> graffed <$$font> , you sow <font>
Kernels <$$font> and <font> Stones <$$font> , the Stocks and Suckers you
so graff , for six or eight years may continue larger and bigger than
the <font> Trees <$$font> that come of <font> Kernels <$$font> and
<font> Stones <$$font> ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,4.27

but yet these lesser <font> Trees <$$font> shall so get ground of the
other , that by the <font> tenth <$$font> or <font> twelfth <$$font>
<P_5> year the <font> Apple-trees <$$font> and <font> Pear-trees
<$$font> , and much sooner <font> Stone-fruit-trees <$$font> shall have
overtaken them . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,5.28

And as to the way of raising <font> Stocks <$$font> for <font> Pears
<$$font> , <font> Plums <$$font> , and <font> Cherries <$$font> by
<font> Suckers <$$font> , it is to be noted , that Trees so raised will
be ever apt to cast up <font> Suckers <$$font> themselves ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,5.29

and such as do , are seldom found to be good bearing <font> Trees
<$$font> , by reason they expend their <font> Sap <$$font> so much that
way . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,5.30

Nevertheless they may be useful for <font> Wall-fruit <$$font> and
<font> Dwarf-trees <$$font> , as you will see hereafter in a peculiar
Chapter . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,5.31

And lastly against both these ways of furnishing a mans self with the
aforemention'd <font> Stocks <$$font> there is this to be said , That a
man shall not without great charge and difficulty store himself with as
many as he may desire , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,5.32

and many of them will prove bad and miscarry , whereas from <font>
Kernels <$$font> the charge is inconsiderable , and plenty may be had ,
that will almost all be fit for use . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,5.33

Yet this I ought to say in favour of buying out of <font> Nurseries
<$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,5.34

1 . Thereby a great deal of <font> time <$$font> is gain'd by the
Planter <paren> <font> viz. <$$font> seven or eight years in <font>
Standard-@ @trees <$$font> , and four or five in <font> Wall <$$font>
and <font> Dwarf-trees <$$font> ; which is very considerable .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,5.35

<P_6>

2 . It will be very difficult for a Planter to be furnisht with many
good sorts of <font> Fruit <$$font> , and of what kind he may desire any
where else , so easie and fully as there . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,6.37

And I think no one can be better furnish'd than they may by their
Majesties Gard'ner and Mr. <font> Wise <$$font> , who have a Nursery at
<font> Brampton Park <$$font> near <font> Kensington <$$font> , the Soil
whereof is not <font> over_enricht
{COM:font_change_only_around_"enricht"} <$$font> with the Fat of <font>
London <$$font> , situate in a <font> Sharp Air <$$font> ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,6.38

they are careful in furnishing the Buyers with <font> true Kinds
<$$font> ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,6.39

and I verily believe have already the best <font> collection <$$font> in
<font> England <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,6.40

and it will still be improv'd by new and <font> unknown Plants <$$font>
, &c. as to us , from that famous <font> Garden <$$font> <paren> for
variety of <font> Kinds <$$font> in the known World <$$paren> at the
<font> Cape of Good hope <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,6.41

<P_7>

<heading>

CHAP. I . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.44

<font> OF THE SEMINARY . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.45

<$$heading>

Sect. <$$font> 1 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.47

Against the beginning of <font> October <$$font> prepare Ground by
digging and cleansing it from <font> weeds <$$font> and <font> roots
<$$font> , making the <font> mold <$$font> very fine ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.48

choose not a <font> wet <$$font> or very <font> stiff Clay-land <$$font>
, nor <font> over_rich {COM:font_change_only_around_"rich"} <$$font>
with <font> Dung <$$font> , but such as being of it self good , you may
make better only with a little mixture of very <font> rotten dung
<$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.49

let it be fenced from the cold , as well as you can , so that it be free
from shade , and dropings of Trees . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.50

<font> Sect. <$$font> 2 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.51

When you set <font> Stones <$$font> , <paren> which if they be <font>
Stones <$$font> of Fruit soon ripe , you must keep in sand till <font>
October <$$font> do it by a Line , pricking holes about a hands breadth
distance one from another , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.52

and then put in the <font> Stones <$$font> , about three inches deep
with the sharp end uppermost ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.53

when one <font> row <$$font> is finished remove your Line a <font> foot
<$$font> further , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.54

and set another <font> row <$$font> in the same manner ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.55

but let your third <font> row <$$font> be about <font> two foot <$$font>
distant from the <font> second <$$font> , that you may have liberty to
go betwixt every <font> two rows <$$font> to weed , <font> &c. <$$font>
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,7.56

and <P_8> so proceed to set as many as you have a mind ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,8.57

possibly some of these Stones may not come up till the second spring
after they are set , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,8.58

and may not deceive you if you then expect them . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,8.59

<font> Sect. <$$font> 3 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,8.60

After the same manner you are to set all kind of <font> Nuts <$$font> :
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,8.61

but because it@ @'s necessary that your young <font> Walnut-trees
<$$font> and <font> Chesnut-trees <$$font> should grow longer in your
Seed-plot than <font> Stone-fruit <$$font> , before they will be fit to
be removed to the place they are to spend their lives in , you must set
them at much further distance , that they may have more room to grow big
without hurting one another . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,8.62

<font> Sect. <$$font> 4 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,8.63

To raise <font> Stocks <$$font> from <font> Seeds <$$font> or <font>
kernels <$$font> of <font> Apples <$$font> , <font> Crabs <$$font> , or
<font> Pears <$$font> <paren> each of which sorts are to be sowed by
themselves <$$paren> you must thus go to work . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,8.64

When either you , or any Neighbour hath made <font> Syder <$$font> ,
<font> Verjuice <$$font> , or <font> Perry <$$font> , take the <font>
Must <$$font> <paren> or as some call it the <font> Pouz <$$font>
<$$paren> which is the substance of the <font> Fruit <$$font> after the
juice is pressed out , the same day or the next day after , before it
heats , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,8.65

and with a <font> riddle <$$font> sift out the Seeds on a clean floor or
cloth , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,8.66

and these you must sow <paren> as soon as you can conveniently <$$paren>
upon beds of very fine Earth , very thick , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,8.67

for <P_9> some being bruised in the grinding , or pounding the <font>
Fruit <$$font> ; and others , not being ripe , many never come up ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,9.68

then sift <font> mold <$$font> upon them about <font> two <$$font>
fingers breadth in thickness : LANGF-1696-E3-P1,9.69

this way is much better than to sow the seeds with the <font> Must
<$$font> or <font> Pouz <$$font> together , <paren> as some do <$$paren>
because the <font> Must <$$font> will heat them , and many of the Seeds
will <font> putrefie <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,9.70

and others will not be able to <font> root <$$font> , or <font> shoot up
<$$font> , because they are so imprisoned in that dry and tough stuff
clinging about them . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,9.71

The <font> Beds <$$font> of Earth you sow them on may be made about
<font> two foot <$$font> in breadth , with a good distance between the
beds that you may the better come at them
{COM:preceding_word_"them"_emended} to <font> weed <$$font> them , and
draw them up as you have occasion . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,9.72

<font> Sect. <$$font> 5 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,9.73

To keep <font> Fowls <$$font> or <font> Birds <$$font> from scraping
them up , lay some <font> white-thorn <$$font> on the beds till the
Ground be well setled . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,9.74

Some cover the beds with <font> Fern <$$font> or <font> Straw <$$font>
to keep them warm in the winter , which may not do amiss ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,9.75

but then it ought to be take {COM:sic} off when the Spring approacheth .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,9.76

If <font> Moles <$$font> or <font> Mice <$$font> get in , <paren> which
you will discover easily , <paren> the Mice leaving shells of the Seeds
on the top of the <P_10> beds <$$paren> they must be destroyed .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.77

For <font> Mice <$$font> therefore lay Poyson , or Oatmeal mixt with
pounded Glass , and Butter , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.78

and cast bits of it upon the beds : LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.79

or set traps for the <font> Mice <$$font> and <font> Moles <$$font> ,
better known than described . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.80

<font> Sect. <$$font> 6 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.81

The next spring you will see these Stones and Seeds come up plentifully
; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.82

first the dissimilar leaves , almost of the shape of the Kernel split in
two , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.83

and from betwixt them will the stem put forth ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.84

keep them clean from weeds all the year , which must be plucked up while
they are young , lest if they get root , in drawing them up you root up
the seedlings with them . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.85

These weeds and such as are pluckt up any where else , thrown up into a
heap will rot , and become very good Manure , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.86

but this should be before they are seeded , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.87

for then the Manure made of them will be apt to make the ground it is
cast upon more subject to weeds . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.88

If a <font> dry time <$$font> happen , you may sometimes in the summer
water the beds . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.89

<font> Sect. <$$font> 7 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,10.90

To furnish your self with a competent variety of Stocks for the several
sorts of Fruit-trees , your <font> Seminary <$$font> is to be stored
with these following ; such as come of <font> Peach-stones <$$font> ,
<font> Plum-stones <$$font> , <P_11> <font> Cherry-stones <$$font> ,
<font> Apple-kernels <$$font> , <font> Crab-kernels <$$font> , and
<font> Pear-kernels <$$font> ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,11.91

and from <font> Nuts <$$font> you raise your <font> Nut-trees <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,11.92

<font> Peach-stones <$$font> are to yield you Stocks for <font> Peaches
<$$font> and <font> Nectarines <$$font> ; <font> Plum-stones <$$font> ,
<font> Stocks <$$font> for <font> Peaches Nectarines <$$font> , <font>
Apricocks <$$font> , and <font> Plums <$$font> ; <font> Cherry-stones
<$$font> , <font> Stocks <$$font> for <font> Cherries <$$font> ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,11.93

<font> Seeds <$$font> of <font> Apples <$$font> and <font> Crabs
<$$font> produce <font> Stocks <$$font> for <font> Apple-trees <$$font>
; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,11.94

and lastly the <font> Seeds <$$font> of <font> Pears <$$font> yield
<font> Stocks <$$font> for <font> Pear-trees <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,11.95

<font> Sect. <$$font> 8 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,11.96

There are likewise some other ways to be furnished with Stocks , and
which you shall find hereafter are in some cases to be made use of ,
that is for <font> Pears <$$font> , <font> Plums <$$font> , and <font>
Cherries <$$font> by Suckers springing out of the roots of Trees of the
same kind , and for several sorts of Apples and Pears by Cuttings of
Apple-trees and Quince-treees : which I here intimate , because Stocks
thus raised are sometimes brought up in Nurseries ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,11.97

but the full directions about them are given in the Chapter of <font>
Dwarf-trees <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,11.98

Mr. <font> Evelyn <$$font> saith , the end of roots that are cut off
from young trees , taken up to be Trasplanted , and set in beds of good
Earth , will shoot forth tops , and become good <font> Stocks <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,11.99

Such may serve for Dwarf-trees , or for Walls . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,11.100

<P_12>

And I have heard an Ingenious person speak of <font> inoculating Buds
<$$font> on the small <font> roots <$$font> of great <font> trees
<$$font> that grow at farthest distance from the Bodies , and after a
years growth to cut off the <font> root <$$font> , about a foot in
length , with the new <font> shoot <$$font> growing upon it , and
transplant it ; because a Tree will be sooner raised thus than from a
<font> Seed <$$font> or <font> Stone <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,12.102

In case of an exigent for a <font> Stock <$$font> or two , this way may
be practised , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,12.103

but it would be found too troublesome for general use .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,12.104

<font> Sect. <$$font> 9 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,12.105

But if you desire to raise some <font> Wall-fruit-trees <$$font>
speedily , for furnishing some vacancies in the Wall , and would be so
sure of the kind of <font> Fruit <$$font> , that you will not trust to a
Nursery Mans selling , you may set some <font> Peach-stones <$$font> in
some old basket fill'd with Earth 4 or 5 in a basket ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,12.106

and where several come up <paren> when very young <$$paren> draw up all
but one that is likely to grow best : LANGF-1696-E3-P1,12.107

Some of these you may possibly <font> Inoculate <$$font> the same year ,
or at farthest the year after all of them : LANGF-1696-E3-P1,12.108

when you see the <font> bud <$$font> taken , in the winter following cut
off the head , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,12.109

and set the basket with the tree in it , in the vacant places , by
opening the ground and letting in the basket , and <P_13> setting in
Earth about it ; The basket will rot , and roots get through it , so
that it will be no hindrance to the <font> Tree <$$font> 's growth ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,13.110

and the chief advantage is that the <font> Tree <$$font> hath not the
lett and hindrance as others have by removing , never being taken out of
the Earth it was set in . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,13.111

Lest any casualty hit off the Bud in removing , or against the Wall ,
you may if you please not set the basket till the year after the <font>
Bud <$$font> that was <font> inoculated <$$font> is shot forth .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,13.112

Or to hasten the furnishing the Wall <paren> if you have none ready
grown in a Nursery nor are willing to buy , and that no impediment
hinder <$$paren> you may set <font> Stones <$$font> by the Wall side in
the Borders , and there inoculate them , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,13.113

and after let stand what you please , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,13.114

and remove the rest ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,13.115

In both those you will find directions of inoculating and more fully
ordering them in the 4th and fifth Chapters . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,13.116

<P_14>

<heading>

CHAP. II . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,14.119

<font> OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE RAISING OF STOCKS IN THE SEMINARY ,
OR ELSEWHERE . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,14.120

<$$heading>

Sect. <$$font> 1 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,14.122

<font> Seeds <$$font> or <font> Stones <$$font> of <font> Fruits
<$$font> gathered from <font> Trees <$$font> that have been <font>
graffed <$$font> or <font> inoculated <$$font> on <font> Stocks <$$font>
of different kinds from the Scions , produce of themselves , <paren> not
being <font> graffed <$$font> or <font> inoculated <$$font> <$$paren>
not the same <font> Fruit <$$font> as that was from when the <font> Seed
<$$font> or <font> Stone <$$font> came , but a different , and most
commonly a worse . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,14.123

The <font> Stones <$$font> of <font> Peaches <$$font> produce <font>
Trees <$$font> that will bear <font> Peaches <$$font> , sometimes better
than the Peaches out of which the Stones were taken , although those
Peaches grew upon a Tree that was <font> inoculated <$$font> on a <font>
Plum : <$$font> LANGF-1696-E3-P1,14.124

And there are some Gardiners by setting many Stones of the <font>
Nerington Peach <$$font> , have found some among the Trees come up from
them , to bear a <font> Fruit <$$font> rather improved than worse ; and
by giving it a new Name , and <font> inoculating <$$font> from it , have
made good gain of it . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,14.125

But this is not a practice for every private <P_15> person ; because
<font> Peach-trees <$$font> so raised , will be longer before they bear
fruit , than those which are <font> inoculated <$$font> ; and because he
must run the hazard of filling great part of his <font> wall <$$font>
with these <font> Peach-trees <$$font> thus raised from <font> Stones
<$$font> , and not one it may be in many prove any thing extraordinary ,
and the rest of no use unless for Stocks , after he hath waited several
years to see what Fruit they will bear . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,15.126

<font> Sect. <$$font> 2 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,15.127

It is controverted amongst men of this <font> Profession <$$font> ,
whether <font> Stocks <$$font> from <font> Peach-stones <$$font> are
best to <font> inoculate Peaches <$$font> upon <font> : <$$font>
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,15.128

both sides have their peculiar advantages , which I shall here set down
, and leave every man to his choice . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,15.129

<font> Stocks <$$font> from <font> Peach-stones <$$font> will be sooner
ready to <font> inoculate <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,15.130

and the buds will take very sure , that are <font> inoculated <$$font>
into them ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,15.131

but they must be carefully and tenderly used in the removal ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,15.132

and must not be expected to make long_lasting Trees .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,15.133

<font> Stocks <$$font> from <font> Plum-stones <$$font> and <font>
budded <$$font> with a <font> Peach <$$font> will make a more firm and
lasting <font> Peach-tree <$$font> ; and such as will bear Fruit well .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,15.134

<P_16>

Therefore rather raise <font> Stocks <$$font> for <font> Peaches
<$$font> , <font> Nectarines <$$font> , <font> Apricocks <$$font> , and
<font> Plums <$$font> from <font> Stones <$$font> of the <font> Wheat
plum <$$font> , which is a <font> White-plum <$$font> ripe in <font>
August <$$font> <paren> if you can have them , <$$paren> or in want of
them from the <font> Stones <$$font> of the <font> White-pear-plum
<$$font> , which is generally commended and used , or of other good
<font> White-plum <$$font> , whose Tree puts forth large <font> shoots
<$$font> , or <font> branches <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,16.136

If you are not sufficiently furnished with <font> Stones <$$font> of
these <font> White-plums <$$font> , you may for <font> Apricocks
<$$font> and <font> Plums <$$font> raise <font> Stocks <$$font> from the
<font> Stones <$$font> of the <font> Muscle-plum <$$font> , the <font>
Black-pear-plum <$$font> , <font> Primordian <$$font> , or any other
<font> Black <$$font> or <font> Red-plum <$$font> of free growth .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,16.137

And it@ @'s a way much commended , first to <font> inoculate <$$font> an
<font> Apricock <$$font> very low on such <font> Plum stocks <$$font> ,
and then after a years growth , <font> inoculate <$$font> a <font> Peach
<$$font> or a <font> Nectarine <$$font> on it ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,16.138

only this way there will be two years loss of time ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,16.139

and take notice that the <font> Red-Roman Nectarine <$$font> will hardly
take on a <font> Plum-stock <$$font> any other way .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,16.140

The Suckers likewise from the <font> roots <$$font> of the <font>
White-plum <$$font> before mentioned make <font> Stocks <$$font> for the
<font> Fruit <$$font> spoken of in this <font> Section <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,16.141

<font> Sect. <$$font> 3 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,16.142

Stocks for <font> Cherry-trees <$$font> are raised from <font>
Cherry-stones <$$font> , set or sowed , or young wild <font> Cherry
trees <$$font> got out of <P_17> <font> Woods <$$font> , <font> &c.
<$$font> or <font> Suckers <$$font> from the common harsh red <font>
Cherry <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.143

The wild <font> Stocks <$$font> make large handsome <font> Standard-@
@trees <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.144

but though <font> graffed <$$font> with a good kind , do not bear <font>
Fruit <$$font> so plentifully in many Countries , as the Suckers of the
<font> red <$$font> being <font> graffed <$$font> do , which last also
are fittest to <font> graff Cherries <$$font> on for <font> Wall
<$$font> or <font> Dwarf-trees <$$font> being of much smaller growth
than those of the wild kind are . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.145

<font> Sect. <$$font> 4 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.146

It@ @'s plain all Stocks and Scions <paren> that will prosper when they
are joyned together <$$paren> are <font> congenerous <$$font> , and
related in some degree of affinity ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.147

I have tryed a <font> Nectarine <$$font> on a <font> Horse-Plum <$$font>
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.148

and it failed ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.149

on the very same Stock an <font> Apricock <$$font> grew very fast .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.150

I have also <font> inoculated <$$font> a <font> Apricock <$$font> on a
course <font> Black-plum <$$font> <paren> known in some Countries by the
name of the <font> Lammas-plum <$$font> LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.151

and it took well , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.152

and bore a good Fruit . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.153

I have <font> inoculated Pears <$$font> upon a <font> Hawthorn <$$font>
or <font> White-thorn <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.154

and it hath taken very well , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.155

but the growth was so small , it@ @'s not worth the practice .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.156

A <font> Pear graffed <$$font> on a <font> Wicky-berry-tree <$$font>
grew very well , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.157

but on the <font> Hazel <$$font> or <font> Nut-tree <$$font> it fail'd .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.158

I have tryed the <font> inoculating buds <$$font> of <font> Walnut-trees
<$$font> upon <font> Ash-trees <$$font> to hasten the raising Trees ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.159

but not one of many that I tryed , came to any thing .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,17.160

<P_18>

Mr. <font> Evelyn <$$font> reports it from one , that said , he had it
to shew , that a <font> white Apple graffed <$$font> upon an <font> Elm
<$$font> did grow and bear a <font> read Apple <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,18.162

<font> Cherries graffed <$$font> on <font> Plum-trees <$$font> will not
prosper long , nor <font> Plums <$$font> on <font> Cherries <$$font> ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,18.163

neither do <font> Apples <$$font> on <font> Pears <$$font> , nor <font>
Pears <$$font> upon <font> Apples <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,18.164

<font> Sect. <$$font> 5 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,18.165

It is an Assertion of my Lord <font> Bacon <$$font> in his <font>
Natural History <$$font> , <font> cent. <$$font> 5. <font> Exper.
<$$font> 452. <font> That Graffing doth meliorate Fruit <$$font> ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,18.166

and I have heard that the <font> Golden-@ @renating <$$font> was the
<font> Fruit <$$font> of a Scion of an <font> Apple-tree graffed
<$$font> by his direction on an Apple-tree , and then had its name as
being in a manner <font> born again <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,18.167

But mere <font> Graffing <$$font> doth not better the <font> Fruit
<$$font> at all , as if you <font> graff <$$font> a <font> Scion
<$$font> upon the same Tree you took it from , the <font> Fruit <$$font>
will be the same , without any the least alternation from what the Tree
bore before it was so graffed . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,18.168

But it is a harder question to resolve , if you graff a Scion on a Stock
differing from it in kind , whether the Fruit of this <font> new Tree
<$$font> will be any thing better than the Fruit of the Tree from whence
the Scion was taken . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,18.169

<P_19>

This is by many held in the <font> negative <$$font> ; because <paren>
say they <$$paren> the <font> Stock <$$font> only conveys food and
nourishment to the Scion , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,19.171

and then when the Scion hath received it , it converts it perfectly into
its own Nature ; so that the Fruit which this Scion shall bear , must be
the very same that the Tree bore from which the Scion was taken , and
neither better nor worse . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,19.172

But that the Scion doth thus perfectly transmute the <font> juice
<$$font> it receives from the <font> Stock <$$font> into its own kind is
not proved , neither <paren> as I verily believe <$$paren> ever will ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,19.173

and it may therefore prove for all that@ @'s said to the contrary , that
the <font> Fruit <$$font> may participate something of the Nature of the
<font> Stock <$$font> , and may so far be made by it either better or
worse ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,19.174

for such an union as that of the <font> Stock <$$font> and the Graff in
natural bodies is hardly conceivable without some commixture of their
Natures , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,19.175

and there are some reasons from Experience that make this probable ; as
, 1. The Seeds of a graffed Tree take much after the <font> Stock
<$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,19.176

and it is hard to conceive the <font> Kernel <$$font> should participate
so much of the <font> Stock <$$font> , and the <font> Fruit <$$font> be
nothing influenced by it . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,19.177

<P_20>

2 . Those that produce the best Fruit by their <font> Stones <$$font>
or <font> Seeds <$$font> , yet vary from the Fruit the <font> seed
<$$font> or <font> stone <$$font> was taken out of which in al
likelyhood proceeds from the mixture of the <font> quality <$$font> of
the <font> stock <$$font> and <font> Scion <$$font> in that Tree the
<font> stone <$$font> came from . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,20.179

3 . It@ @'s manifest that amongst <font> Trees <$$font> of one kind ,
in the same <font> Orchard <$$font> , you shall have some one of them
bear better Fruit than any of the rest sometimes ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,20.180

and I know not what to impute this excellency to more probably chiefly
though there may be some other causes for it , than that the <font>
stocks <$$font> they were graffed on might be <font> Crab-trees <$$font>
that bore <font> Crabs <$$font> of several kinds , some better , some
worse . So that to conclude this discourse , it can@ @not be amiss to
be so far curious about the <font> stocks <$$font> you <font> graff
<$$font> , as rather to choose such <font> seeds <$$font> and <font>
stones <$$font> to raise them from as come from <font> Trees <$$font>
that bear the best <font> fruit <$$font> in their kind <paren> if you
can have them <$$paren> than to take them at adventure .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,20.181

<font> Sect. <$$font> 6 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,20.182

In raising <font> Apple-trees <$$font> for <font> Orchards <$$font> or
<font> fields <$$font> , whether for <font> Cyder <$$font> or <font>
baking <$$font> , <font> &c. <$$font> the <font> Crab-kernels <$$font>
are preferr'd before <font> Apple-kernels <$$font> , as yielding <font>
stocks <$$font> more hardy , and so better able to endure <P_21> cold
and course Land , and because they root better and so will make larger
<font> Trees : <$$font> LANGF-1696-E3-P1,21.183

Neither are some sorts of <font> Crabs <$$font> so contemptible a <font>
fruit <$$font> as they are generally accounted ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,21.184

for being gathered very ripe and kept a good while to <font> mellow
<$$font> , some of them will make good <font> Cyder <$$font> ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,21.185

and generally they yield a strong Liquor : so that such kind of <font>
Crab-stocks <$$font> may rather help to mend some Apples of weak <font>
juice <$$font> than make them worse , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,21.186

but the reason before mentioned is the cause of their choice before
Apple Kernels . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,21.187

Yet where you can@ @not conveniently be stored with <font> Crab-kernels
<$$font> ; <font> Apple-kernels <$$font> are not so much inferior to
them , but they may well enough be made use of , <paren> as they
commonly are <$$paren> for raising <font> Stocks <$$font> to graff
Apples upon . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,21.188

And concerning the <font> seeds <$$font> of <font> Apples <$$font> it@
@'s to be observed , that although they produce not <font> Trees
<$$font> bearing the same kind of Apples as those the seeds were had out
of ; yet without graffing they will bring forth a good <font> harsh
fruit <$$font> that may yield good <font> Cyder : <$$font>
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,21.189

and thus <paren> it@ @'s said <$$paren> we came by some of our best
<font> Cyder-Apples <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,21.190

<P_22>

If you sow the <font> seeds <$$font> of several sorts of <font> Apples
<$$font> mixt together , you would certainly have fruit multiply'd into
various kinds ; but yet perhaps find none better for <font> Cyder
<$$font> than those already known , nor so good ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,22.192

and such <font> Trees <$$font> will be longer before they come to bear
<font> fruit <$$font> than others that are graffed <font> : <$$font> so
that it would be but an unpleasant Experiment to search this way for a
<font> Cyder Apple <$$font> to exceed all that have been before ,
because the trial would be so tedious , and the labour in greatest
likelyhood lost at last . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,22.193

But if a man had a mind to raise a good <font> new Fence <$$font> about
a <font> Field <$$font> he designs to inclose , which he can keep for
four or five years together to bear <font> Corn <$$font> or <font>
Clover-grass <$$font> to mow , that <font> Cattle <$$font> may be so
long kept out of it , he might do it rarely well by sowing Apple kernels
of as many sorts as he will , on the top of a new made <font> Ditch bank
<$$font> , making the <font> dead Hedge <$$font> <paren> that is usually
on the top of the bank <$$paren> on the out_side of the ditch to defend
them . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,22.194

When they are grown up he may plash this Hedg , leaving at every four or
five yards distance , one of the best Trees to grow up , which of
themselves will bear good <font> Cyder fruit <$$font> , or may be
graffed to bear what pleaseth the owner ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,22.195

and by this <P_23> means in a little time and with small charge he shall
have a <font> fruit-bearing <$$font> and <font> impregnable Hedge
<$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,23.196

<font> Sect. <$$font> 7 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,23.197

It@ @'s held by some , that the <font> Kernel <$$font> of the <font>
fruit <$$font> hath a great dependence upon and sympathy with the <font>
pith <$$font> of the Tree , and that <font> hollow-@ @trees <$$font>
though they grow and bear fruit , yet that fruit hath few Kernels in it
, and those little better than withered <font> husks <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,23.198

When I was a young <font> Planter <$$font> , I was once in want of
<font> Pear-stocks <$$font> ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,23.199

and made my complaint to an ancient <font> practiser <$$font> , a man of
very good judgment in the opinion of those that knew him ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,23.200

and he told me he had oft sowed <font> kernels <$$font> of <font> Pears
<$$font> and never could get any to grow <font> : <$$font>
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,23.201

Yet I procured some Seeds of <font> Pears <$$font> from the <font> Mill
<$$font> , that were very <font> ripe <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,23.202

and had <font> stocks <$$font> enough from them , which makes me believe
my friend took his kernels from a <font> Tree <$$font> that was <font>
hollow-hearted <$$font> , as <font> Pear-trees <$$font> are more subject
to be than any other <font> fruit-trees <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,23.203

I mention this the rather , because if a <font> Planter <$$font> try any
thing but once , and fail , he should not be <font> discouraged <$$font>
, and particularly in this ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,23.204

but if he can get ripe Seeds , <paren> which will be then very black
<$$paren> and of a <font> sound Tree <$$font> , he need not doubt the
success . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,23.205

<P_24>

And to have plenty of <font> stocks <$$font> such as are best for large
<font> standards <$$font> for <font> Orchards <$$font> , or <font>
Fields <$$font> , there is no better way of raising them than by Kernels
; with which a man can no way be plentifully and easily provided ; but
at the time and place of making <font> Perry <$$font> , though he do
send some miles for them . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,24.207

I shall end this <font> Chapter <$$font> with this one <font>
Observation <$$font> more , not unsuitable to what went before , and
which I have met with verifi'd more than once or twice in my own
Experience , that there are some <font> hollow fruit-trees <$$font> that
bear fruit so much more excellent than any of the same kind the owners
had had , or could elsewhere meet with , that they have been very
desirous to propagate from them , but never could any manner of way
raise young ones of those old <font> Trees <$$font> , that would bear so
good a <font> fruit <$$font> ; which seems to infer that the <font>
fruit <$$font> of a <font> Tree <$$font> may be the <font> better
<$$font> for the <font> piths <$$font> being <font> consum'd <$$font> ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,24.208

and if that be true , it must be so , because the <font> pith <$$font>
conveys to the <font> fruit <$$font> a <font> worse <$$font> sort of
<font> juice <$$font> than any other part of the Tree doth ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,24.209

and therefore being freed from that infection by the <font> Consumption
<$$font> of the <font> Pith <$$font> the Fruit becomes more <font>
choice <$$font> and <font> delicate <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,24.210

And that the <font> Pith <$$font> <P_25> is the conveyance of a <font>
courser <$$font> , or other sort of juice , is rendred in some sort
probable , because <paren> as hath been before observed <$$paren> the
<font> Kernels <$$font> of <font> Fruit <$$font> depend much upon the
<font> Pith <$$font> , which almost never produce such <font> good fruit
<$$font> as they come out of , and generally much worse .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,25.211

<heading>

CHAP. III . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,25.213

<font> OF TRANSPLANTING THE SEEDLINGS . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,25.214

<$$heading>

Sect. <$$font> 1 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,25.216

In <font> October <$$font> after one Summers growth in the <font>
Seed-plots <$$font> , you ought to draw up with your hand , such of your
<font> Crab <$$font> , <font> Apple <$$font> , or <font> Pear-seedlings
<$$font> as you find grown above a foot in height <font> : <$$font> and
transplant them into your <font> Nursery <$$font> , and let the rest
remain in the <font> Seed-plot <$$font> till another year ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,25.217

as for those from <font> Stones <$$font> they need not be <font> removed
<$$font> , but inoculated in the <font> Seminary <$$font> , the <font>
stones <$$font> being set at the distance aforesaid .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,25.218

When they are drawn up , cut off the <font> side-spriggs <$$font> from
about the <font> top <$$font> , and the <font> strings <$$font> from
about the roots , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,25.219

and snip off the <font> extremities <$$font> , both of the <font> top
<$$font> , that it may not run too fast upward , <paren> but <P_26> the
body may grow in bigness , <$$paren> and of the <font> tap <$$font> or
<font> heart root <$$font> , that it may not run directly <font>
downward <$$font> <paren> lest it run further than the good <font> soil
<$$font> <$$paren> but may be more apt to spread its <font> Roots
<$$font> in breadth . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,26.220

Have <font> beds <$$font> ready prepared , of good <font> fertile dry
Earth <$$font> , not <font> over_rich
{COM:font_change_only_around_"rich"} <$$font> , lest upon removal
afterwards into a much worse Soil <paren> as for the most part <font>
Orchard <$$font> and <font> Field <$$font> ground is <$$paren> your
Trees coming of a sudden from such delicate food , to such course fare ,
pine away if they do not perish ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,26.221

and this is but reasonably thought to be the cause why many Trees bought
out of <font> London <$$font> Nurseries <paren> which are vastly deep
with <font> fat <$$font> , and <font> rich manure <$$font> <$$paren>
decay , or come on very poorly , when they are brought into the Country
. LANGF-1696-E3-P1,26.222

Therefore upon every removal endeavour to have Earth as good , or better
<paren> to place next the <font> roots <$$font> <$$paren> than that out
of which they were taken . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,26.223

<font> Sect. <$$font> 2 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,26.224

Let every <font> bed <$$font> you make , for setting these <font> Plants
<$$font> in , be about <font> two foot broad <$$font> , leaving <font>
room <$$font> betwixt each <font> bed <$$font> to walk and work about
them , without prejudicing the <font> Plants : <$$font>
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,26.225

Set <font> two rows <$$font> a <font> foot <$$font> or more distance
each from other on every <font> bed <$$font> , by drawing a <font> line
<$$font> , and pricking <font> holes <$$font> a full <font> foot
<$$font> asunder ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,26.226

let the <P_27> <font> holes <$$font> be so deep , that if the <font>
roots <$$font> be not very long , you may set your Plants at least two
fingers breadth deeper in the ground then they grew in the <font>
Seed-plot <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,27.227

<font> close <$$font> the <font> mold <$$font> about them ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,27.228

and if it be a very <font> dry <$$font> time , <font> water <$$font>
them the same day , the better to settle the Earth about them .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,27.229

If you can get old <font> Fearn <$$font> <paren> in some places called
also <font> Brakes <$$font> <$$paren> or for want of it <font> Straw
<$$font> , or <font> new Dung <$$font> , cover the <font> Beds <$$font>
with it , which will keep the <font> roots <$$font> warm in the <font>
Winter <$$font> , and preserve them from overmuch heat in the <font>
Summer <$$font> ; if the land be any whit <font> stiff <$$font> , this
cover will make it <font> mellow <$$font> , and when <font> rotten
<$$font> enrich it , and very much hinder the growth of <font> weeds
<$$font> , which ought duly to be pluck'd up LANGF-1696-E3-P1,27.230

and put new <font> Fearn <$$font> , <font> &c. <$$font> as the old rots
. LANGF-1696-E3-P1,27.231

<font> Sect. <$$font> 3 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,27.232

If any of these <font> Plants <$$font> <paren> in the years following
<$$paren> shoot forth <font> upright <$$font> , top them early in the
year , it will make them grow bigger bodied , and so become sooner ready
for <font> graffing <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,27.233

If you intend to raise any <font> Stocks <$$font> , to be set out in
<font> Fields <$$font> before they are <font> graffed <$$font> , you
need not <font> top <$$font> them upon their first <font> removal
<$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,27.234

neither need you <font> remove <$$font> them , till they are grown
<font> high <$$font> enough <P_28> to stand in the <font> Fields
<$$font> ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,28.235

if you find that they <font> spread <$$font> their <font> roots <$$font>
, and run not <font> downward <$$font> , as in <font> gravelly <$$font>
and such kind of <font> soils <$$font> they will not be apt to do ;
<paren> and by the first you <font> draw up <$$font> you may judge of
the <font> rest <$$font> , whether they do or no : <$$paren> If you
<font> reserve <$$font> any for this use , you had best <font> choose
<$$font> such as grew <font> straight <$$font> , and at convenient
<font> distance <$$font> one from another ; which you may contrive to do
, in <font> drawing <$$font> out the <font> first two <$$font> years ,
such as be of <font> stature <$$font> to be <font> Transplanted <$$font>
from among them : LANGF-1696-E3-P1,28.236

Whether you remove these into your <font> Nursery <$$font> or suffer
them to remain in the <font> Seminary <$$font> you ought to Dress these
once or twice a year by cutting off the biggest side-branches to hasten
their growing <font> tall <$$font> , but leaving some small
side-branches , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,28.237

for this causeth them to thrive in <font> bigness <$$font> the more ,
which they ought to do proportionable to their height ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,28.238

or else they will be too <font> weak <$$font> to <font> bear a top
<$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,28.239

Observe this also in <font> graffed Trees <$$font> in your <font>
Nurseries <$$font> or elsewhere . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,28.240

{COM:insert_helsinki_1_here}

<P_42>

<font> Sect. <$$font> 2 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,42.243

The second way <paren> called <font> Graffing in the Bark <$$font>
<$$paren> is much like this , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,42.244

and I prefer it from experience much before the fore-mentioned , or any
other way , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,42.245

but it can with certainty only be used for <font> Apples <$$font> ,
because all Scions of other Fruit will be grown past use , before the
<font> Bark <$$font> of the <font> stocks <$$font> will <font> peel
<$$font> ; which is about the end of <font> March <$$font> or the
beginining of <font> April <$$font> : LANGF-1696-E3-P1,42.246

But this will be time enough for <font> Apples <$$font> , if the Stocks
be in any thing good liking , which if they be not , they are not fit to
be graffed any way . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,42.247

I have kept Scions of <font> Pears <$$font> till the bark hath risen ,
and thus graffed them with success . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,42.248

If <font> February <$$font> have been so sharp as to keep the Scions
backward , it may do very well , not cutting them till toward the end of
<font> February <$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,42.249

for then they will be well preserved till <font> Lady-day <$$font> or
thereabouts , by which time the bark of <font> Pear <P_43> stocks
<$$font> generally will peel from the <font> Stocks <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.250

Prepare then your <font> Stock <$$font> and <font> Scion <$$font>
exactly as you were directed in <font> packing <$$font> ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.251

only instead of cutting the <font> bark <$$font> off the <font> Stock
<$$font> , slit it on the <font> South-west <$$font> side , from the top
, almost as long as the <font> sloped <$$font> part of the <font> Scion
<$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.252

and loosen the <font> bark <$$font> at the top of the slit with the
point of your Knife . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.253

Have in readiness a little Instrument made of <font> Ivory <$$font> , or
a <font> Deer <$$font> or <font> Sheep-shank <$$font> , or <font> Silver
<$$font> , or hard smooth Wood , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.254

at one end let it be made of the shope {COM:sic} of the slope part of
the Scion , but much less every way ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.255

thrust it down betwixt the Bark and the Wood of the <font> Stock
<$$font> , where it was slit , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.256

to make room for the Scion , take it out LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.257

and put in the Scion , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.258

but first cut a little of the <font> Bark <$$font> at the thin end of
the slope of the <font> Scion <$$font> , that it double not in going
down , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.259

yet leave it with a sharp edge ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.260

and because when your {SIC:you} Scion is put in , it will bear the
<font> bark <$$font> hollow from the Stock , nick or slit the <font>
Bark <$$font> , on each side the Scion , so that it may fall close to
the Stock , and to the edges of the Scion . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.261

<font> Bind <$$font> and <font> Clay <$$font> it as you have already
heard . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,43.262

<P_44>

These two are the best ways of <font> Graffing <$$font> for these
Reasons . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.264

1 . Because <font> Stocks <$$font> may be <font> Graffed <$$font> thus
, some years before they can be ready to <font> graff <$$font> in the
<font> cleft <$$font> ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.265

and though <font> Whip-graffing <$$font> may be used sooner then either
of those , yet their are other great inconveniencies attending it , as
you will see hereafter . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.266

2 . The Stocks are this way less harmed than where a cleft is used ,
because the cleft lets wet into them , and makes them not so fit for
Graffing again <paren> if any fail to grow the first time <$$paren> as
these continue to be , though they should once miscarry , or come to any
mischance . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.267

3 . The Scion will much sooner and better cover the Stock , and so make
a more <font> healthful <$$font> , <font> sound <$$font> , and <font>
swifter growing Tree <$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.268

4 . This is much more speedy , easie , and sure to succeed .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.269

<font> Sect. <$$font> 3 . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.270

There is another way , called <font> Whip-graffing <$$font> ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.271

and here your Stock and Scion ought to be exactly of the same bigness ,
as the manner of performing it plainly sheweth , which is as followeth .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.272

<font> Slope <$$font> off the Scion a full inch or longer ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.273

and do the like to the Stock , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.274

and tye the one upon the other . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,44.275

<P_45>

You may if you will , make a {SIC:a_make} shoulder on the Scion , and
cut the top of the Stock to suit with it , and then bind them together ,
and <font> clay <$$font> about the place . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,45.277

This way is successful enough , so that special care be taken , that
both <font> Stock <$$font> and <font> Scion <$$font> suit exactly where
they are joyned together , which is somewhat troublesome to do ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,45.278

and so it is to find Scions and Stocks of a equal bigness ; both which
makes it require longer time in doing than the former ways ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,45.279

besides the head will be apt to overgrow the Stocks ;
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,45.280

all that can be done to prevent it , is to Graff these very low , or if
high , to give the Stock more liberty to thicken , by slitting the Bark
of it with a Knife . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,45.281

In this way of <font> Graffing <$$font> there is another little knack
may be added to very good purpose ; LANGF-1696-E3-P1,45.282

and that is , when the Stock and <font> Scion <$$font> are prepared
<paren> as you heard before <$$paren> to be joyned together , to make a
slit with a Knife in the bare place of the Stock downward , beginning
towards the top of the <font> slope <$$font> , and so slitting it a
little way , and doing the like in the <font> sloped <$$font> face of
the Scion , but beginning at the same distance from the lower end of it
, as you did before from the top of <P_46> the <font> Stock <$$font> ,
and so carrying it upwards , and then joyn them by thrusting the one
<font> slice <$$font> into the other , till the bare place of the <font>
Scion <$$font> cover the bare place of the <font> Stock <$$font> .
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,46.283

This may be done likewise in <font> Graffing <$$font> by <font> packing
<$$font> , LANGF-1696-E3-P1,46.284

and in both conduceth much to strengthen the work ,
LANGF-1696-E3-P1,46.285

and is called by some , <font> Lipping <$$font> or <font> Tonguing
<$$font> . LANGF-1696-E3-P1,46.286

