<BEGIN_latimer-1549-e1-p1>

<P_17P>

<heading:edcomment:THE_IIII._SERMON_OF_MAISTER_LATIMER>

<font> Qvaecunque scripta sunt : ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt .
<$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.4

All thinges which are written are writen for our erudition and knowledge
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.5

All thinges that are written in Goddes boke , in the Bible boke , in the
boke of the holy scripture , are wrytten to be oure doctrine .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.6

I told you in my first sermon honorable audience , that I purposed to
declare vnto you ii. thinges . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.7

The one what sede shuld be sowen in Gods field , in Goddes plough land .
And the other who shuld be the sowers . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.8

That is to sai , what doctrin is to be taught in Christes church and
congregation , and what men shoulde be the teachers and preachers of it
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.9

The firste part I haue told you in the thre sermons , past in which I
haue assaied to sette furth my plough , to proue what I coulde do .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.10

And now I shal tel you who be the plowers , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.11

for Gods worde is a seede to be sowen in Goddes fielde ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.12

that is the faithful congregation , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.13

and the preacher is the sower . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.14

And it is in the gospel . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.15

<font> Exiuit qui seminat seminare semen suum . <$$font>
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.16

He that soweth , the husbandman , the ploughman went furth to sowe his
seede , so that a preacher is resembled to a ploughman , as it is in an
other place . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.17

<font> Nemo admota arato manu , et a tergo respiciens aptus est regno
Dei . <$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.18

No man yat putteth his hand to the plough and loketh backe is apte for
the kingdom of god . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.19

That is to say , let no preacher be negligente in doinge his office .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,17P.20

Al_be_it this is one of the places yat hath ben racked , <P_18P> as I
tolde you of rackynge scriptures . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.21

And I haue ben one of them my selfe yat hath racked it ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.22

I crye God mercie for it , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.23

and haue bene one of them that haue beleued and haue expounded it ,
agaynste religious persons that would forsake theyr ordre which they had
professed , and woulde go out of their cloyster , whereas in deede it
toucheth not monkerie , nor maketh any thyng at all for any such matter
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.24

But it is directlie spoken of diligente preachyng of the worke of God .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.25

For preachynge of the Gospel is one of Goddes plough workes ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.26

and the preacher is one of Goddes plough men .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.27

Ye may not be offended wyth my similitude : in that I compare preachynge
to the laboure and worke of ploughinge , and the preacher to a ploughman
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.28

Ye maye not be offended wyth thys my similitude ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.29

for I haue ben sclaundred of some personnes for such thynges .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.30

It hath ben sayde of me . Oh Latimer , nay as for hym I wil never
beleue hym whyle I lyue , nor neuer truste hym ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.31

for he lykened our blessed Ladye to a saffrone bagge , where in dede I
neuer vsed that similitude . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.32

But it was as I have sayde vnto you before nowe , accordinge to that
whiche Peter sawe before in the spirite of prophesy and sayde that there
shoulde come afterwarde men : <font> Per quos via veritatis maledictis
afficeretur <$$font> , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.33

there should come felowes by whom the waye of truth should be yll spoken
of and sclaundred . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.34

But in case I had vsed this similitude , it had not bene to be reproued
, LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.35

but myght haue bene without reproche . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.36

For I might have sayde thus , as the saffrone bagge that hath bene full
of saffron or hath had saffron in it , doth euer after sauoure and smel
of the swete saffron that it conteyned : so our blessed Ladye which
conteyned and bare Christe in her wombe , dyd euer after resemble the
maners and vertues of that precious babe which she bare .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.37

And what had oure blessed Ladie bene the worse for thys ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.38

or what dishonour was thys to oure blessed Ladie .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,18P.39

But as preachers must be ware and <P_19P> circumspect yat they geue not
any iust occasion to be sclaundered and yll spoken of by the hearers ,
so must not the auditours be offended without cause .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.40

For heauen is in the gospel likened to a musterde seede .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.41

It is compared also to a piece of leauen , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.42

and Christ sayth that at the last day , he wyl come lyke a thiefe ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.43

and what dishonoure is thys to God ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.44

or what derogation is thys to heauen . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.45

Ye maye not then , I say , be offended with my similitude , for because
I lyken preachyng to a ploughmans laboure and a prelate to a ploughman .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.46

But now you wyll aske me whom I cal a prelate .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.47

A prelate is that man , what soeuer he be , yat hath a flocke to be
taughte of hym , who soeuer hath any spirituall charge in the fayethfull
congregation , and who so euer he be that hath cure of soule .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.48

And wel may the preacher and the ploughman be lykened together .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.49

Fyrste for their labour of all ceasons of the yere .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.50

For there is no tyme of the yere , in whiche the ploughman hath not some
speciall worke to do , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.51

as in my countrey in Lecestre_shire , the ploughe man hath a tyme to set
furth and to assaie hys plough , and other tymes for other necessari
workes to be done . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.52

And then they also maye be likenede together , for the diuersitie of
workes and varietie of offices yat they haue to do .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.53

For as the ploughman first setteth furth hys plough and then tilleth hys
lande and breaketh it in furroughes , and sometime ridgeth it vp agayne
. And at an other tyme harroweth it , and clotteth it , and somtyme
doungeth it , and hedgeth it , diggeth it , and weedeth it , pourgeth
and maketh it cleane . So the prelate , the preacher hath mani diuers
offices to do . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.54

He hath fyrst a busie worke , to bringe his parishioners to a ryght
fayth , as Paule calleth it . And not to a swaruinge fayeth , but to a
fayeth that embraceth Christe , and trusteth to hys merites , a liuely
fayth , a iustifiyng fayth , a fayth that maketh a man rightuous wythout
respecte of workes . As ye haue it , verie well declared and set furth
in the Homilie . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,19P.55

He hath then a busie worke I say , to bringe his flocke to a <P_20P>
ryght fayth and then to confirme them in the same fayeth , Nowe castynge
them downe with the lawe , and with threateninges of God for synne .
Nowe ridgynge them vp agayne , with the gospel and with the promises of
Gods fauoure . Nowe weedinge them , by , tellinge them their faultes ,
and makynge them forsake synne . Nowe clottinge them , by breakynge
their stonie hertes , and by making them supple_herted , and makyng them
to haue hertes of fleshe , that is soft hertes , and apte for doctrine
to enter in . Nowe teachinge to knowe God ryghtly , and to knowe theyr
duetie to God and to theyr neyghboures . Nowe exhorting them when they
knowe theyr duety , that they do it and be diligente in it : so that
they haue a continuall worke to do . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.56

Greate is theyr busines , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.57

and therfore greate shoulde be theyre hyre . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.58

They haue great laboures , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.59

and therfore they ought to haue good luinges , that they maye
comodiously feade theyr flocke , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.60

for the preachynge of the worde of God vnto the people is called meate ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.61

scripture calleth it meat . Not strauberies , that come but once a
yeare and tary not longe , but are sone gone : LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.62

but it is meat . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.63

It is no deynties . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.64

The people muste haue meate that muste be familier and continuall , and
dayly geuen vnto them to fede vpon . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.65

Many make a strauberie of it , ministringe it but once a yeare ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.66

but such do not the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} office of good
prelates . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.67

For Christe sayeth . <font> Quis putas est seruus prudens et fidelis ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.68

qui dat cibum in tempore . <$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.69

Who thynke you is a wyse and a faythful seruaunt ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.70

He that geueth meat in due time . So that he must at all times
conuenient preache diligentelie . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.71

Therfore sayeth he ? who trowe you is a faythefull seruaunte ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.72

He speaketh it as thoughe it were a rare thynge to fynde suche a one ,
and as though he shoulde saye , there be but fewe of theym to fynde in
the world . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,20P.73

And howe fewe of them there be throughout this realme that geue meate to
their flocke <P_21P> as thei should do : the visitours can beste tell .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.74

To fewe , to fewe , the more is the pittie , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.75

and neuer so fewe as nowe . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.76

By thys then it appeareth that a prelate or anye that hath cure of soule
must diligentlie and substancially worke and laboure .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.77

Therfore saythe Paule to Timothe . <font> Qui episcopatum desiderat ,
hic bonum opus desiderat . <$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.78

He that desireth to haue the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} office
of a byshop , or a prelate , that man desyreth a goode worke .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.79

Then if it be good worke , it is worke . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.80

Ye can make but a worke of it . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.81

It is Gods worke , Gods ploughe , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.82

and that plough , God woulde haue styll going .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.83

Suche then as loyter and liue idelly are not good prelates or ministers
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.84

And of suche as do not preache and teache , nor do not theyr dueties :
God sayth by hys Prophet Hieremie . <font> Maledictus qui facit opus
dei fraudulenter . <$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.85

Gilefullie or deceytefully some bokes have <font> Negligenter <$$font> ,
negligentli , or slacklie . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.86

Howe manye such prelates , howe many such byshops , Lorde for thy mercie
, are there nowe in England ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.87

And what shall we in thys case do ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.88

Shall {COM:preceding_word_"Shall"_emended} we companie wyth them ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.89

O Lorde for thy mercie shal we not companie with them ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.90

O Lorde whither shall we flie from them ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.91

But curssed be he that doeth the worcke of God negligentli or gilefullie
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.92

A soore word for them that are neglygent in dyschargeinge theyr office ,
or haue done it fraudulentlye , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.93

for that is the thynge that maketh the people yll .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.94

But true it must be that Christ sayeth , <font> Multi sunt vocati ,
pauci vero electi . <$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.95

Manye are called , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.96

but fewe are chosen . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,21P.97

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_1_here}

<P_29P>

He is the moste dyligent preacher of al other ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,29P.100

he is neuer <P_30P> out of his dioces , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.101

he is neuer from his cure , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.102

ye shal neuer fynde hym vnoccupyed , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.103

he is euer in his parishe , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.104

he keepeth residence at al tymes , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.105

ye shal neuer fynde hym out of the waye , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.106

cal for him when you wyl , he is euer at home ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.107

the diligenteste preacher in all the Realme , he is euer at his ploughe
, LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.108

no lordynge nor loytringe can hynder hym , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.109

he is euer appliynge his busynes , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.110

ye shal neuer fynde hym idle I warraunte you .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.111

And his office is to hinder religion , to mayntayne supersticion , to
set vp Idolatrie , to teach al kynde of popetrie ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.112

he is readye as can be wished , for to sette forthe his ploughe , to
deuise as manye wayes as can be , to deface and obscure Godes glory .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.113

Where the Deuyl is residente and hath his plough goinge : there awaye
with bokes , and vp with candelles , awaye wyth Bibles and vp with
beades , awaye wyth the lygte of the Gospel , and vp with the lyghte of
candlles , yea at noone dayes . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.114

Where the Deuyll is residente , that he maye preuaile , vp wyth al
superstition and Idolatrie , sensing , peintynge of ymages , candles ,
palmes , asshes , holye water , and newe seruice of menes inuenting , as
though man could inuent a better waye to honoure God wyth then God him
selfe hath apointed . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.115

Downe with Christes crosse , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.116

vp with purgatory picke_purse LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.117

vp wyth hym , the popish pourgatorie I mean .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.118

Awaye wyth clothinge the naked , the pore and impotent ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.119

vp wyth deckynge of ymages and gaye garnishinge of stockes and stones ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.120

vp wyth mannes traditions and his lawes , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.121

Downe wyth Gods traditions and hys most holy worde ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.122

Downe wyth the olde honoure dewe to God , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.123

and vp wyth the new gods honour , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.124

let al things be done in latine . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.125

There must be nothynge but latine , not as much as <font> Memento homo
quod cinis es , et in cinerem reuerteris . <$$font> Remembre man that
thou arte asshes , and into asshes thou shalte returne . Whiche be the
wordes that the minister speaketh to the ignoraunte people , when he
gyueth them asshes vpon asshe wensdaye , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.126

but it muste be spoken in latine . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.127

Goddes worde may in no wyse be translated into englyshe .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,30P.128

Oh that our prelates woulde be as diligente to sowe the corne <P_31P> of
good doctrine as Sathan is , to sowe cockel and darnel .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.129

And this is the deuilyshe ploughinge , the which worcketh to haue
thinges in latine , and letteth the fruteful edification .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.130

But here some man will saie to me , what sir are ye so priuie of the
deuils counsell that ye know al this to be true ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.131

Truli I know him to wel , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.132

and haue obeyed him a little to much in condescentinge
{COM:preceding_word_"condescentinge"_emended} to some follies .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.133

And I knowe him as other men do , yea , that he is euer occupied and
euer busie in folowinge his plough . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.134

I know bi saint Peter which saieth of him . <font> Sicut leo rugiens
circuit querens quem deuoret . <$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.135

He goeth aboute lyke a roaringe lyon seekynge whome he maye deuoure .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.136

I woulde haue thys texte wel vewed and examined euerye worde of it .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.137

<font> Circuit <$$font> , he goeth aboute in euerye corner of his dioces
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.138

He goeth on visitacion daylye . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.139

He leaueth no place of hys cure vnuisited . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.140

He walketh round aboute from place to place LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.141

and ceaseth not , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.142

<font> Sicut leo <$$font> , as a Lyon that is strongly , boldly , and
proudlye straytelye and fiercelye with haute lookes , wyth hys proude
countenaunces , wyth hys stately braggynges .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.143

<font> Rugiens <$$font> , roaringe , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.144

for he letteth not slippe any occasion to speake or to roare out when he
seeth his tyme . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.145

<font> Querens <$$font> , he goeth about seekyng and not sleepyng , as
oure bishoppes do , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.146

but he seketh diligently , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.147

he searcheth diligently al corners , wher@ @as he may haue his pray ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.148

he roueth abrode in eueri place of his dioces ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.149

he standeth not styl , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.150

he is neuer at reste , but euer in hande wyth his plough that it may go
forwarde . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.151

But there was neuer shuch a preacher in England as he is .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.152

Who is able to tel his diligente preachyng ? whiche eury daye and euery
houre laboreth to sowe cockel and darnel , that he may bryng oute of
forme and out of estimation and roume , the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} institution
{COM:preceding_word_"institution"_emended} of the Lordes supper and
Christes crosse , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.153

for there he lost his ryghte , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,31P.154

for Christe saied . <font> Nunc iudicium est mundi , princeps seculi
hujus eiicietur foras , et sicut exaltaui Moises serprentem <P_32P> in
deserto , ita exaltari oportet filium hominis , et cum exaltatus fuero ,
a terra , omnia traham ad meipsum . <$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.155

Nowe is the iudgemente of thys worlde LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.156

and the Prynce of thys worlde shall be caste oute .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.157

And , as Moyses dyd lyfte vp the serpente in the wyldernesse so muste
the sonne of manne be lyfte vp : LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.158

And when I shall be lyfte vp from the earthe , I wyl drawe all thinges
vnto my selfe . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.159

For the Deuyll was dysapoynted of hys purpose ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.160

for he thoughte all to be hys owne . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.161

And when he had once broughte Christe to the crosse , he thought all
cocke_sure . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.162

But there loste he all his reygning , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.163

for Christ saied <font> Omnia traham ad meipsum . <$$font>
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.164

I wyll drawe all thynges to my selfe . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.165

He meaneth drawynge of mans soule to saluacion .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.166

And that he sayde he woulde do <font> per semetipsum <$$font> , by his
owne selfe , not by anye other bodyes sacrifice .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.167

He ment by his own sacrifice on the crosse wheare he offred him selfe
for the redemption of mankynd , and not the sacrifice of the masse to be
offered by an other . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.168

For who can offer him but him selfe ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.169

He was boeth the offerer and the offeryng . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.170

And thys is the pricke , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.171

thys is the marke at the whyche the Deuyll shooteth , to euacuate the
crosse of Chryste and to mingle the institucion of the Loordes supper ,
the whiche although he canne not brynge to passe : yet he goeth aboute
bi his sleyghtes and subtyle meanes , to frustrate the same ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.172

and these fyftene_hundreth yeres he hath bene a doar , onelye purposinge
to euacuate Christes death , and to make it of smal efficacitie and
vertue . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.173

For where as Christe accordyng as the serpent was lyfte vp in wyldernes
: so woulde he hym self to be exalted , that thereby as manye as trusted
in hym , shoulde haue saluation . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.174

But the deuyl would none of that . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.175

They would haue vs saued by a daily oblation propitiatorie , by a
sacrifice expiatorie , or remissorie . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,32P.176

Nowe if I shoulde preache in the contrye amonge <P_33P> the vnlearned ,
I woulde tell what propitiatorie , expiatorie and remissorie is :
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.177

but here is a learned auditorie . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.178

Yet for them yat be vnlearned I wyll expounde it .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.179

Propitatorie , expiatorie , remissorie , or satisfactorie ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.180

for they signifie all one thynge in effecte , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.181

and is nothinge elles but a thynge whereby to obteyne remission of
synnes , and to haue saluacion . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.182

And thys waye the Deuyll vsed to euacuate the death of Chryste , that we
myght haue affyaunce in other thynges . As in the daylye sacrifice of
the prieste , where as Chryste woulde haue vs to truste in his onelye
sacrifice . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.183

So he was <font> Agnus occisus ab origine mundi , <$$font> the lambe
that hath bene slayne frome the beginnynge of the worlde ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.184

and therefore he is called <font> Iuge sacrificium . <$$font> A
continuall sacrifice , and not for the continuaunce of the Masse as the
blaunchers haue blaunched it , and wrested it . And as I my selfe dyd
once mystake it . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.185

But Paule sayth , <font> Per semetipsum purgatio facta , <$$font>
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.186

by hym selfe and by none other , Chryste made purgation and satisfaction
for the whole worlde . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.187

Woulde Chryste this worde <paren> by him selfe <$$paren> hadde bene
better weyghed and looked upon , and <font> In sancrificationem <$$font>
, to make them holye , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.188

for he is , <font> Iuge sacrificium <$$font> , a continuall sacrifice ,
in effecte , fruite and operation , that lyke as they whiche seinge the
serpente hange vp in the deserte were put in remembrance of Christes
death , in whome as many as beleued were saued : so all men that trusted
in the death of Chryste shall be saued , as well they that were before ,
as they that came after . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.189

For he was a continuall Sacrifyce , as I sayed in effecte , fruite ,
operation and vertue . As thoughe he had frome the begynnyng of the
world and continually should to the worldes ende hange styll on the
crosse , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.190

and he is as freshe hangynge on the crosse now to them that beleue and
truste in hym , as he was fiftene_hundreth yeares a_go when he was
crucyfied , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,33P.191

then lette vs truste vpon hys <P_34P> onelye death , and looke for none
other sacrifice propiciatorye , then the same bloudye sacrifice , the
liuelye sacrifice , and not a drye sacrifice , but a bloudie sacrifice .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.192

For Chryste hym selfe said , <font> Consummatum est . <$$font>
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.193

It is perfectlie finished . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.194

I haue taken at my fathers hande the dispensation of redemynge mankynde
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.195

I haue wroughte mannes redemption , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.196

and haue dyspatched the matter . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.197

Whye then myngle ye hym ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.198

whye do ye deuide hym ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.199

why make you of hym mo sacrifices then one ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.200

Paule sayeth , <font> Pascha nostrum immolatus est Christus <$$font>
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.201

Christe our passeouer is offered vp , so that the thynge is done ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.202

and Christe hathe done it , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.203

and he hath done it , <font> semel <$$font> , Once for all .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.204

And it was a bloudy sacrifice not a drye sacrifice .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.205

Why then it is not the Masse that auaileth or profiteth for the quicke
and the dead ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.206

Wo worth the O Deuyll , wo worth the , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.207

thou hast preuayled so farre and so longe that thou haste made Englande
to worshyppe false Goddes forsakyng Christ their Lorde :
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.208

Wo worth the Deuyll . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.209

Wo worth the Deuyll and all thyne Angelles : LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.210

if Christ by his death draweth all thynges to him selfe , and draweth al
men to saluation and to heauenlye blisse that trust in him . Then the
priestes at the Masse <paren> at the popishe Masse I say <$$paren> what
can thei draw when Christe draweth all , but landes and goodes frome the
ryght heires ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.211

The priestes draw goodes and ryches , benifices and promotions to them
selues LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.212

and suche as beleued in their sacrifice they drawe to the Deuyll .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.213

But Christe it is that draweth soules unto hym by his bloudy sacrifice .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.214

What haue we to do then , but <font> Epulari in domino , <$$font> to eat
in the Lorde at his Supper . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.215

What other seruice haue we to do to hym ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.216

and what other sacrifice haue we to offer : but the mortification of our
flesh ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.217

What other oblation haue we to make , but of obedience , of good liuynge
, of good worckes , and of healpynge oure neighbours ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,34P.218

<P_35P>

But as for oure redemption , it is done alredie ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.220

it can not be better . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.221

Christe hath done that thynge so well , that it can not be amended .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.222

It can not be deuised howe to make that , any better then he hath done
it . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.223

But the Deuyl by the healpe of that Italian Bishop yonder , his
chaplayne : hath labored by al meanes , that he myghte , to frustrate
the death of Christe and the merites of his passion .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.224

And they haue deuised for that purpose to make vs beleue in other vayne
thynges by his pardons , as to haue remission of sinnes for praiynge on
hallowed beades , for drynkyng of the bakehouse bole , as a channon of
Waltam Abbey , once tolde me , that when soeuer they putte theyr loues
of breade into the ouen , as manie as drancke of the pardon boll should
haue pardon for drynckynge of it . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.225

A madde thynge to geue pardon to a bolle . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.226

Then to Pope Alexanders holie water to hallowed belles , palmes ,
candelles , asshes , and what not ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.227

And of these thynges euery one hath taken awaye some parte of Christes
sanctification . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.228

Euerie one hath robbed some parte of Christes passion and crosse ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.229

and hathe mingeld Christes death , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.230

and hath bene made to be propitiatorie and satisfactorie , and to put
awaye sinne . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.231

Yea and Alexanders holie water yet at thys day remayneth in Englande ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.232

and is vsed for a remedye againste spirites , and to chase awaye
deuylles , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.233

yea and I woulde thys had bene the worste . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.234

I woulde thys were the worste . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.235

But wo worth the , O Deuyll that haste preuayled to euacuate Christes
crosse and to mingle the lordes supper . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.236

These be the Italian bishoppes deuices , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.237

and the diuyll hath prycked at thys marke to frustrate the crosse of
Christe , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.238

he shotte at thys marke longe before Christe came ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.239

he shotte at thys prycke foure_thousande yeres before Christ hanged on
the crosse , or suffered his passion . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,35P.240

For the brasen serpente , was set vp in the wyldernes to put men in
remembrance of Christes commyng , that lyke as they whiche behelde the
brasen serpente were healed of their bodilie diseases : so they that
loked spiritually upon Christe that was to come in hym <P_36P> shoulde
be saued spiritually from the deuyll . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.241

The serpent was set vp in memorie of Christ to come ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.242

but the deuyll founde meanes to steale awaye the memorie of Christes
comming LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.243

and broughte the people to worshyp the serpente self , and to sence hym
, to honoure hym , and to offre to hym , to worshyppe hym , and to make
an Idoll of hym . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.244

And thys was done by the markette men that I tolde you of .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.245

And the clarke of the markette dyd it for the lucre and aduauntage of
his maister , that thereby his honour myghte encrease ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.246

for by Christes death , he could haue but small worldly aduantage .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.247

And euen nowe so hath he certayne blanchers longyng to the markette , to
lette and stoppe the lyght of the Gospel , and to hindre the kynges
procedynges in settying forth the word and glorie of God .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.248

And when the kynges maiestie with the aduise of his honorable counsaile
goeth aboute to promote Gods worde and to sette an ordre in matters of
religion there shall not lacke blanchers that wyll saye .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.249

As for Images wher as thay haue ben vsed to be senced , and to haue
candels offred vnto them : none be so folishe to do it to the stocke or
stone , or to the Image selfe , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.250

but it is done to God and his honour before the Image .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.251

And thoughe they shoulde abuse it , these blanchers wyll be ready to
whisper the Kynge in the eare , and to tell hym that thys abuse is but a
small matter . And that the same wyth all other lyke abuses in the
churche maye be reformed easelie . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.252

It is but a litle abuse <paren> saye they <$$paren>
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.253

and it maye be easely amended . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.254

But it shoulde not be taken in hande at the first for feare of trouble ,
or further inconueniences . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.255

The people wyll not beare sodayne alterations ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.256

an insurrection maye be made after sodyane mutation , which maye be to
the greate harme and losse of the realme . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.257

Therefore al thynges shal be wel , but not out of hand , for feare of
further busynes . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.258

These be the blanchers yat hitherto haue stopped the worde of god , and
hyndered ye true setting furth of ye same . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,36P.259

There be so manie put_offes , so many put_byes , so many respectes , and
considerations <P_37P> of worldly wisedome . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.260

And I dout not but there were blanchers in the olde time to whisper in
the eare of good kynge Ezechias for the mayntenaunce of Idolatrie done
to the brasen serpent , as@ @wel as there hath ben now of late , and be
now that can blanche the abuse of Images and other lyke thynges .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.261

But good kynge Ezechias woulde not be so blinded ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.262

he was like to Apollos , feruent in spirite .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.263

He woulde gyue no eare to the blanchers , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.264

he was not moued wyth these worldlie respectes , with these prudente
considerations , wyth these policies , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.265

he feared not insurrections of the people . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.266

He feared not leste his people woulde not beare the glorie of God :
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.267

but he <paren> without any of these respectes , or policies , or
considerations , lyke a good kynge for goddes sake , and for conscience
sake <$$paren> by and by plucked downe the brasen serpente ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.268

and destroyed it vtterly , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.269

and beate it to pouder . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.270

He out of hande , dyd caste downe all Images ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.271

he destroied al Idolatrie , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.272

and clearly dyd extirpate all superstition . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.273

He would not heare these blanchers and worldly wise men ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.274

but without delay , foloweth gods cause LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.275

and destroyeth al Idolatrie out of hande . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.276

Thus dyd good kyng Ezechias , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.277

for he was lyke Apollos {COM:preceding_word_"Apollos"_emended} , feruent
in spirite , and diligente to promote goddes glorie .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.278

And good hope there is that it shall be lykewyse here in Englande ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.279

for the Kynges maiestie is so brought vp in knowledge , vertue and
godlines , that it is not to be mistrusted , but that we shall haue all
thynges well , and that the glorie of God shall be spred abrode
thorowout all partes of the realme , if the prelates wil diligently
apply their plough and be preachers , rather then Lordes ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.280

but oure blanchers , whiche wyll be Lordes , and no labourers , when
they are commaunded to go and be residente vpon their cures , and
preache in their benefices , they would saye . What , I haue sette a
deputie there . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.281

I haue a deputie that loketh well to my flocke , and the whiche shall
discharge my dutie . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.282

A deputi quod he . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.283

I loked for that worde all thys whyle . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.284

And what a deputie must he be , trowe ye ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.285

Euen one lyke him selfe , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,37P.286

it muste <P_38P> be a cannoniste , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.287

that is to saye , one that is broughte vp in the studie of the Popes
lawes and decrees . One that wyl set furth papistrie as@ @wel as him
selfe wyll do , and one that wyl mayntayne al superstition Idolatrie .
And one that wyll nothynge at all , or els verie weakly resist
{COM:preceding_word_"resist"_emended} the deuyles plough ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.288

yea happie it is if he take not parte wyth the deuyll ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.289

and where he shoulde be an enemy to him , it is wel if he take not the
Deuilles parte agaynste Christe . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.290

But in the meane tyme the Prelates take theyr pleasures .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.291

They are Lordes and no labourers , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.292

but the Deuill is diligente at his ploughe . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.293

He is no vnpreachynge prelate . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.294

He is no Lordelie loyterer from his cure , but a busie ploughe man , so
that amonge all the prelates , and amonge al the packe of them that haue
cure the Deuil shall go for my money . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.295

For he styl applyeth his busynes . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.296

Therfore ye vnpreachynge prelates , learne of the deuill to be diligent
in doing of your office . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.297

Learne of the deuill . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.298

And if you wyl not learne of God nor good man : for shame learne of the
deuill . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.299

<font> Ad erubescentiam vestram dico . <$$font>
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.300

I speake it for your shame . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.301

If you wyll not learne of god nor good man to be diligent in your office
, learne of the deuill . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.302

Howe_be_it there is nowe verie good hoope that the Kynges maiestie
beinge by the healpe of good gouernaunce of his mooste honourable
counsaylours , he is trayned and broughte vp in learnynge and knowledge
of Goddes word wil shortly prouide a remedye and set an ordre here in ,
which thyng that it may so be , lette vs praye for hym .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.303

Praye for hym good people , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.304

praye for hym , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.305

ye haue great cause , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.306

and neede to praye for hym . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.307

FINIS . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,38P.308

<P_22L>

<font> Qvaecunque scripta sunt : ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt .
<$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,22L.310

What soeuer thynges are written a_fore tyme , are wrytten for our
learnynge , that we through pacience and comforte of scripturs , might
haue hope . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,22L.311

In takynge thys parte of scripture <paren> most nobill audience
<$$paren> I playe as a trowant , which when he is at schole , wyl chose
a lesson , wherin he is perfight , because he is loth to take payne in
studienge a newe leasson , or elles feareth strypes for his slothfulnes
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,22L.312

In lyke maner , I might seme now in my olde age to sum men , to take
this parte of scripture , because I woulde wade easilye awaye there wyth
, and dryue my matter at my pleasure and not to be bounde vnto a
certayne theame . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,22L.313

But ye shall consyder , yat the forsayd words of Paul are not to be
vnderstande of all scriptures , but only of those , which are of god ,
written in goddes boke , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,22L.314

and all thynges whiche are therein , are wrytten for our learnynge ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,22L.315

The excellencye {COM:preceding_word_"excellencye"_emended} of thys worde
is so greate , and of hye dignitie , that there is no earthly thynge to
be compared vnto it LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,22L.316

The author thereof is great LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,22L.317

that is God him selfe , eternal , almightie , euerlastynge .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,22L.318

The scripture because of hym , is also greate , eternal , most mightie ,
and holy . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,22L.319

Ther is no kyng , Emperour , maiestrate , and ruler , of what state so
euer they be , but are bounde to obey this God , and to geue credence
vnto hys holy worde in directynge their steppes ordinatlye accordyng
vnto the same word , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,22L.320

yea truly they are not only bound to obey <P_23L> gods boke , but also
the minister of the same , for the wordes sake , so far as he speaketh
syttynge in moses chayre . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.321

that is , if hys doctryne be taken out of Moyses lawe .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.322

For in thys world God hath .ii. swerdes LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.323

the one is a temporal swerde the other a spiritual ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.324

The temporall swerde resteth in the handes of kynges , maiestrates , and
rulers vnder hym , where vnto al subiectes , as wel the Cleargy as the
laite be subiect , and punisheable , for anye offence contrarye to the
same boke . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.325

The spirituall swerde is in the handes of the ministers and preachers ,
wher vnto all Kynges , Maiestrates , Rulers oughte
{COM:preceding_word_"oughte"_emended} to be obediente ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.326

that is , to here , and folowe , so longe as the ministers syt in
Christes chayre , that is speakynge out of Christes boke .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.327

The kynge correctyth transgressours wyth the temporall swerd
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.328

ye and the preacher also yf he be an offender ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.329

But the preacher can not correct the Kynge if he be a transgressor of
goddes word , wyth the temporal swerde LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.330

But he muste correcte and reproue him wyth the spyrytuall swerde ,
fearynge no man , settinge God only before hys eyes , vnder whom he his
a minister to supplante and roote vp all vice and myschyefe by Goddes
worde , where vnto all menne oughte to bee obedyente , as is mencyoned
in many places of scripture , LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.331

and amonges many thys is one . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.332

<font> Quaecunque iusserint vos seruare , seruate , et facite .
<$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.333

What so euer they byd you obserue , that obserue and doo
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.334

Therefore let ye preacher teach , improue , amende , and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} instructe in rightwesnes , wyth the
spyrytuall swearde , fearynge no man though death shoulde insue
LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.335

Thus Moyses fearynge no man wyth thys swerde , dyd reproue Kyng Pharao ,
at Goddes commandement . LATIMER-1549-E1-P1,23L.336

