<BEGIN_locke-1685-e3-p1>

<P_33>

1 . Mens Sana in Corpore Sano is a short but full description of a
happy state , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.3

he that has these two has litle more to wish for , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.4

and he that wants either of them is but litle the better for anything
else . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.5

Men's happynesse or misery is most part of their own makeing .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.6

He whose minde directs not wisely will never take the right way ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.7

and he whose body is crazy and feeble will never be able to march in it
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.8

I confesse there are some men's constitutions of body and minde soe
vigorous and well framed by nature that they need not much assistance
from others , but by the strength of their natural genius are from their
cradles carried towards what is exellent and by the vigor of their
constitutions are able to doe wonders , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.9

but these examples are but few , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.10

and I thinke I may say that of all the men we meet with , nine parts of
ten are what they are , good or evill , usefull or not , by their
Education . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.11

T@ @is that which makes the great difference in mankinde .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.12

The litle and almost insensible impressions on our tender infancys have
very important and lasting consequences , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.13

and there 't@ @is as in the fountains of some rivers where a gentle
application of the hand turns the flexible waters into chanels that make
them take quite contrary courses LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.14

and by this litle impression given them in the soarse they come to
arrive at places distant and opposite . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.15

2 . I imagin the mindes of children as easily turned this or that way
as water itself , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.16

and though this be the principal part , and our main care should be
about the inside , yet the clay cottage is not to be neglected .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.17

I shall therefore begin with the case , and consider first the health of
the body as that which perhaps you may rather expect from that study
which I have been thought more peculiarly to have applyd myself to , and
that also which will be soonest dispached as lying as I thinke in a very
litle compass . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,33.18

<P_34>

3 . How necessary health is to our businesse and happynesse and how
necessary a strong constitution able to indure hardships and fatigue is
to one that will make any figure , be any thing considerable in the
world , is too obvious to need any proof . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,34.20

4 . Your sonne seemes to me to be of as strong principles of nature as
any childe I have seen , soe that one and the hardest part concerning
the body is spared . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,34.21

We need not trouble ourselves how to invigorate a weake and mend a
faulty constitution . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,34.22

We have nothing to doe but to preserve a good one and help it to
continue suitable to soe promising a begining , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,34.23

and that perhaps might be dispached all in a word by biding you to use
him as you see one of your ordinary tenants does his children .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,34.24

5 . But because that perhaps may seeme to you a litle too short and to
your Lady a litle too hard who will be ready to say that t@ @is a signe
he has noe children of his owne who would have others use their
{COM:sic} soe ill , I shall explaine my self a litle more particularly
only laying downe this as a generall and certain observation for the
women to consider viz. That most childrens constitutions are either
harmed or spoiled by cokering and tendernesse . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,34.25

I say not this to accuse Madame for I thinke her not guilty but to
fortifie her against the silly opinions of others .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,34.26

6 . The first thing then to be had a care of is that he be not too
warmely clad or coverd winter or sommer . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,34.27

The face when we are borne is {COM:preceding_word_"is"_emended} noe
lesse tender then any other part of the body . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,34.28

T@ @is use alone hardens it and makes it more able to endure the cold ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,34.29

and therefore the Scythian philosopher gave a very significant answer to
the Athenian who wonderd how he could goe naked in the cold of <P_35>
winter . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.30

How , said the Scythian , can you endure your face naked in the cold of
winter ? LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.31

My face is used to it , said the Athenian . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.32

Thinke me all face , said the Scythian . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.33

Our bodys will endure any thing that from the begining they are used to
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.34

T@ @is time now to leave off his cap and never to put it on again night
nor day , unlesse about 20 yeares hence it be thought fit to put on a
thinne holland one for fashons sake to please the young lady when he
goes a wooing . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.35

7 . I would also have his feet washd every night in cold water and have
his shoes soe thin that they might leake and let in water when ever he
comes neare it . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.36

Here I feare I shall have the Mistress and maids too about my ears .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.37

One will thinke it too filthy and the other perhaps too much pains to
make cleane his stokings . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.38

But yet truth will have it that his health is much more worth than all
this adoe and ten times as much more . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.39

And he that considers how mischeivous and mortal a thing takeing wet in
the feet is to those who have been bred nicely will wish he had with the
poore peoples children gon barefoot who by that meanes come to be soe
reconciled by custome to wet in their feet that they take noe more cold
and harme that way then if their hands were put in water .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.40

And what is it I pray that makes this great difference between the hands
and the feet but only custome , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.41

and I doubt not but if a man from his cradle had been always used to goe
barefoot but to have his hands close wrapd up constantly in thick
mittins and handschoons as the Dutch call gloves over them , I doubt not
I say but custome would make takeing wet in his hands as dangerous to
him as now takeing wet in their feet is to a great many others .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.42

To prevent this I would have his shoes made soe as to leake water , and
his feet washd every night in cold water both for health and
cleanlynesse sake , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,35.43

but begin with <P_36> luke_warme LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.44

and soe colder and colder every night till in a few days you come to
perfectly cold water LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.45

and soe continue . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.46

For it is to be observd in this as in all other alterations from our
ordinary way of liveing the changes must be made by gentle and
insensible degrees LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.47

and soe we may bring our bodys to any thing without pain and without
danger . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.48

And if you have any convenient place neare you since you can swim soe
well your self have him often in to the water with you whereby he will
have other advantages besides learning to swimm .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.49

8 . Another thing that is of great advantage to everyones health but
espetially children is to be much in the ayre and very litle as may be
by the fire even in winter . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.50

By this he will accustome himself alsoe to heat and cold , shine and
raine , all which if a mans body will not endure it will serve him to
very litle purpose in this world LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.51

and when he is grown up it is too late to begin to use him to it ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.52

it must be got early and by degrees , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.53

thus the body may be brought to bare almost any thing .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.54

If I should advise him to play in the winde and the sun without a hat I
doubt whether it could be borne , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.55

there would a_thousand objections be made against it , which at last
would amount to noe more in truth then being sunburnt ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.56

and if my young master be to be kept always in the shade and never
sunburnt , Lord have mercy upon him , I feare he will never be like his
father . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.57

I am not now giveing rules about my pritty litle mistress ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.58

I leave her at present to her mothers way LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.59

and confesse that her face is not soe easily to be exposd to all winde
and weather . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.60

I now claime only a priviledg over the boyes LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.61

and those I thinke Madam will allow may endure a litle rougher usage ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,36.62

and in recompense of that liberty <P_37> which I hope she will permit me
I shall tell her that it will be the better for the girles too the
nearer they approach the hardship of their brothers in their breeding .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.63

But I claime the boys alone as my province LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.64

and leave the girles wholy in the disposition and management of their
mother . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.65

9 . One thing I had almost forgot which the mention of the girls
brought into my minde , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.66

and that is that your sonnes clothes be never made too strait espetially
about the breast . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.67

Let nature have scope to fashon the bodys as she thinkes best .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.68

She workes of her self a great deale better then we can direct her
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.69

and if women were themselves to frame the bodys of their children in
their wombs as they often endeavour to mend their shapes when they are
out we should as certainly have noe perfect children borne as we have
few well shaped that are much tamperd with . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.70

This consideration should me thinks keepe busy people <paren> I will not
say ignorant nurses and bodice makers <$$paren> from medling in a matter
they understand not , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.71

and they should be afraid to put nature out of her way in fashoning the
parts when they know not how the least and meanest is made ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.72

and yet I have seen soe many instances of children receiving great harme
from strait laceing that I can@ @not but conclude there are other
creatures litle wiser than Munkeys who destroy their young ones by
senseless fondnesse and too much imbraceing . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.73

10 . Narrow breasts , short and stinkeing breath , ill lungs and
crookednesse are the natural and almost constant effects of hard bodices
and clothes that pinch . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.74

That way of makeing slender wasts and fine shapes serves but the more
effectually to spoile them . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,37.75

Nor can there indeed but be disproportion in the parts when the <P_38>
nourishment prepard in the severall offices of the body can@ @not be
distributed as nature designes , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.76

and therefore what wonder is it if it being laid where it can on some
part not soe braced it often makes one shoulder or one hip higher or
bigger than the other . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.77

T@ @is generally known that the women of China <paren> imagining I know
not what kinde of beauty in it <$$paren> by braceing and bindeing them
hard from their infancy have very litle feet . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.78

I saw a pair of China shoes lately of about 3 or 4 inches long and of a
proportionable breadth LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.79

and of this size are generally the feet of their women .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.80

Besides t@ @is observd that their women are also very litle and
short_lived whereas the men are of the ordinary stature of other men and
live to a proportionable age . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.81

These defects in the female sex those that write of that Country impute
to their unresonable bindeing of their feet , whereby the free
circulation of the blood is hindred and the growth and health of the
whole body suffers , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.82

and how often doe we see that some small part of the foot being injurd
by a wrench or a blow the whole leg and thigh thereby loose their
strength and nourishment and dwindle away . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.83

How much greater inconveniencys may we expect when the thorax wherein is
placed the heart and seat of life is unaturally compressed and hindred
from its due Expansion . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.84

11 . As for his diet let it be very plain and simple .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.85

Flesh once a day and of one sort at a meale is enough .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.86

Beef mutton veale &c. without other sawce then hunger is the best ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.87

and pray desire Madame to teach her children if not by her example yet
some other way to eat bread plentifully both alone and with every thing
else . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.88

And what ever he eats that is solid make him chew it abundantly .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,38.89

We English often are negligent herein from whence follow great <P_39>
inconveniencys which if you desire I shall more at large explain to you
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.90

12 . I need not tell your Lady what is fit for children for breakfast
or supper , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.91

milk milkpotage watergruel flummery and twenty other things that we are
wont to make in England are very fit for children ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.92

only in all these let care be taken that they be plaine and without much
mixture and very sparingly seasond with sugar or rather none at all .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.93

Espetially avoid all spice and other things that may heat their bloud .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.94

Be spareing also of salt in the seasoning of all his victuals
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.95

and use him not to salt meats . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.96

Our palats like the seasoning and cookery they are used to ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.97

and an overmuch use of salt besides that it occasions thirst and
overmuch drinkeing has other ill effects upon the body
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.98

and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} hastens old age .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.99

I should thinke that a good peice of well made and well baked brown
bread sometimes with and sometimes without butter or cheese would be
often the best breakfast for young master . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.100

I am sure t@ @is as wholesome and will make him as strong a man as
greater delicacys , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.101

and if he be used to it , it will be as pleasant to him .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.102

13 . If he at any time cals for victuals between meals use him to
noething but drye bread . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.103

If he be hungry more then wanton bread alone will down ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.104

and if he be not hungry t@ @is not fit he should eat .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.105

By this you will obteine two good effects , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.106

first that by custome he will come to be in love with bread ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.107

for as I said our pallats are set to the things we are used to .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.108

Another good you will gain hereby is that you will not teach him to eat
more nor oftner then nature requires . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.109

I doe not thinke that all peoples appetites are alike ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.110

some have naturally stronger and some weaker stomachs ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,39.111

but this I thinke that many are made gurmands and gluttons , by custome
that were <P_40> not soe by nature , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.112

and I see in some countrys men as lusty and strong that eat but two
meales a day as others that have set their stomachs by a constant usage
like larmes to crave 4. or 5 , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.113

and therefore I thinke it most convenient if you thinke it not too
severe that he should have noething but bread too for breakefast .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.114

You can@ @not imagin of what force custome is LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.115

and I impute a great part of our diseases in England to our eating too
much flesh and too litle bread . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.116

14 . His drinke as I have said , should be only smal beer
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.117

and that he should never be sufferd to have between meals , but after he
had eat a peice of bread . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.118

The reasons why I say this are these , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.119

1=o= more feavers and surfets are got by peoples drinking when they are
hot then by any one thing I know , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.120

and therefore if by play he be hot and drye , drye bread will ill goe
doun , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.121

and soe if he can@ @not have drinke but upon that condition he will be
forced to forbeare , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.122

for if he be very hot he should by noe meanes drinke .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.123

At least a good peice of bread first to
{COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} be eaten will gain time to warme the
beer bloud_hot , which then he may drinke safely .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.124

If he be very drye it will goe doune soe and quench his thirst better ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.125

and if he will not drinke it soe abstaining will not hurt him .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.126

Besides this will teach him to forbeare . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.127

15 . 2=o= . Not being permitted to drinke without eating will prevent
the custome of haveing the cup often at his nose and laying betimes the
foundation of being a good fellow . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.128

Men often bring habitual hunger and thirst on themselves by custome ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.129

and if you please to trye I will venture a wager you may bring him by
use to such a necessity of drinking in the night that he will not be
able to sleepe without it , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,40.130

and it being the lullaby used by nurses to allay <P_41> crying I beleive
you found some difficulty to weane him from drinking in the night .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.131

Beleive it , custome prevails as much by day as by night ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.132

and you may if you please bring him to be thirsty every hower .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.133

Since I saw you I was in a house where to appease a froward child they
gave him drinke as often as he would , soe that he was constantly bibing
, LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.134

and though he could not speake yet he drank more in 24 howers then I did
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.135

Trye it when you please LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.136

you may with small as well as strong beer drinke your self into a
drought . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.137

But in this as well as other things doe not begin to make any thing
customary if you would not have it {COM:preceding_word_"it"_emended}
increase and be lasting LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.138

and therefore I would have him drinke between meales noe more then
nature requires . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.139

If he eat not salt meats nor drink not strong drinke he will not thirst
often . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.140

16 . His meales I would not have kept constantly to an hower ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.141

for when custome has fixed his eating to certain howers his stomach will
expect victuals at that time LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.142

and he will be sick if he passes it . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.143

In short I would have him eat flesh once a day , plain flesh but of one
sort at a time , and whilst young spoon meat also once a day , and if
you please once a day cheese or butter , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.144

but I would have noe time fixt constantly to , but varied almost every
day , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.145

and if betwixt these which I call meales he will eat let him have as
often as he cals for it good drie bread , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.146

and let him never drinke betwixt meales untill he has first eaten a
peice of bread . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.147

If anyone thinke this too hard and sparing a diet for a child let them
know that a child will never starve nor want nourishment who besides
flesh once a day and other things once or twice more may have good bread
and beer as often as he has a stomach , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.148

nor let any one thinke this unsuitable to his condition .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,41.149

A gent in any age ought to be soe bread as to <P_42> be fited to beare
armes and be a soldier , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.150

but he that in this breeds his son soe as if he designed him to sleepe
over his life in the plenty and ease of a full fortune he intends to
leave him litle considers the examples he has seen nor the age he lives
in . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.151

17 . Above all take great care that he seldome if ever tast any wine or
strong drinke . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.152

There is nothing soe ordinarily given children in England and noething
soe destructive to them . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.153

They ought never to drinke any strong liquor but when they need it as a
cordiall and the Doctor prescribes it . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.154

And in this case it is that servants are most narrowly to be watchd and
most severely to be reprehended when they transgresse .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.155

These meane sort of people placeing a great part of their happynesse in
strong drinke are always forward to make court to my young master by
offering him that which they love best themselves ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.156

and finding themselves made merry by it they foolishly thinke 't@ @will
doe the childe noe harme . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.157

This you are carefully to have your Eye upon and restrain it with all
the skill and industry you can , there being nothing that lays a surer
foundation of mischeife both of body and minde then childrens being used
to strong drinke , espetially used to drinke in private with the
servants . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.158

18 . Fruit makes one of the most difficult chapters in the government
of health , espetially that of children . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.159

Our first parents venturd paradice for it LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.160

and t@ @is noe wonder our children can@ @not stand the temptation though
it cost them their health . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.161

The regulation of this can@ @not come under any one generall rule
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.162

for I am by noe meanes of theire minde who would keep children almost
wholy from fruit as a thing totally unwholesome for them , by which
strict way they make them but the more ravenous after it , and to eat
good and bad , ripe or unripe , all that they can get when ever they
come at it . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,42.163

Mellons , peaches , most sorts of plumbs and all sorts of grapes in
<P_43> England I thinke children should be wholy kept from as haveing a
very tempting tast in very unwholesome juice , soe that if it were
possible they should never soe much as see them or know there were any
such thing . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.164

But strawberrys , cherys , goosberrys , currants Apples and peares when
throughly ripe I thinke may be very safely allowed them
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.165

and that with a pretty liberal hand if they be eaten with these cautions
, LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.166

1=o= Not after meales as we usually doe when the stomach is alredy full
of other food , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.167

but I thinke they should be eaten rather before or between meales
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.168

and thinke children should have them for their breake_fasts , 2=o= bread
eaten with them , 3=o= perfectly ripe . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.169

If they are thus eaten I imagin them rather conduceing then hurtfull to
our health , being suited to the hot season of the yeare when they come
and refreshing our stomach languishing and fainting under it ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.170

and therefore I should not be altogeather soe strict in this point as
some are to their children , who being kept soe very short instead of a
moderate quantity of well chosen fruit which being allowd them would
content them , whenever they can get loose or bribe a servant to supply
them satisfie their longing with any trash they can get and eat to a
surfet . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.171

Fruit also dried without sugar I thinke very wholesome ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.172

but sweete meats of all kinds wholy to be avoided , which whether they
doe more harme to the maker or eater I can@ @not well tell .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.173

This I am sure of , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.174

it is one of the most inconvenient ways of expence that vanity has yet
found out , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.175

and soe I leave them to the Ladys . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.176

19 . Of all that lookes soft and effeminate noething is more to be
indulged children then sleepe . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.177

In this alone they are to be permitted to have their full satisfaction ,
nothing contributeing more to the growth and health of children then
sleepe . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,43.178

All that is to be regulated in it is in what part of the 24. howers
they should take it , which will easily be answerd by only saying that
it is of great use to <P_44> accustome them to rise early in the morning
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,44.179

It is best soe to doe for health , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,44.180

and he that from his childhood has by a setled custome made riseing
betimes easy and familiar to him will not when he is a man wast the best
and most usefull part of his life in drousynesse and lying a bed .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,44.181

If children therefore are to be cald up early in the morning it will
follow of course that they must goe to bed betimes , whereby
{COM:preceding_word_"whereby"_emended} they will be accustomed to avoid
the unhealthy and unsafe howers of debauchery which are those of the
Evenings , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,44.182

and they who keepe good howers seldome are guilty of any great disorders
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,44.183

I doe not say this as if your sonne when growne up should never be in
company past eight or never chat over a glasse of wine till midnight .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,44.184

You are now by the custome of his tender yeares to indispose him to
these inconveniencys as much as you can LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,44.185

and that will be noe small advantage to him , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,44.186

that contrary practise haveing made it uneasy to him it will make him
often avoid and very seldome propose mid night revells .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,44.187

But if it should not reach soe far but fashon and company should prevail
and make him live as others doe about twenty , t@ @is worth your while
to accustome him to early riseing and early goeing to bed between this
and that for the present improvement of his health and other advantages
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,44.188

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_here}

<P_59>

48 . As I would have children very seldome corrected by blows , soe I
thinke frequent and espetially passionate chideing of as ill consequence
, LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,59.191

for it lessens the authority of the parents and the respect of the
childe , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,59.192

for I bid you still remember they destinguish early between passion and
reason , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,59.193

and as they can@ @not but have a reverence for what comes from the later
{COM:sic} soe they come quickly to slight the former ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,59.194

or if it causes a present terror yet it quickly weares off
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,59.195

and natural inclination will quickly learne to slight such scarecrows
which make a noise but are not animated by reason .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,59.196

Children being to be restraind by their parents only in vicious <paren>
which in their tender yeares are only a few <$$paren> things a looke or
a nod only ought to correct them when they doe amisse ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,59.197

or if words are sometimes to be used they ought only to be grave , kinde
and sober , representing the ill or unbecomingnesse of the fault rather
then a hasty rateing of the child for it , which makes him not
sufficiently destinguish whether your dislike be not more directed to
him then his fault . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,59.198

<P_60>

49 . How then <paren> will you say <$$paren> shall children be governd
? LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.200

Take away hope and feare and there is an end of all discipline .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.201

I grant that good and evill , reward and punishment , are the only
motives to a rational creature . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.202

These are the Spur and rains whereby all mankinde are set on worke and
guided , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.203

and therefore they are to be made use of to children too ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.204

for I would always have their parents and governours cary this in their
mindes that they are to be treated as rational creatures .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.205

Rewards then and punishments must be proposd to children if we intend to
worke upon them . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.206

The mistake I thinke is that those that are generally made use of are
ill chosen . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.207

The pains and pleasures of the body are , I thinke , of ill consequence
when made the rewards and punishments whereby men would prevaile on
their children , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.208

for they serve but to increase and strengthen those appetites which t@
@is our businesse to subdue and master . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.209

What principle of vertue doe you lay in a childe , if you will redeeme
his desire of one pleasure by the proposal of another ?
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.210

This is but to enlarge his appetite and instruct it to wander .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.211

If a childe cryes for an unwholesome and dangerous fruit , you purchase
his quiet by giveing him lesse hurtfull sweet_meat .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.212

This perhaps may preserve his health LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.213

but spoiles his minde LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.214

and sets that farther out of order , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.215

for here you only change the object LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.216

but flatter still his appetite , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.217

and allow that must be satisfied wherein as I have shewd lies the root
of the mischiefe , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.218

and till you bring him to be able to beare a denial of that satisfaction
the child may at present be {COM:preceding_word_"be"_emended} quiet and
orderly , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.219

but the disease , the mischeif is not cured . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.220

By this way of proceeding you foment and cherish in him that which is
the spring from which all the evill flows , which will be sure on the
next occasion to breake out again with more violence , give him stronger
longings and you more trouble . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,60.221

<P_61>

50 . The rewards and punishments then whereby we would keepe children
in order are quite of another kinde , and of that force that when we can
get them once to worke the businesse I thinke is donne , the difficulty
is over . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,61.223

Esteeme and Disgrace are of all others the most powerfull incentives to
virtuous and generous mindes . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,61.224

If you can once get into children a love of credit and an apprehension
of shame and disgrace , you have put in them the true principle which
will constantly worke and incline them to the right .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,61.225

But how shall this be donne , will it be said . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,61.226

51 . I confesse it does not at first appeareance want some difficulty ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,61.227

but yet I thinke it worth our while to seeke the ways <paren> and
practise them when found <$$paren> to atteine this which I looke on as
the great secret of Education . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,61.228

52 . First children at the age of your son are not insensible of praise
and commendation . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,61.229

They finde a pleasure in being esteemd and valued , espetially by their
parents , whom they depend on . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,61.230

If therefore you caresse and commend them when they doe well , show a
cold and neglectfull countenance to them upon doeing ill , and this
accompanied by a like cariage of his mother and all others that are
about him , it will in a litle time I doubt not make him sensible of the
difference , espetially if you be constant in it ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,61.231

and I doubt not but will of itself worke more then threats or blows
which loose their force when once grown common , and are of no use when
shame does not attend them , and therefore are to be forborne but in the
cases before mentioned when it is brought to extremity .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,61.232

53 . But secondly to make the impression sinke the deeper , to make
them more sensible of Esteeme or disgrace , I would have other agreeable
or disagreeable things constantly accompany these different states , not
as particular rewards and punishments of this or that particular fact ,
but as necessarily belonging to and constantly <P_62> attending one who
by his cariage has brought himself into a state of disgrace or
reputation . By which they may as much as is {TEXT:missing_"is"}
possible be brought to conceive that those that are commended and in
esteeme for doeing well will necessarily be beloved and cherishd by
every body and have all other good things , and on the other side when
any one by miscariage falls into disesteeme and cares not what he is
thought of , neglect and with it the want of all good things will follow
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,62.233

If by these meanes you can come once to shame them out of their faults
<paren> for besides that I would willingly have noe punishment <$$paren>
and make them in love with the pleasure of being well thought on , you
may turne them as you please LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,62.234

and they will be in love with all the ways of vertue .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,62.235

54 . The great difficulty here is , I imagin , from the folly and
perversnesse of servants , who are hardly to be hinderd from crosseing
herein their Master and Mistris . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,62.236

Children discountenanced by their parents for any faults , finde usually
a remedy and retreat in the caresses of these foolish flatterers , who
thereby undoe whatever the parents endeavour to establish .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,62.237

When the father or Mother lookes sower on the childe , every body else
should put on the same cariage to them , and noe body give them
countenance till forgivenesse be {TEXT:missing_"be"} asked and a
contrary cariage restord them to their esteeme and their former credit
again . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,62.238

If this were constantly observed I guesse there would be litle need of
blows or chideing . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,62.239

Their own ease and satisfaction would quikly teach children to court
commendation and avoid doeing that which they found every body condemned
and they were sure to suffer for , without being chid or beaten .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,62.240

This would teach them modesty and shame , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,62.241

and they would quickly come to have a natural abhorrence for that which
made them slighted and neglected by every body .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,62.242

But how this inconvenience from servants is to be remedied I can only
leave to your care and consideration , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,62.243

<P_63>

only I thinke it of great importance , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.245

and you would be very happy if you could get a discreet body about your
children . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.246

55 . Haveing thus told you what rewards and punishments I would have
made use of to children , the next thing to consider is
{COM:preceding_word_"is"_emended} what those things are that should be
punishd in them , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.247

and those are very few , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.248

but every good action I would have rewarded , i.e. commended .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.249

I have seen parents soe multiply rules to their children that it was
impossible for the pore litle ones to remember a tenth part of them ,
much lesse to observe them ; LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.250

however they were either by words or blows corrected for the
transgression of them . Whence it naturally followed that the children
minded not what was said to them when it was evident to them that noe
attention they were capeable of was sufficient to preserve them from
transgression and the rebukes which followd it .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.251

56 . Let therefore your rules to your son be as few as is possible ,
and rather fewer then more then are absolutely necessary .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.252

For if you burden him with many rules , one of these two things must
necessarily follow , that he must be very often punishd , which will be
of ill consequence . For all punishment is as much as may be to be
avoided , or else you must let the transgressions of some of your rules
goe unpunishd , whereby they will of course grow contemptible and your
authority become cheape to him . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.253

Make but few laws LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.254

but see they be well observed when once made . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.255

Few yeares require but few laws , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.256

and as they increase when one rule is by the practise well establishd
you may add another . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,63.257

<P_64>

57 . Frequent punishment is therefore carefully to be avoided because
it never produces any good any farther then it serves to revive shame
and abhorrence of the miscarriage which drew it on them ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,64.259

and if the greatest part of the trouble be not the apprehension that
they have drawn on themselves the just displeasure of their best freinds
the pain of punishment will worke but an imperfect cure .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,64.260

It only patches up the present LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,64.261

and skins it over , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,64.262

but reaches not to the bottom . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,64.263

Shame then and apprehension of displeasure being that which ought alone
to give a check and hold the rains , t@ @is impossible but punishment
should loose that efficacy when it often returnes .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,64.264

Shame has in children the same place as modesty in women , which can@
@not be kept and often transgresd against . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,64.265

And as to the apprehension of displeasure in the parents , that will
come to be very insignificant if the marks of that displeasure quikly
cease , LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,64.266

and therefore I thinke parents should well consider what faults in their
children are weighty enough to deserve the declaration of their anger ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,64.267

but when their displeasure is once declard to a degree that carrys any
punishment with it , they ought not presently to lay by the severity of
their brows , but to restore their children to their former grace with
some kinde of difficulty and delay till their conformity and more then
ordinary merit make good their amendment . LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,64.268

If this be not soe orderd punishment will be by familiarity but a thing
of course : offending , being punishd , and then forgiven , be as
natural and ordinary as noon , night , and morning following one another
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P1,64.269

