<BEGIN_marches-1537-e1-p1>

<P_107>

<heading:edcomment:58_FIRST_DUKE_OF_SUFFOLK_AND_OTHER_COUNCILLORS_TO_THE_FIRST_EARL_OF_CUMBERLAND,_31_JANUARY_1537>

A lettre from my lord of Suffolke , my lord privy seale , my lord of
Sussex , my lord admirall , the bishopps of Hereford and Chichester and
Sir William Kingstone unto the earle of Cumberland .
MARCHES-1537-E1-P1,107.4

After our right harty commendacions to your good lordshipp , whereas the
kings majestie considering the great discord that hath of late chaunced
amongst his subjetes of those partes , purposing like a wise and prudent
prince with th@ @appeasing of inward trouble to establish such an order
for the sure keeping and defence of his marches as may preserve his
subjects from all annoyance and danger of outward and forreigne enemyes
, hath concluded upon a direccion for his East and Middle Marches . And
to putt the same in execucion hath already sent hither Sir Anthony
Browne knt , one of the gentlemen of the privy chamber , of whose
arrivall and proceeding in that behalfe wee doubt not but you shall have
perfitt knowledge before these our lettres shall come to your handes .
MARCHES-1537-E1-P1,107.5

Albeit his highnes and wee of his counsell doe well see and perceive
that a like order to be taken for the West Marches should be both for
his graces honour and safety . And doe remember therewith both how loth
ye weare to take the office of warden thereof upon you , and how
desyrous you have showed your selfe as@ @well to me specially the lord
privy seale as to others sythence you had the rome thereof to be
discharged againe of the same , so it might have ensewed with his
majesties favour , whome you have ever showed your selfe ready in all
thinges to serve without respect in such place as he hath appointed unto
you . MARCHES-1537-E1-P1,107.6

Yet his highnes , considering the faithfull and honorable service you
have lately done unto him in the preservacion of your selfe out of the
handes of his rebelles , hath determined to stay his proceedinges for
the West Marches unles you shall be well contented to leave your offices
in the same . Wherein as we doubt not but you will use that conformity
that may be to his graces satisfaccion , honour and suerty therein ,
which also we desyre and advise you to doe ; so his majestie hath
commaunded us to signify unto yow that in a part of recompence for your
loyall {COM:fo.15r} service lately done unto him , his grace hath
resolved to advance yow to the honour of the Gartier , and besides
further in such wise to consider the same as you shall have cause to
thincke it well employed . Wherefore his highnes desireth you not onely
to signify your conformity herein unto his grace or to us of his
counsell with diligence , but also in the meane season to have such
regard to the defence of Carlile and th@ @other partes of those marches
as they may be out of all danger of <P_108> enemyes or rebells that
would impugne the same . MARCHES-1537-E1-P1,108.7

And thus fare yee most hartely well . MARCHES-1537-E1-P1,108.8

From Greenwich MARCHES-1537-E1-P1,108.9

the last of January . MARCHES-1537-E1-P1,108.10

