<BEGIN_markham-1615-e2-p1>

<P_1,87>

<heading>

OF HAWKING , &C. MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,87.4

CHAP. VII {SIC:VIII} . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,87.5

OF HAWKING WITH ALL SORTS OF HAWKES , AND OF COURSING WITH GREY-HOUNDS .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,87.6

<$$heading>

If our English Husband-man shall for his recreation chuse the pleasure
of hawking which is a most Princely and serious delight ; he shall
vnderstand that all <font> Hawks <$$font> are diuided into two kindes :
the long_winged <font> Hawke <$$font> , and the short ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,87.8

the long_winged <font> Hawkes <$$font> which are meete for our
Husbandmans recreation , are the <font> Faulcon-gentle <$$font> , the
<font> Ger-faulcon <$$font> , the <font> Saire <$$font> , the <font>
Lanver <$$font> , the <font> Barbary-faulcon <$$font> , the <font>
Merlin <$$font> , and the <font> Hobbie <$$font> :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,87.9

and the short-winged <font> Hawkes <$$font> are the <font> Goshawke
<$$font> , the <font> Terrell <$$font> of the <font> Goshawke <$$font> ,
the <font> Sparrow-hawke <$$font> and the <font> Musket <$$font> .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,87.10

The <font> Faulcon gentle <$$font> which is the principle of <font>
Hawkes <$$font> , may be made either for the field or riuer ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,87.11

& wil fly either at the Partridge , or at the <font> Mallard <$$font> ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,87.12

the <font> Gerfaulcon <$$font> wil flie at the Herron , the <font> Saire
<$$font> at the Crane or Bitter , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,87.13

the <font> Lanner <$$font> wil fly at the Partridge , Pheasant , or
Choffe , the <font> Barbary-faulcon <$$font> at the Partridge only , the
<font> Merlin <$$font> and the <font> Hobbie <$$font> at the Partridge ,
Larke or any small bird whatsoeuer : the <font> Goshawke <$$font> , or
<font> Terrell <$$font> of <font> Goshawke <$$font> at the Partridge ,
<P_1,88> Pheasant , or Hare , the <font> Sparrow-hawke <$$font> at the
Partridge or Black-bird , and the <font> Musket <$$font> at the bush
onely , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.14

and all these Hawkes are hardie , meeke , courteous , and louing to the
man . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.15

Touching the ordering of <font> Hawkes <$$font> , the first thing the
Faulconer must doe to his Hawke after shee is taken from the Caidge , is
to bathe her in warme water and pepper , beeing no more but luke-warme ,
thereby to cleanse her from nits , lice , and such like vermine ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.16

then he must for her generall feeding rather keepe her hie in flesh then
poore , because thereby he avoideth disease , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.17

then after euery flight whether it be at prey , at traine , or at the
lure , he shall giue his Hawke casting , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.18

if she bee a long-winged Hawke hee shall giue her flannell , if
{COM:she_be} a short_winged Hawke {COM:he_shall_give_her} plummage :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.19

hee shall keepe the ground very cleane vnder his Hawkes pearch , that
thereby hee may with ease finde out the casting :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.20

Then he shall bee sure to weather his Hawke abroad euery evening except
on her bathing daies , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.21

hee shall at no time feede her vpon two seuerall meates at once , but
vpon one meate , as on Pidgeon , Rooke , Mutton , or Beefe , the fat
euer being cast away : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.22

when he maketh a flight at the field he shall observe the springing of
the Partridge , be readie to cast off his Hawke , haue a quicke eye for
the marke , and a readie iudgement to prevent the stealing away of the
prey , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.23

when he maketh a prey at the River , he is to know that he must cast off
his Hawke before he come neere to the Fowle , hee must not shewe the
Fowle before the Hawke be at her full pitch , he must crosse the Fowle
after she hath beene twice or thrice enewde ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.24

and when the Hawke sleyeth the Fowle , he shall rewarde her with the
head , neck , heart , blood , gysserde and a legge .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,88.25

All Hawkes generally are manned after one manner , that is to say , by
watching and keeping them from sleep , <P_1,89_misnumbered_as_98> by a
continuall carrying of them vpon your fist , and by a most familiar
stroaking and playing with them , with the wing of a dead Fowle or such
like , and by often gazing and looking of them in the face with a louing
and gentle countenance , and so making them acquainted with the man .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,89_misnumbered_as_98.26

After your Hawks are manned you shall bring them to the lure by easie
degrees , as first making them iumpe to the fist , after fall vpon the
lure , then come to the voice : and lastly , to know the voice and lure
so perfectly , that either upon the sound of the one , or sight of the
other , she will presently come in and be most obedient , which may
easily be performed , by giuing her rewarde when she doth your pleasure
, and making her fast when she disobeieth :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,89_misnumbered_as_98.27

short_wing'd Hawks shall be called to the fist only , and not to the
lure ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,89_misnumbered_as_98.28

neither shall you vse vnto them the loudnesse and varietie of voice
which you doe to the long-winged Hawkes , but only bring them to the
fist by chirping your lips together , or else by the whistle ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,89_misnumbered_as_98.29

and in this manner of luring and calling of Hawkes <paren> for
short-winged Hawkes are sayd to be called and not lured <$$paren> you
shall specially acquaint your Hawke with three things ; first bouldnesse
and acquaintance with men , dogges , and horses ; then that shee bee
eager and sharpe_set before the lure be shewed her , knowing both the
morning and euening howres of her luring ; and lastly to delight her the
more with the lure , to haue it ever garnished on both sides with warme
and bloody meate . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,89_misnumbered_as_98.30

When your Hawkes are throughly manned and lured , and are come to height
of flesh and good lust , you shall then spie out a faire daie when the
weather and aire is most temperate , and carrie your Hawke to some faire
little , shallow sandie , running Brooke , or rundle where the water is
quiet and still , and where your Hawke may <P_1,90> stand vp to the mid
thigh therein , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.31

and hauing prickt her downe and made her fast hard by the verdge thereof
, you shall take off her hood and goe a little way from her , and see if
shee will bathe therein ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.32

but if you finde her fearefull of the water , you shall with a little
sticke paddle in the water awhile before her , and then depart from her
againe , and let her then bathe therein as long as shee pleaseth :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.33

this done , you shall take her vpon your fist and giue her a bit or two
of meate , then hold her in the sun , and let her picke , prune , and
drie her selfe againe ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.34

if you can@ @not come to anie Riuer , brooke , or rundle conueniently ,
then you shall prouide either a large bason , or a broad shallow tubbe ,
and in it let your Hawke bathe as oft as occasion shal serue ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.35

for this bathing giueth a Hawk courage , boldnesse and a great appetite
, MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.36

and would commonly be vsed the daie or morniug before anie princely
fight : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.37

If it bee in the winter that your Hawke batheth , when no sunne shineth
, you may then drie her as well by the gentle aire of the fire as
otherwise . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.38

To enseame your Hawke , which is to cleanse her from , {COM:sic} grease
, fat and glut which lieth inwardly in her bodie , and which you shall
know by her round thighes , hie flesh , and full mewing ; then when you
feede her in the morning giue her a bit or two of hot meate , and the
night following little or nothing , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.39

then morning and euening after feede her vpon the flesh of Rookes washt
in two waters , till you feele the pinions of her wings more tender then
they were before , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.40

then giue her casting according to her nature , as was before shewed ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.41

and once in two or three daies giue her a Hennes necke well iointed and
washt in water , which will by the sharpnes therof breake the kells and
filmes of fat which are in her bodie ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,90.42

then euerie morning you shall giue her a quicke traine Pidgeon , and
keepe her so long vpon her winge <P_1,91> that by her owne moderate
exercise , she may melt and dissolve the grease that molesteth her ,
which after it is broken you may take away , by giuing her three or
fowre pellets of the roote of Sellandine , as bigge as garden pease ,
well washt and scowred , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,91.43

and if you steepe those pellets in the sirrup of Roses the scowring is
much stronger . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,91.44

When your hawke is manned , lured , and enseamed , you shall then bring
her to her flight , which if it bee at the Pheasant or Partridge in
woodie and closse grounds , then you shall when you lure the hawke ,
cast your lure into some lowe tree or bush , that thereby you may bring
her to take the stand , which when she doth you shal then drawe out your
lure , and giuing her notice thereof , make her ceaze thereon ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,91.45

and euer feed her on the ground and vnder a bush , the practice whereof
will bring her to delight in the stand , and to marke all the aduantages
which shee shall get from thence , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,91.46

then bringing her to either Pheasant or Partridge , make her flie at a
yonng one first , that being more foolish and easier slaine , she may
take delight in her conquest . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,91.47

But if you flie anie long-winged hawke in the champaine , then you shall
by all meanes possible keepe her from the stand , and onlie maintaine
her upon her wing till you spring the Partridge vnderneath her ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,91.48

and then stooping upon the advantage , the prey can hardly escape her ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,91.49

yet for the more sure killing of the game and entring of young hawkes ,
you shall first spring the Partridge and marke them ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,91.50

then being come to the marke cast off your hawke , and when she is
gotten to the height of her gate laie in your Spannels , and then
retriuing the Partridge vnderneath her after the first flight it is
impossible she should escape . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,91.51

And in this sort you may flie all manner of long-winged hawkes ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,91.52

for it is not so proper to flie them from the first {COM:sic} , although
most <P_1,92> of our late <font> Faulconers <$$font> now_a_daies use it
; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.53

but for your short-winged hawkes , you shall flie them from the fist
onely : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.54

And therefore to make them hardy and valient , you shall first enter
them at an old field Partridge , laid in a hole , and couered either
with a sodde , board , or hat , at which you shall fasten a small
Creance , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.55

and then vncoupling your spaniels , as they are raunging about sodainely
, when your Hawkes head is towards the Partridge , plucke of the sodde
or hat , and let the traine goe , and the Hawke after it , which as
soone as shee hath slaine reward her very well , and thus doing twice or
thrice , you may after venture to flie her at your pleasure .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.56

To make your Hawke to flie at foule , which is called the flight at the
riuer , you shall first whistell of an approued wel quarried Hawke that
is a sure killer , and let her enewe the foule so longe til shee bring
it to the plundge : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.57

then take her downe MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.58

and reward her , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.59

and set her by , yet so as you may haue her ready to vse at your
pleasure : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.60

then whistel of your yong Hawke , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.61

and when she is at the height of her gate , and that you haue shewed her
water diuers times to make her the more inward , and by a gibbet cal'd
her in , when at any time shee hath looked out : Then being iust ouer
the fowle , make in with all your companie on euery side the riuer ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.62

and so lay forth the foule , which if your Hawke stoope , strike and
trusse , you shal presently make into her , and helpe her ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.63

and then crossing the foules wings or breaking them , let your Hawke
take her pleasure thereon , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.64

but if shee doo not slay the foule at the first stooping , then you
shall giue your Hawke leasure to recouer her gate againe ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.65

and then lay forth the foule as before , not leauing thus to doe till
you haue landed it , and that the Hawke hath slaine it ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.66

and then reward her as before said : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,92.67

But if such a mischiefe shall fall out that the fowle doe scape and
breake away : <P_1,93> then you shal bee sure to have a live Mallard
readie in your bag ; which you may cast forth , and so reward your Hawke
thereon . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.68

If your long-winged hawke flying at the riuer or in champaine fields vse
to take stand which is a foule fault , you shal first by al meanes
shunne flying neere trees or couert : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.69

but if that doe not suffice , then you shal haue diuers traines in
diuers mens hands : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.70

and when the hawke offers to goe to the stand , let him which is next
her cast out his traine , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.71

and if shee kill it , reward her : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.72

this doing once or twice will reclaime her or nothing .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.73

If your Hawke through pride of grease or other wise be froward and wie ,
you shall not when shee kils reward her as you were wont ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.74

but conuaying some other colde meat cunningly vnder her let her take her
pleasure thereon ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.75

and euer with the meat give her some feathers which may scower her and
make her to cast ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.76

for this will recouer her stomacke , and make her more carefull and
diligent . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.77

If your Hawke be of a wilde and stirring nature , and will not looke
inward towards the man with her head , but rake and gase after euery
checke , neither respecting whooping nor gibbeting , in this case you
must follow her and lure her backe , and as soone as shee tourneth in
her head , show her the Luer , to which if shee stoupe , then presently
reward her , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.78

and thus doe so oft as shee raungeth till shee be brought to that loue
to your voice and affection to the luer , that shee will forget her
other extrauagant thoughts . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.79

When your Hawke is brought to flie to an extraordinary high pitch , to
mainetaine and keepe her in the same manner of flying still , you shall
not flie her aboue one flight in the day at the most ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.80

for nothing bringeth her downe more then ouer_wearinesse :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,93.81

Also you shall <P_1,94> not keepe too extreme a straight hand vpon her ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.82

for the too much greedinesse of the quarry makes her shake her flying .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.83

Also you shall not flie her vpon rundles , or small brookes , but vpon
plashes and broad riuers , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.84

you shall not suffer her to flie too long , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.85

but after two or three stoopings , and a crossing although shee misse it
, take her downe with the Luer or traine MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.86

and reward her , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.87

for this encouragement wil mainetaine her in her goodnes .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.88

If your Hawke be high_flying , yet sloathfull to get to her gatte , or
els now and then stouping before there be cause , and so loosing her way
, which many times happeneth when either the hawke is kept too sharpe ,
or flowne out of her due time , any of which faults when you perceiue ,
you shall then vpon the doing thereof giue her a dead quarrie , and then
hood her vp without reward , and an houre or two after call her to the
lure , and feed her : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.89

and thus doe as oft as shee offendeth , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.90

yet for the more sure preuention thereof , I would haue euery <font>
Faulconer <$$font> to trie the naturall disposition of his hawke , and
find whether she flieth better on a strait hand or an open , and whether
early or late and so forth , and according to her owne nature euer to
keepe her . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.91

Short_winged hawkes , as <font> Goshawkes <$$font> , and <font>
Sparrowhawks <$$font> will many times neither kill their game , nor flie
their game to marke , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.92

but will giue it ouer after a little flying , and <paren> as <font>
Faulconers <$$font> terme it <$$paren> turne taile vnto it , which when
you see , you shal incourage your <font> Dogges <$$font> to hunt and
cast before your Hawke a traine Partridge , as it were the wild one ,
and make her ceaze it and feed well vpon it , to incourage her the
better ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.93

and thus doe twice , or thrice , which if you see it preuaile not , then
esteeme her not , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.94

but make her away , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.95

for shee will hardly euer bee reclaimed . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,94.96

Hawkes that haue neuer beene acquainted with pray , <P_1,95> will many
times not flie at all ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.97

but taking a tree , will sitte and looke after the game , which fault to
amend , you shal euer feed her vpon quicke birds , and make her foote
them , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.98

and then going into the field , which is champaine and plaine , after
you have rid vp and downe , a prettie space with the hawke vnhooded ,
you shall cause one of your company to cast out a fielde Partridge
before your hawke : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.99

then let her flie at it , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.100

and so soone as shee hath footed it , let her feed thereon at her
pleasure , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.101

and doe thus three or foure times till shee bee well in blood , and you
shall find her valient quickly . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.102

If your hawke be so fond of the man that shee will not flie from him ,
but after a stroke or two , returnes to him againe : you must then but
sildome be familier with her , and let her rather feed her selfe then be
fed by you , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.103

and as oft as shee commeth so vnproperly to you , you shall giue her no
reward , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.104

but when shee forsaketh you and killeth the game , then you shall well
reward her , and then make her both familiar with Men , dogs , and
horses , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.105

for to take toy or dislike to any of them , is a mischiefe a great deale
worse then the former . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.106

To speake of the mewing of long_winged hawkes , you shall vnderstand
that he may be set downe , that is , put into the Mewe about the middle
of <font> Aprill <$$font> , at which time if you finde they have anie
lice you shall pepper them , and then put them into the Mewe , which if
it be a lowe place vpon the ground free from noise , vermine , or anie
euill aire , then it is called mewing at the stone or stocke ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.107

but if you mew in anie high roome with open windowes towards the <font>
North <$$font> , or <font> North-east <$$font> , then it is called
mewing at large : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,95.108

If you mewe at the stocke , you shal have a broad Table in the midst of
the roome , on which you must place sand , grauell , stones , sods , and
tubs for water , and in the midst of these a free-stone or blocke of
<P_1,96> two foote hie , to which you shal fasten your hawke with a
turuell of iron , so that at no time her lease may be intangled ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,96.109

this manner of mewing may be in the Faulconers owne bed-chamber , or in
anie other safe roome at his pleasure , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,96.110

the best meate in the mewe is any quicke birds or fowle , dogges-flesh
and such like : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,96.111

If you mewe your hawke at large you shall put her loose into the mewe ,
hauing sundrie pearches therein , some hie , some lowe for her to sit on
; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,96.112

and in this mewe also you shall haue , sand , stones , grauell , greene
sods and water , all which you shall renewe as oft as neede doth require
, and in the midst of them a blocke or two whereon to tie her meate ,
which meate shall be the same formerly spoke {COM:sic} of and given at
certaine and due times , without faile or alteration .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,96.113

If you intend to mew a short_winged hawke , as the Goshawke , or such
like , you shall in <font> March <$$font> after you haue scowred her and
made her cleane from lice , cut of her Iesse , and throw her into the
Mew loose , either in a high roome or a low roome at your pleasure ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,96.114

let her perches be lined with canuasse , or with woollen lists for the
safetie of her feet , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,96.115

let her haue store of water for bathing and oft renewed , and store of
meate , as liue Pidgeons , warme mutton , warme goate , or dogges-flesh
, anie of which will make her mew quickly . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,96.116

Hawkes for the fielde would bee drawne from the mewe in <font> Iune
<$$font> , and made readie to flie in <font> August <$$font> , at which
time corne is cut and the game is strong , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,96.117

and Hawkes for the Riuer would be drawne in <font> August <$$font> ,
that they may bee readie to flie in <font> September <$$font> .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,96.118

Hawkes haue diuers infirmities and diseases , as feauers , palsey ,
impostumes , sore eyes , and nares , migrims , pantas , casting her
gorge , fowlenesse of gorge , wormes fillanders , ill liuer , or gowte ,
pinne in the foote , breaking the pounce , <P_1,97> bones out of Ioint ,
bones broken , bruises , lice , coldes , frounce , fistulas , stone ,
much gaping , more sounding , priuie euill , teynt in the feathers ,
losse of appetite , broken wind , blow on the wing , wounds , swellings
, eating their own feete , taking vp of venes in Hawkes , crampe , and a
world of others : All which forasmuch as I haue shewed the medicines ,
and cures thereof in a small treatise called <font> Cheape and good
<$$font> , I will referre you to the same , and not doubt but it will
giue you satisfaction . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,1,97.119

<P_2,120>

<heading>

CHAP. V . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,120.122

OF THE OFFICE OF THE BREW-HOUSE , AND THE BAKE-HOUSE , AND THE NECESSARY
THINGS BELONGING TO THE SAME . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,120.123

<$$heading>

When our <font> English Hous-wife <$$font> knowes how to perserue health
by wholsome phisicke , to nourish by good meate , and to cloth the body
with warme garments shee must not then by anie meanes bee ignorant in
the prouision of bread and drinke ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,120.125

shee must know both the proportions and compositions of the same .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,120.126

And for_as_much as drinke is in euerie house more generallie spent then
bread , being indeed <paren> but how well I know not <$$paren> made the
verie substance of all entertainement . I will first beginne with it ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,120.127

and therefore you shall know that generally our kingdome hath but two
kindes of drinkes , that is to say Beere and Ale , but particularly
fowre , as Beere , Ale , Perry and Cider ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,120.128

and to these we may adde two more , as Meade and Metheglin two compound
drinkes of honie and hearbes which in the places where they are made ,
as <P_2,121> in <font> Wales <$$font> and the marches are renouned for
exceeding wholsome and cordiall . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.129

To speake then of Beere , although there bee diuers kinds of tastes and
strength thereof , according to the allowance of malte , hoppe , and age
giuen vnto the same ; yet indeed there can bee truly sayd to be but two
kindes thereof ; namely , ordinary beere and March beare , all other
beeres being deriued from them . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.130

Touching ordinary Beere , which is that wherewith either Nobleman ,
Gentleman , Yeoman , or Husbandman shall maintaine his family the whole
yeere ; it is meet first that our <font> English Hus-wife <$$font>
respect the proportion or allowance of mault due to the same , which
amongst the best Husbands is thought most conuenient ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.131

and it is held that to drawe from one quarter of good malt three
Hogsheads of beare is the best ordinary proportion that can be allowed ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.132

and hauing age and good caske to lie in , it will be strong enough for
any good mans drinking . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.133

Now for the brewing of ordinary Beere , your mault being well ground and
put in your Mash-fat , and your liquor in your leade ready to boile ,
you shall then by little and little with scopes or pailes put the
boiling liquor to the mault , and then stirre it euen to the bottome
exccedingly well together <paren> which is called the mashing of the
mault <$$paren> MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.134

then the liquor swimming in the top couer all ouer with more mault ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.135

and so let it stand an howre & more in the mash-fat , during which space
you may if you please heate more liquor in your leade for your second or
small drinke ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.136

this done , pluck vp your mashing stroame , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.137

and let the first liquour runne gently from the mault , either in a
cleane trough or other vessels prepared for the purpose ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.138

and then stopping the mash-fat againe put the second liquour to the
mault MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.139

and stirre it well together ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.140

then your leade being emptied put your first liquour or wort therein
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,121.141

<P_2,122>

and then to euery quarter of mault put a pound and a half of the best
hops you can get , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.143

and boile them an hower together , till taking vp a dishfull thereof you
see the hops shrinke into the bottome of the dish ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.144

this done put the wort through a straight flue which may draine the
hoppes from it into your cooler , which standing ouer the Guil-fat you
shall in the bottome therof set a great bowle with your barme and some
of the first wort <paren> {COM:no_matching_close_paren} before the hops
come into it mixt together , that it may rise therein , and then let
your wort drop or run gently into the dish with the barme which stands
in the Guil-fat ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.145

and this you shal do the first day of your brewing letting your cooler
drop all the night following , and some part of the next morning ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.146

and as it droppeth if you finde that a blacke skumme or mother riseth
vpon the barme , you shall with your hand take it off and cast it away ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.147

then nothing being left in the cooler , and the beere well risen , with
your hand stirre it about MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.148

and so let it stand an hower after , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.149

and then beating it and the barme exceeding well together , tunne it vp
in the Hogsheads being cleane washt and scaulded ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.150

and so let it purge , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.151

and herein you shall obserue not to run your vessels too full for feare
thereby it purge too much of the barm away ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.152

when it hath purged a day and a night you shall close vp the bung-holes
with clay , and only for a day or two after keepe a vent-hole in it ,
and after close it vp as close as may be . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.153

Nor for your second or small drinke which are left vpon the graines you
shall suffer it there to stay but an hower or a little better , and then
drain it off also , which done put it into the lead with the former hops
and boile the other also , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.154

then cleere it from the hops MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.155

and couer it very close til your first beere bee run'd ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.156

and then as before put it also to barme MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.157

and so tunn it vp also in smaller vessels , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.158

and of this second beere you shall not drawe aboue one Hogshead to three
of the better . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,122.159

Now <P_2,123> there be diuers other waies & obseruations for the brewing
of ordinary Beere but none so good , so easie , so ready and quickly
performed as this before shewed : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.160

neither will any beere last longer or ripen sooner ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.161

for it may bee drunke at a fortnights age MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.162

and will last as long and liuely . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.163

Now for the brewing of the best march Beere you shall allow to a
Hogs-head thereof a quarter of the best malt , well ground :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.164

then you shall take a pecke of pease , halfe a pecke of Wheate , and
halfe a pecke of Oates and grind them all very well together , and then
mix them with your malt : which done you shall in all points brew this
beere as you did the former ordinary beere :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.165

onely you shall allow a pound and a half of hops to this one Hogshead :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.166

and whereas before you drew but two sorts of beere : so now you shall
draw three : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.167

that is a Hogs-head of the best , and a Hogshead of the second , and
halfe a Hogs-head of small beere without any augmentation of hops or
malt . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.168

This march Beere would be brew'd in the moneths of <font> March <$$font>
or <font> Aprill <$$font> , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.169

and should if it haue right lie a whole yeere to ripen :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.170

it will last two , three and foure yeeres if it lie coole and close ,
and indure then dropping to the last drop , though with neuer so much
leasure . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.171

Now for the brewing of strong Ale because it is drinke of no such long
lasting as Beere is : therefore you shall brew lesse quantity at a time
thereof , as two bushels of northerne measure , which is foure bushels
or halfe a quarter in the South ; at a brewing and not aboue ; which
will make foureteene gallons of the best Ale .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.172

Now for the mashing it & ordering of it in the mashfat , it wil not
differ any thing from that of beere ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.173

as for hops although some vse not to put in any ; yet the best Brewers
thereof will allow to fourteene gallons of Ale a good espen full of hops
and no more , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,123.174

yet before you put in your hops , as soone as you take it from the
graines you shall put it into a <P_2,124> vessell and change it , or
blinke it in this manner ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.175

put into the wort a handfull of Oake bowes and a Pewter dish ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.176

and let them lie therein till the wort looke a little paler then it did
at the first ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.177

and then presentlie take out the dish and the leafe ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.178

and then boile it a full hower with the hops as aforesaid ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.179

and then clense it , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.180

and set it in vessels to coole , when it is no more but milke_warme ,
hauing set your barme to rise with some sweet wort :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.181

then put all into the guilfat , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.182

and as soone as it riseth with a dish or bawle beate it in ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.183

and so keepe it with continuall beating a day and a night at least ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.184

and after tunne it . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.185

From this Ale you may also draw halfe so much very good middle ale , and
a third part very good small ale . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.186

Touching the brewing of bottle Ale , it differeth nothing at all from
the brewing of strong ale , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.187

onelie it must be drawne in a larger proportion , as at least twentie
gallons of halfe a quarter ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.188

and when it comes to bee changed you shall blinke it <paren> as was
before shewed <$$paren> by much more {SIC:more_by_much} then was the
strong ale , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.189

for it must be pretty and sharpe , which giueth the life and quickness
to the Ale : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.190

and when you tunne it you shall put it into round bottles with narrow
mouthes , and then stopping them close with corke , set them in a cold
sellar vp to the wast in sand , and be sure that the corkes be fast tied
in with strong packethrid , for feare of rissing out , or taking vent ,
which is the vtter spoile of the ale . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.191

Now for the small drinke arising from this bottle_Ale , or any other
beere or ale whatsoeuer , if you keepe it after it is blinkt and boiled
in a close vessel , and then put it to barme euerie morning as you haue
occasion to vse it , the drinke will drinke a great deale the fresher ,
and be much more livelie in tast . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,124.192

As for the making Perrie and Cider which are drinks much vsed in the
west parts , and other Countries well stored with fruit in this kingdome
; you shal know that your <P_2,125> Perry is made of Peares only , and
your Cider of Apples ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.193

and for the manner of making therof it is done after one fashion ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.194

that is to say after your Peares or Apples are well pickt from stalkes ,
rottennesse and all manner of other filth , you shall put them in the
presse mill which is made with a mil-stone running round in a circle ,
vnder which you shall crush your Peares or Apples ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.195

and then straining them through a bagge of haire cloth , tunne vp the
same after it hath beene a little setled into Hogs-heads , Barrels and
other close vessels . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.196

Now after you haue prest all you shall saue that which is within the
haire cloth bagge , and putting it into seuerall vessels , put a pretty
quantitie of water thereunto , and after it hath stood a day or two ,
and hath beene well stirred together , presse it ouer also againe ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.197

for this will make a small perrie or cider ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.198

and must be spent first . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.199

Now of your best sider that which you make of your summer or sweet
fruite , you shall call summer or sweet cider or perrie ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.200

and that you shall spende first also ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.201

and that which you make of the winter and hard fruite , you shall call
winter and sowre cider , or perry ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.202

and that you shall spend last MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.203

for it will endure the longest . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.204

Thus after our English Huswife is experienced in the brewing of these
seuerall drinkes , shee shall then looke into her Backe-house , and to
the baking of all sorts of bread , either for Masters , Seruants , or
Hinds , and to the ordering and compounding of the meate for each
seuerall vse . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.205

To speake then first of meales for breed , they are either simple as
Wheate and Rie , or compound as Rie and Wheate mixt together , or Rie ,
Wheate and Barley mixt together ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.206

and of these the oldest meale is euer the best ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,125.207

and yealdeth most so it be sweet and vntainted ; for the preseruation
whereof it is meet that you clense <P_2,126> your meale well from the
branne , and then keepe it in sweet vessels .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.208

Now for the baking of bread of your simple meales , your best and
principall bread is manchet , which you shall bake in this manner ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.209

first your meale being ground vpon the black stones if it be possible ,
which makes the whitest flower , and boulted through the finest boulting
cloth , you shall put it into a clean Kimnel , and opening the flower
hollow in the mids , put into it of the best Ale-barme the quantity of
three pints to a bushel of meale , with som fat to season it with :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.210

then put in your liquor reasonable warme , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.211

and kneade it very well together , both with your hands , and through
the brake , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.212

or for want thereof , fould it in a cloth , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.213

and with your feete tread it a good space together ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.214

then letting it lie an howre or thereabouts to swel , take it foorth
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.215

and mould it into manchets , round , and flat , scorcht about the wast
to giue it leaue to rise , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.216

and prick it with your knife in the top , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.217

and so put into the Ouen , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.218

and bake it with a gentle heate . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.219

To bake the best cheate bread , which is also simply of wheate onely ,
you shal after your meale is drest and boulted through a more course
boulter then was vsed for your manchets , and put also into a cleane tub
, trough , or kimnell ; take a sowre leauen , that is a peece of such
like leauen saued from a former batch , and well fild with salt , and so
laid up to sower , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.220

and this sower leauen you shall breake into small peeces into warme
water , and then straine it , which done make a deepe hollow hole , as
was before said , in the middest of your flower ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.221

and therein power your strained liquor , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.222

then with your hand mixe some part of the flower therewith till the
liquor bee as thicke as pancake batter , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.223

then couer it all ouer with meale , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.224

and so let it lie all that night , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.225

the next morning stirre it , and all the rest of the meale wel together
, MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,126.226

and with a little more warme <P_2,127> water , barme , and salt to
season it with , bring it to a perfect leauen , stiffe , and firme ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.227

then kneade it , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.228

breake it , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.229

and tread it , as was beforesaid in the manchets ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.230

and so mould it vp in reasonable bigge loues ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.231

and then bake it with an indifferent good heat :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.232

and thus according to these two examples before shewed , you may bake
any bread leauend or vnleauen'd whatsoeuer whether it be simple corne ,
as Wheate or Rie of it selfe , or compound graine as wheat and rie , or
wheat , rie and barley , or rie and barley , or anie other mixt white
corne ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.233

only because Rie is a little stronger graine then wheate , it shall bee
good for you to put to your water a little hotter then you did
{COM:to_your_water} to your wheate . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.234

For your browne bread , or bread for your hinde seruants which is the
coursest bread for mans vse , you shall take of barly two bushels , of
pease two pecks , of wheat or rie a pecke , a peck of mault ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.235

these you shall grind altogether and dress it thorough a meale flue ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.236

then putting it into a sower trough set liquor on the fire ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.237

and when it boils let one put on the water , and another with a
mash-rudder stir some of the flower with it after it hath been seasoned
with salt MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.238

and so let it be till the next day , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.239

and then putting to the rest of the flower , worke it vp into a stiffe
leauen , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.240

then mould it MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.241

and bake it into great loaues with a verie strong heate :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.242

now if your trough be not sower enough to sower your leaven , then you
shall either let it lie longer in the trough or else take the helpe of a
sower leauen with your boiling water : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.243

for you must vnderstand that the hotter your liquour is , the lesse will
the smell or ranknesse of the pease be receiued .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.244

And thus much for the baking of anie kinde of bread , which our <font>
English Hus-wife <$$font> shall haue occasion to vse for the maintenance
of her family . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.245

As for the generall obseruations to be respected in the Brew-house or
Bake-house they be these : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,127.246

first that your Brew-house be seated in so conuenient a part of the
house <P_2,128> that the smoke may not annoy your other more priuate
roomes , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.247

then that your furnace be made close and hollow for sauing fewell , and
with a vent for the passage of smoake least it taint your liquour ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.248

then that you preferre a copper before a lead ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.249

next that your Mash-fat be euer neerest to your leade , your cooler
nearest your Mash-fat , and your Guilfat vnder your cooler , & adioining
to them all seueral clean tubs to reciue your Worts & Liquours :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.250

then in your Bake-house you shall haue a faire boulting house with large
Pipes to boulte meale in , faire troughes to lay leauen in and sweet
safes to receiue your branne , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.251

you shall haue boulters , searses , raunges and meal siues of all sorts
both fine and course , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.252

you shal haue faire tables to mould on , large ouens to bake in
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.253

the soales thereof rather of one or two intire stones then of many
brickes MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.254

and the mouth made narrow , square and easie to be close couered ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.255

as for your peeles , cole-rakes , mankins and such like , though they be
necessary yet they are of such general vse they need no further relation
. MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.256

And thus much for a full satisfaction to all the Husbands and Huswiues
of this kingdome touching Brewing , Baking , and all what else
appertaineth to either of their offices . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.257

<font> Finis <$$font> . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P1,2,128.258

