<BEGIN_masham-1630-e2-p1>

<P_55>

<heading:edcomment:28_LADY_ELIZABETH_MASHAM,_N._D.>

{COM:before_18_february_1629}

Deare mother I desire pardon for my longe silenc in wrighting to you ;
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,55.5

indeed I did think to have gon downe this weeke , MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,55.6

but haveing gott a very convenient lodging my husband is lothe to lett
me goe away , MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,55.7

yett Mrs Perkins is grone soe deare that I was very willing to gett my
husband from thenc , MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,55.8

and I doe much desire to be here att the <P_56> fast the next Wedensday
when the sity joyne with the parliment in keeping that day .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.9

I pray God fitt us all ernestly to cry to the lord ;
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.10

we never had such need as now we have , MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.11

we have no other refuge to fly unto . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.12

We may justly fare that we shall cry now and he will not here us ,
because we have soe longe refused to here him calling to us ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.13

and if we doe fall into great misirie we may lay our hand on owr mowthes
and confes he hath bin very gratyus in sparing us so long .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.14

I pray God give us wisdom to prepare for the worst .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.15

I confes I daly se more and more that there is noe hapynes in any thing
but in getting asuranc of God's {COM:preceding_word_"God's"_emended}
love in Christ , MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.16

and 't@ @is the only thing , I thank God , which I take comfort in ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.17

and I know you will say the like by your self . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.18

I pray God increase that comfort which at any time you have felt .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.19

I am very glad to here you are soe well . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.20

I desire the continuanc of your comfort both in sole and bodye ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.21

and shall pray for it as for my one . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.22

with my humble duty This {COM:sic} , desiring to be rememberd to all my
frinds with you , I remaine Your ever dutyfull daughter Elizabeth Masham
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.23

When I am like to proseed in any match for Jugg you shall here .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.24

We showlde be glad to se you here . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.25

My cosin Bowcher hers no more of Mr Archer ; MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.26

Mr Goodwin is fre as yett . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.27

{COM:Endorsed_f._309b} To my honourable good mother the Ladye Barrington
these be given MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,56.28

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample,_letters_49_and_65}

<P_102>

<heading:edcomment:78_LADY_ELIZABETH_MASHAM>

{COM:november_1629}

Deare mother I have sent this bearer desireing to here of the continuanc
of your health . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,102.33

I showlde be glad to here some hopes of your coming amonkst us againe .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,102.34

I wolde wilingly waite upon you with <P_103> my coatch to fetch you home
. MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.35

I shall pray hartyly to God for your safe returne hither .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.36

I had lately a letter from my brother Knightly MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.37

and he gives me better hopes of the young man , withall expresing the
younge and olde man's great desire of the proseeding with this match and
hir well aproving of our family , wharupon we will proseed in further
treaty if you think good . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.38

His father desiers to meet my husband to make conclusion of matters of
estate , MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.39

but we desire to do nothing withowt your advise .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.40

These shall@ @be our demandes , which we will stand upon if you think
fitt , 300@ @=li= maintinanc besides hir one lands and soe much in
joynter . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.41

I think it is as little as can be demanded , thay being alowed no borde
with his father . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.42

The olde man offers to settle 1200@ @=li= a year upon his sonn and his
ayers mayles , MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.43

but I think it fit to be settled upon the isue whether maile or female ,
specially considering he hath more lande which he may settle upon his
younger sonne if his eldest dye withowt isue maile .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.44

I pray consider well of these things MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.45

and send me your opinion by this bearer . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.46

I shall desire your harty prayers to God to direct us to doe that which
may be most for his glorye and all our comforts .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.47

'T@ @is a waity busynes MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.48

and God ca@ @not be to much sought in it . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.49

I am now going to wright to my brother Knightly MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.50

and therfore I must here conclude , with my humble duty and ernest
prayers to God for your happynes here and hereafter ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.51

and so I rest Your dutyfull daughter Elizabeth Masham
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.52

I beseech you to remember my love to my brother and sisters .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.53

I have sent you a cople of little pulletts , the best I have at this
time . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.54

{COM:Endorsed_f._91b} <bracket> in Sir William Masham's hand <$$bracket>
: MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.55

To my much honoured mother the Lady Barrington , these be given
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.56

<heading:edcomment:79_LADY_ELIZABETH_MASHAM,_N._D.>

{COM:november_1629}

Deare mother I have received a letter from my brother Knightly
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.59

and it seemes Sir Robert Bevell thinks our demaunds very unreasonable .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.60

I did write to you what thay ware , 300 a yere joynter added to hir owne
and hir land to hir owne ayer , MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.61

but he would have it presently asured upon his sonn and his ayers
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.62

and then he would ad so much joynter to hir owne ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.63

or elce if he may not hav hir lande he would make hir noe joynter at al
, MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.64

but she showld have hir owne againe if hir husband showld dye befor hir
. MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.65

I perceive by every one that he is a very worldly olde man ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,103.66

he is not willing by any means that his sonn <P_104> sholde live with
him after he is maryed , MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.67

I know not what the reson is . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.68

I woulde be glad to doe as well as I can for Jug ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.69

for I perseive ther is nothing will come from him but what is agreed ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.70

for we must have nothing to his curtysye . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.71

I desire you seriusly to consult with my brother Garard and to help me
with your best advise ; MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.72

I will send no answer of my letter till I here from you .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.73

Ther is no perticulars in the letter , but in genrall that we come
nothing neer what he expects in our demandes . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.74

I desire your hartiest prayers for the busynes .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.75

'T@ @is a wayty matter MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.76

and I desire of the lord that if it may be for his glory it may come to
pas , elce not . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.77

Thus with my humble duty and my love to my brother and sisters I comit
you to the lord MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.78

and ever rest Your obedient daughter Elizabeth Masham
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.79

Mr Willyams desirs to have his best service remembred to you .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.80

My husband is at Colchester . MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.81

{COM:Endorsed_f._85b} To my much honoured mother the lady Barrington at
Harrow thisse MASHAM-1630-E2-P1,104.82

