<BEGIN_memo-1675-e3-p1>

<P_275>

<heading:edcomment:CLXXXVIII_CONCERNING_Y=E=_EXPORTATION_OF_WOOLL_FROM_IRELAND>

Several Statutes of Ireland have imposed so great a Custom upon all Wool
whatever exported , as it amounts to a most strict prohibition .
MEMO-1675-E3-P1,275.4

This was done , as y=e= preambles of y=e= s=d= Statutes doe recite ,
w=th= an intention to oblige y=e= people to manufacture all y=e= Wool
within y=e= Kingdome , MEMO-1675-E3-P1,275.5

but it being found by experience that in y=e= Country , alwaies too
thinly inhabited , there were not hands enough to worke up y=e= Wool
w=ch= y=e= Stock of Sheep on y=e= Lands could produce , It has ever bin
allowd to y=e= chiefe Govern=r= to dispence w=th= these Laws , & grant
Licences for y=e= Exportac~on of Wooll into England only , y=e= person
who exported it entring into good securitie that y=e= Wool be delivered
into some port of that Kingdom , & that Certeficates should be returned
of their soe doeing , for w=ch= Licence y=e= Chiefe Govern=r= rec~d a
duty of 4@ @=d= for every great Stone consisting of 18 pd~s weight so
licenced to be exported . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,275.6

The profitt being very great of vending this comodity into forreine
parts , That is to say , France , Flanders , & Holland , in comparison
of y=e= gaine they make when sold in England , hath sett all men's
Inventions on worke in contrivance of ways & means to evade y=e= Lawe ,
MEMO-1675-E3-P1,275.7

& it being every man's Interest here , who hath any Thing in y=e=
Kingdome , to encourage or at least connive at y=e= exportac~on at large
, may be some reason why much of y=e= Wooll of this Country doth goe
into forreine parts , MEMO-1675-E3-P1,275.8

or will be one obstruction to y=e= due regulac~on thereof ;
MEMO-1675-E3-P1,275.9

For first T@ @is y=e= Chiefe Govern=rs= Interest to have as much as may
be exported , no matter whether <P_276> into England or else where ,
y=e= carrying out of it encreasing his Income ; MEMO-1675-E3-P1,276.10

Next T@ @is y=e= Interest of all y=e= Judges & Magistrates , who are
ever Landed Men , to have it goe freely , it encreasing their rents ;
MEMO-1675-E3-P1,276.11

And , lastly , T@ @is more y=e= Interest of Merch=ts= & Traders to carry
it thither , in regard of y=e= High Rates they may gett for it .
MEMO-1675-E3-P1,276.12

Thus , it conducing to y=e= profitt of all Men here to have it freely
exported , it may easily be supposed that all connivance imaginable will
be used for y=e= encouragement thereof , & that when ever any shall be
prosecuted for undue Exportac~ons , some grains of favor will probably
be allowd them , even in y=e= Courts here ; MEMO-1675-E3-P1,276.13

but for this no through remedy can be prescribed till y=e= Country be
fully stockd wth people , MEMO-1675-E3-P1,276.14

& then , men's Interests being changed , it will become every man's
concerne to keep this commodity manufactured within our selves .
MEMO-1675-E3-P1,276.15

However , y=e= present Chiefe Govern=r= will not faile of doeing his
part efectually to obstruct all fraudulent practices in this matter ,
tho' it may a little lessen his gaine , & a strictness in this point
also render him somewhat ungratefull to y=e= Landed Men and Merchants in
this Kingdome . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,276.16

Causes of y=e= Undue Exportac~on of Wooll out of y=e= Kingdom of Ireland
. MEMO-1675-E3-P1,276.17

1 . The Multitude of Ports in this Kingdome doe give great opportunitie
for y=e= Shipping of Wooll into forrein parts . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,276.18

2 . The carelessness of y=e= Custom=rs= , & other Officers in y=e=
severall ports , in performing their duty , either neglecting to take
any Securities upon y=e= passing of Wooll , or else excepting such as
are insolvent . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,276.19

3 . A patent to S=r= Nich: Armorer & S=r= Gabriel Silvius of all y=e=
forfeitures incurred upon y=e= bonds enterd into for y=e= delivery of
y=e= Wooll into some Port in England , wherein is an Expresse Clause
conteynd empowring y=e= Patentees to make compositions for these bonds .
MEMO-1675-E3-P1,276.20

<P_277>

4 . The Wooll being Shipt & Securitie taken for y=e= delivery thereof
in England by y=e= corruption of some Officers in y=e= English ports ,
Certeficates are signed of y=e= Landing of it there , tho' it were never
really put on shoar ; As also sometimes Certificates are counterfeited .
MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.22

5 . A late practice hath likewise bin discovered of rolling up Wooll
into great Twist , & so passing it as Yarne , MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.23

& when it arrives into forrein parts 'T@ @is untwisted agen
MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.24

& becomes Wooll . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.25

Remedies to prevent y=e= Exportac~on of Wooll out of Ireland into
forrein parts . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.26

To y=e= 1=st= . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.27

That y=e= ports be limited to a certain Numb=r= , out of w=ch= & no
other Wooll shall be exported . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.28

These Ports may be Dublin , Drogheda , Waterford , Ross , Corke ,
Youghall , Limericke , & Galloway . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.29

To y=e= 2=nd= . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.30

When ever any Officer shall be found faulty in permitting any Wooll to
goe without Licence , or neglecting to take securitie , or taking such
as is insolvent , that He doe infallibly loose his place , & receive
such further punishm=t= as y=e= Law appoints . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.31

To y=e= 3=rd= . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.32

That This Patent be vacated , w=ch= 'T@ @is conceived may be done at his
Majesties Will & pleasure <paren> but then it will be reasonable , his
Majestie intending y=e= Patentees a favor when He gave it them , may
allow them some compensation when 'T@ @is revoked <$$paren> , & that no
Compositions be ever made or allowd of to y=e= persons forfeiting their
bonds , but y=e= utmost rigor & extremity taken ag=t= them as
punishm=ts= due by Law . MEMO-1675-E3-P1,277.33

