<BEGIN_merrytal-1526-e1-p1>

<P_1>

<heading>

A_Hundred Mery Talys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,1.4

I . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,1.5

<font> Of the mylner that sayd he harde neuer but of ii commau~demens
and .ii. dowtys . <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,1.6

<$$heading>

A certayn Curat in the contrey there was that preched in the pulpit of
the ten commandementys . Seyng that there were ten co~mau~deme~tes that
euery man ought to kepe | & he that brake any of the~ | co~mytted
greuous syn | how be it he sayd that somtyme it was dedly syn & somtyme
venyall | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,1.8

But when it was dedly syn & when venyall | there were many douts therin
. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,1.9

And a mylner a yong ma~ a mad felow that cam seldom to church | & had
ben at very fewe sermons or none in all his lyfe answerd hym tha~
shortly this wyse . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,1.10

I meruel master parson that ye say ther be so many co~mau~deme~tis & so
many doutys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,1.11

For I neuer hard tell but of ii. <P_2> co~mandeme~ts that is to say
co~mande me to you and co~mau~de me fro you . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.12

Nor I never herd tell of mo doutis but twayn that ys to say dout the
candell and dout the fyre . At which answere all the people fell a
laughynge . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.13

By this tale a man may well p~ceyue that they that be brought vp without
lernyng or good maner shall never be but rude and bestely all though
they haue good naturall wyttys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.14

<heading>

II . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.16

<font> Of the cytesen that callyd the prest syr John~ & he called hi~
master raf . <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.17

<$$heading>

On a tyme there was a Joly Citesyn walkyng in the co~trey for sport
which met with a folysh prest | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.19

& in dirysyo~ in co~munycacio~ cald hym syr John~ .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.20

this prest , vnderstonding his mockyng calde him master rafe |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.21

why quod the cytesyn doste thou call me master rafe |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.22

mary quod the prest why callyst me syr John~ . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.23

Then quod the cytesen I call the syr John~ becawse euery folysh preste
most comonly is calde sir John | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.24

Mary quod the prest MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,2.25

& I call the master rafe because euery@ @proud {COM:sic} <P_3> Cocold
most comenly is callyd master Rafe . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,3.26

At the which answer all that were by laught a_pace because dyuers there
supposyd the same cytesen to be a cokcold in dede .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,3.27

By thys tale ye may se that he that delyteth to deryde & laughe other to
skorne is somtyme hym selfe more derydyd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,3.28

<heading>

III . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,3.30

<font> Of the wyfe that mayd hyr husbande to go syt in the herber in the
nyght whyle her prentys lay with her in her bed . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,3.31

<$$heading>

<P_4>

A wyfe ther was which had apointed her pre~tys to com to her bed in the
night which serua~t had long woyd her to haue his plesure which
acordi~ge to the apoi~tme~t <P_5> ca~ to her bed syde i~ the night her
husba~d liyng by her MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.34

& when she pceyuyd hym ther she caught hi~ by the ha~d
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.35

& hyld hym fast MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.36

& inco~tine~t wakened her husbo~d MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.37

& sayd | Sir it is so ye haue a fals & an vntru serua~t to you which is
william your prentys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.38

& has lo~ge woyd me to haue his plesur | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.39

& becawse I coud nat auoyde his importunate request I haue appoi~tyd hym
this night to met me in the garde~ i~ the herber
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.40

& yf ye wyll aray your self in myn aray & go theder ye shall se p~fe
therof MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.41

& then ye may rebuke hym as ye thi~ke best by your dyscrecyon |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.42

this husba~d thus aduertised by his wyfe | put vpo~ hym his wyues
rayme~t MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.43

& went to the herber MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.44

and when he was gone thyder the prentys ca~ in to bed to his mastres
wher for a seaso~ they wer both conte~t and pleasyd ech other by the
space of an hour or .ij . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.45

but when she thought tyme co~uenye~t she sayd to the prentyse Now go thy
way in to the herber MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.46

& mete hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.47

& take a good waster in thy ha~d MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.48

& say thou dydys it but to p~ue whether I wold@ @be a good woma~ or no
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.49

& reward hym as thou thynkyst best . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.50

This prentys doi~g after his mastres co~cell we~t to the herber wher he
founde his master i~ his mastres ap~pel MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,5.51

& sayd A thou <P_6> harlot art thou comen hether |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.52

now I se well yf I wold be fals to my master thou woldest be a stro~g
hore MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.53

but I had leuer thou wer ha~gyd tha~ I wold do him so traterous a dede
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.54

therfore I shall gyve the some punishment as thou lyke an hore hast
deseruyd | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.55

& therwith lapt hi~ well about the shold~s & bak
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.56

and gaue hym a dose~ or .ii. good strypys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.57

the master felyng hym selfe so~what to smart sayd pese wyllia~ myne own
true good serua~t MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.58

for godys sake hold thy ha~dys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.59

for I a~ thi master & not thi mastres | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.60

na hore quod he thou lyest MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.61

thou art but an harlot MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.62

& I dyd but to p~ue the | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.63

& smote hi~ agayn . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.64

Alas man quod the master I beseche the MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.65

nomore MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.66

for I am not she MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.67

for I am thy master MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.68

fele MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.69

for I haue a berd | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.70

and therwith he sparyd his ha~d MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.71

& felt hys berd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.72

Alas master quod the prentys I crye you mercy MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.73

& then the mayster went vnto hys wyfe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.74

& she askyd hym how he had sped MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.75

& he a~swerd I wis wyfe I haue bene shrewdly betyn
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.76

how_be_it I haue cause to be glad MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.77

for I thanke god I haue as trew a wyfe & as trew a seruant as any man
hath in englond . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.78

By this tale ye may se that it is not wysdome for a man to be rulyd
alway after hys wyues councell . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,6.79

<P_7>

<heading>

IV . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,7.82

<font> Of hym that playd the deuyll and came thorow the waren & mayd
theym that stale the connys to ronne away . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,7.83

<$$heading>

It fortunyd that in a market towne in the counte of Suffolk there was a
stage play i~ the which playe on callyd John~ adroyns wich dwelyd i~ a
nother vyllage ij. myle fro~ the~s playd the deuyll .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,7.85

And whe~ the play was done this John~ adroyns i~ the euenyng departyd
fro the sayd market towne to go home to his owne house
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,7.86

& be cause he had there no cha~ge of clothi~ge he went forth i~ his
deuylls ap~ell whiche i~ the way comyng homward ca~ thorow a waren of
conys belo~gyng to a ge~tylma~ of the Village wher he hym selfe dwelt .
at which tyme it fortunyd a prest a vycar of a church therby with .ij.
or iij. other vnthryfty felowes had brought with the~ a hors a hey & a
feret to th@ @e~et~t ther to get conis MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,7.87

& whe~ the feret was in the yerth & the hey set ouer the path way wheri~
thys John~ adroyns shold com . this prest & this other felowes saw hym
com i~ the deuyls rayme~t MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,7.88

co~syderi~g that they were i~ the deuyls seruyse & steli~g of cones &
supposynge it had ben the deuyll in dede for <P_8> fere ran away .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.89

this John adroyns i~ the deuyls rayme~t & be cause it was so~what dark
saw not the hey MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.90

but we~t forth i~ hast MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.91

& sto~blid therat MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.92

& fell down MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.93

& wyth the fall he had almost broke his nek . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.94

But when he was a lytyll reuyuyd he lokyd vp MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.95

& spyed it was a hay to chach connys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.96

& lokyd further | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.97

& saw that they ran away for fere of hym | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.98

& saw a horse tyed to a bush laden with connys whych they had taken |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.99

& he toke the horse & the haye MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.100

& lepe vpo~ the horse MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.101

& rode to the gentylmannys place that was lorde of the waren | to the
entente to haue thanke for takynge suche a pray .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.102

And when he cam | knokyd at the gatys . To whome anone one of the
{TEXT:missing_"the"} gentylmannys seruauntys askyd who was there |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.103

and sodeynly openyd the gate | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.104

and as@ @sone as he perceyuyd hym in the deuyls raymente was sodenly
abashyd | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.105

and sparryd the dore agayn | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.106

& went in to his mayster | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.107

and sayd & sware to hys mayster that the deuyll was at the gate | and
wolde come in . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.108

The gentylman heryng hym say so callyd another of hys seruauntys
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.109

& bad hym go to the gate to knowe who was there .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,8.110

This seconde seruau~t <P_9> cam to the gate MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.111

durst not open it | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.112

but askyd with lowd voyce who was there . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.113

thys John Adroyns in the deuyls apperell answerd with a hye voyce
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.114

and sayd | Tell thy master I must nedys speke with hym or I go .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.115

This seco~d seruau~t heryng that answer supposynge also it had bene the
deuyll | went in agayn to his master MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.116

and sayd thus | mayster yt is the deuyll in dede that ys at the gate |
and sayth he must nedys speke with you or he go hens .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.117

The gentylma~ then began a lyttvll to bashe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.118

and callyd the steward of hys howse | whyche was the wysyst seruaunt
that he had MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.119

and bad hym to go to the gate and to brynge hym sure worde who was there
. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.120

This steward be cause he thaught he wold se surely who was there came to
the gate MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.121

and lokyd thorow the chinys of the gate in dyuers placys |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.122

and saw well that yt was the deuyll and sat vpon an horse
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.123

and hangynge aboute the saddell on euery syde sawe the cony heddys
hengynge down | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.124

than he came to his mayster aferde in greate haste
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.125

and sayd | By goddys body yt is the deuyll in dede that is at the gate
syttyng vpon an horse laden all wyth fowllys | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,9.126

and by lykelyhede | he is com for your <P_10> soule purposely |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.127

and lakkyth but your soule | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.128

& yf he had your sowle I wene he shold be gone .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.129

This gentylman tha~ meruelously abashyd callyd vp his chapleyn |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.130

and made the holy candell to be lyght | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.131

and gat holy water MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.132

and wente to the gate wyth as many of hys seruauntys as durste go with
hym | where the chaplayn with holy wordys of coniuracyon sayde | In the
name of the fader | sonne and holy goost | I coniure the and charg the
in the holy name of god to tell me why and wherfore thowe commyste
hyther . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.133

This John~ Androynys in the deuyllys apparell heryng theym begynne to
co~iure after suche maner sayd | Nay nay be not a_ferd of me
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.134

for I am a good dyuell MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.135

I am John~ Adroyns your neghboour dwellyng in thys towne and he that
played the dyuell | to_day in the play | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.136

I haue braught my mayster a dosen or ii. of hys owne connyes that were
stolyn in hys waren and theyr horse & theyr hay |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.137

and made theym for fere to ronne away | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.138

and when they herde hym thus speke by hys voyce they knew hym well
ynoughe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.139

and openyd the gate MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,10.140

<P_11>

and let hym come in | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,11.142

And so all the forsayd fere and drede was tornyd to myrth and dysporte .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,11.143

By this tale ye may se that me~ fear many tymes more than they nede
which hath causyd me~ to beleue that spyryttys & deuyls haue bene sene
in dyuers placys when it hath bene nothynge so .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,11.144

<heading>

V . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,11.146

<font> Of the syk man that bequethyd hys thyrd son a lytyll ground with
the galows . <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,11.147

<$$heading>

Ther was a riche man which lay sore seke in his bed lyke to dy wherfore
his eldyst son cam to hym & besechyd hym to gyue hym his blyssyng to
whom the fader sayd son thou shalt haue goddys blessyng & myne
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,11.149

and for that that thou hast ben euer good of co~dycyons I gyue & bequeth
the all my land | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,11.150

to whom he answered & sayd nay fad~ I trust you shal lyue & occupy them
your selfe full well by goddys grace . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,11.151

Sone after came his ij. sone to hym lyke wyse
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,11.152

& desyred his blessyng | to whom the fad~ sayd because thou hast ben
{COM:preceding_word_"ben"_emended} euer kynde <P_12> & gentyll & I geue
the goddys blessynge & myn MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,12.153

and also I bequeth the all my mouable goodys |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,12.154

to whom he answerd and sayd | nay fader I trust ye shall lyve & do well
& spend and vse your goodys your selfe by goddys grace .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,12.155

Anon after the iij. sone cam to hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,12.156

& desyred his blessyng to whom the fader answerd & sayd by cause thou
hast bene euyll & stoborne of condycyons & wolde neuer be ruled after my
cou~sell I haue nother land nor goodys onbequethyd but onely a lytell
vacant ground wher a galows standyth which now I geue and bequeth to the
| and goddys curse withall | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,12.157

to whom the sonne answerd as hys bretherne dyd & sayd nay fader I trust
ye shall lyue and be in good helth and haue yt and occupy it your selfe
by goddys grace . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,12.158

But after that the fader dyed MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,12.159

& this thyrd son co~tynuyd styll hys vnthryfty condycyons wherefore yt
was hys fortune afterwarde for hys deseruyng to be hangyd on the same
galows . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,12.160

By this tale men may wel perceyue that yong people that wyll not be
ruled by theyr frendys councell in youth in tymys come to a shamfull
ende . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,12.161

<P_13>

<heading>

VI . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.164

<font> Of the gentylman that lost his ryng in the gentylwomans bed ,
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.165

& a nother gentylman found it after in the same bed . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.166

<$$heading>

Two ge~tylmen of accoyntau~ce wer appoyntyd to ly with a ge~tyll woma~
in one nyght the one not knowi~ge of the other at dyuers tymys .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.168

This fyrst at his houre appoyntyd ca~ | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.169

& in the bed ther he fortunid to lese a ryng |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.170

the .ij. gentylma~ when he was gone cam | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.171

& fortunyd to fynd the same rynge | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.172

& when he had sped hys besynes departyd | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.173

& ij. or iij. dayes after the furst ge~tylman seyng hys ryng on the
others fynger chalengyd yt of hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.174

& he denyed yt hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.175

& bad hi~ tell wher he had lost it MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,13.176

& he seyd i~ such a gentylwomans <P_14> bed | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.177

than quod the other & ther founde I yt | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.178

& the one sayd he wolde haue yt | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.179

the other sayd he shulde not | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.180

tha~ they agreyd to be iuggid by the next ma~ that they mete |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.181

& it fortunid theym to mete with the husba~d of the sayd gentyll woma~
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.182

& desyryd hym of his best Jugeme~t showyng hym all hole mater |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.183

then quod he by my iugeme~t he that owd the shetys should haue the ryng
| MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.184

the~ quod they & for your good iugeme~t you shall haue the ryng .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.185

<heading>

VII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.187

<font> Of the husband man that askyd for master pyspot the physysyo~ .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.188

<$$heading>

In a vyllage in sussex there dwellyd a husbandman whose wyfe fortunyd to
fall syk . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.190

Thys husbandman came to the preest of the church
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,14.191

and desyryd hys councell <P_15> what thyng was best to help his wyfe |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.192

whych answeryd hym & sayd y=t= in bredstrete in londo~ there was a
connyng Phesycyon whose name is callyd master Jordayne |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.193

Go to hym & shew hym that thy wyfe is syk and Jmpotent & not able to go
& shew hym her water and beseech hym to be good master to the | and
praye hym to do hys cure vppon her : and I warrant he wyll tech the some
medsyne that shall help her . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.194

Thys husbandman , folowyng hys councell ca~ to london
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.195

& askyd of dyuers men which was the way to good ale strete so y=t= euery
man y=t= hard hym laught hym to scorne . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.196

At the last on y=t= harde hym askyd him whether it were not bred strete
that he wold haue | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.197

By god quod the husbandma~ ye say treuth : MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.198

for I wyst well it was other brede or drink : MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.199

So whe~ they had taught hym the way to bred strete & was e~teryd into
y=e= strete he askyd of dyuers men where one master Pyspot dwellyd whych
sayd they knew no such ma~ & laught at hym apace .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.200

At last one askyd him whether it were not master Jordayn y=e= physycio~
. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.201

ye y=e= same quod ye husbandma~ MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.202

for I wot well a iordayn & a pyspot is all one .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.203

So whe~ they had shewyd hym hys house he we~t thyder
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.204

& ca~ to hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.205

& dyd hys era~d thys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,15.206

& sayd | Syr if it <P_16> please your mashyp I vnderstand ye ar callyd a
conyng confusyon : MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.207

So it is my wyfe is syk & omnypotent & may not go
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.208

& here I haue brought you her water MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.209

I besech you do your corage vppon her & I shall gyue your mashyp a good
reward : MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.210

The phesycio~ p~seyuyng {TEXT:p~seynyng} by the water y=t= she was weke
of nature bad hym get her mete y=t= were restoratyue
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.211

& specyally if he coud let her haue a pou~dgarnet & to let her not
ouercome her stomak w=t= mych mete tyll she haue an apetyte .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.212

Thys husba~dma~ herd him speke of a poundgarnet & an apetite
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.213

had wend he had spoken of a pound of garlyk and of an ape
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.214

& shortly bought a pound of garlyk MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.215

& after went to the stylyard MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.216

& bought an ape of one of the marchantys & brought both home to hys wyfe
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.217

and tyed the ape w=t= a cheyn at hys beddys fete |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.218

& made hys wyfe to ete the pound of garlyk whether she wolde or no |
whereby she fell in so great a lask that it purgyd all the corrupcio~
out of her body whereby & by reso~ y=t= the ape that was tyde ther made
so many mokkys skyppys & knakkys that made her oftymys to be mery &
laugh that , thankyd be god she was shortly restoryd to helth .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.219

By thys tale ye may se that oft tymys medesyns taken at aduenturys do as
mich good to the Pacyent as medesyns geuen by the solempne cou~cell of
conyng physycyons . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,16.220

<P_17>

<heading>

VIII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,17.223

<font> Of the scoler that bare his shoys to cloutyng . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,17.224

<$$heading>

In the vnyuersyte of Oxonford there was a skoler y=t= delytyd mich to
speke eloquent english & curious termis | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,17.226

And ca~ to y=e= cobler wyth hys shoys whych were pikid before as they
vsyd y=t= seson to haue them cloutyd MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,17.227

& sayd thys wyse | Cobler I pray the set me .ii. tryangyls & .ii.
semy_cercles vppon my subpedytals & I shall gyue the for thy labor |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,17.228

This cobler because he vnderstode hym not half well a~swerid shortly
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,17.229

& sayd | Syr youre eloquence passith myne i~telligence |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,17.230

but I promyse you yf ye meddyll wyth me | the clowtyng of your shone
shall coste you .iij. pence . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,17.231

By thys tale me~ may lerne yt it is foly to study to speke eloque~tly
before them that be rude & vnlernyd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,17.232

<P_22>

<heading>

XII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,22.235

<font> Of the mylner with the golden thombe . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,22.236

<$$heading>

A merchant that thought to deride a myllner seyd vnto y=e= mylner
syttyng among company . Sir I haue hard say that euery trew mylner that
tollythe trewlye hath a gyldeyn thombe | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,22.238

the mylner answeryd MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,22.239

& seyd it was trewth | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,22.240

Then quod the merchaunt I pray the let me se thy thomb |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,22.241

& when the mylner shewyd hys thomb the merchaunt sayd I can not perceyue
y=t= thy thombe is gylt | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,22.242

but yt ys but as all other mennys tho~bis be |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,22.243

to whom the mylner answeryd & seyd | Syr trothe yt ys that my tho~b is
gylt how be it ye haue no power to se it | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,22.244

for ther is a properte euer incide~t therto y=t= he y=t= ys a cokecold
shall neuer haue power to se yt . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,22.245

<P_37>

<heading>

XIX . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,37.248

<font> Of the iiii. eleme~tys where they shulde sone be found .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,37.249

<$$heading>

In y=e= old world when all thyng coud speke y=e= iiii. elementys met
togeder for many thyngys whych they had to <P_38> do because they must
medyll alway one with a nother : MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,38.251

& had co~municacio~ to_geder of dyuers matters
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,38.252

& because they coud not conclude all theyr maters at y=t= season they
appoyntyd to breke comunycacyon for y=t= tyme & to mete agayn a nother
tyme | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,38.253

therfore ech one of the~ shewyd to other wher theyre most abydyng was &
where theyr felows shuld fynd them if nede shuld requyre :
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,38.254

& furst y=e= yerth sayd brethern ye know well as for me I am p~mane~t
alway & not remouable MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,38.255

therfor ye may@ @be sure to haue me alway whan ye lyst .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,38.256

The water seyd yf ye lyste to seke me ye shal@ @be sure euer to haue me
vnder a toft of grene rushys or ellys in a womans eye .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,38.257

The wynde sayd yf ye lyst to seke me ye shal@ @be sure euer to haue me
amonge aspyn leuys or els in a womans tong . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,38.258

Then quod the fyre yf any of you lyst to seke me : ye shall euer be sure
to fynd me in a flynt stone or els in a womans hart .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,38.259

By thys tale ye may lerne as@ @well the propertes of y=e= .iiii.
elementys as ther properte of a woman . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,38.260

<P_41>

<heading>

XXI . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,41.263

<font> Of the weddyd men that cam to heuyn to clayme theyr herytage .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,41.264

<$$heading>

A certayne weddyd man there was whyche whan he was dede ca~ to heuen
gatys to saynt Peter & sayd he ca~ to claym his herytage which he had
deseruyd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,41.266

Saynt Peter askyd hym what he was | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,41.267

& he sayd a weddyd ma~ | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,41.268

anon Seynt peter openyd y=e= gatys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,41.269

& bad hym come in MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,41.270

& sayd he was worthy to haue hys herytage because he had had much
trobyll & was worthy to haue a crowne of glory .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,41.271

Anon after y=t= there cam a nother man that claymyd <P_42> heuyn | &
sayd to Seynt Peter he had had .ii. wyuys to whom Seynt peter a~sweryd
and sayd come in MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.272

for thou art worthy to haue a doble crown of glory |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.273

for thou hast had doble troble | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.274

at y=e= last there cam a thyrd claymyng heuen MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.275

& sayd to Saynt peter that he had had .iii. wyuys & desyryd to come in
| MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.276

what quod Seynte Peter thou hast bene onys in troble & therof delyueryd
| MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.277

and then wyllyngly woldyst be trobyld agayn MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.278

& yet agayn thereof delyueryd | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.279

& for all y=t= couldest not beware y=e= thyrde tyme |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.280

but enterest wyllyngely in trobyll agayne MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.281

therefore go thy way to hell MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.282

for thou shalte neuer come in heuen MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.283

for thou arte not worthy . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.284

Thys tale is a warnyng to them that haue bene twyse in parell to beware
how they come therin the thyrd tyme . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.285

<heading>

XXII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.287

<font> Of the merchaunte that chargyd hys sonne to fynde one to synge
for hys sowle . <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,42.288

<$$heading>

<P_43>

A rych merchant of london there was which had but one sonne y=t= was
somewhat vnthryfty MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,43.291

therefore his fader vppon hys deth bed called hym to hym
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,43.292

& seyd he knew well y=t= he had ben vnthrifty MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,43.293

howbeit yf he knew he wold amend hys condicio~s he wolde make hym his
executoure & leue hym his goodys so y=t= he wold promyse to praye for
his sowle : & to fynde one dayly to syng for hym | whyche thyng to
performe hys son there made a faythfull promyse .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,43.294

After y=t= thys ma~ made hym hys executoure MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,43.295

& dyed | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,43.296

But after that hys son~e kept such ryot y=t= in short tyme he had wasted
& spend all & had nothynge left but a hen & a cok that was hys faders .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,43.297

It fortunyd than that one of hys <P_44> Frendys came to hym & sayd he
was sory y=t= he had wastyd so mych & askyde hym how he woulde p~form
hys p~myse made to hys father y=t= he wold kepe one to sing for him .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.298

Thys yong man a~sweryd & sayd by god yet I wyll performe my promyse |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.299

for I wyll kepe thys same cok alyue styll MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.300

and he wyll krowe euery daye MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.301

and so he shall synge euery day for my faders sowle |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.302

& so I wyll performe my promyse well ynough .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.303

By thys ye may se that it is wysdome for a man to do good dedys hym self
whyle he is here & not to trust to the prayer and promys of hys
executours . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.304

<heading>

XXIII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.306

<font> Of the mayd washyng clothys and answered the frere . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.307

<$$heading>

There was a mayde stode by a ryuers syde in her smok washynge clothys .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.309

And as she stoupyd oft tymys in her smokke cleuyd betwene her butukkes |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.310

By whome there came a frere seynge her MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.311

and sayd in sport . Mayd mayde take hede MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,44.312

for Bayard bytys on the <P_45> brydyll . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.313

Nay wys master frere quod the mayden MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.314

he doth but wype hys mouth MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.315

and wenyth ye wyll come & kysse hym . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.316

By thys ye may se that a womans answer is neuer to seke .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.317

<heading>

XXIV . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.319

<font> Of the .iii. wyse men of gotam . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.320

<$$heading>

A certayn man there was dwellynge in a towne callyd Gotam which went to
a fayre .iii. myle of to by shepe | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.322

& as he cam ouer a brydge he met w=t= one of hys neybours
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.323

& told him whether he went | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.324

& he askyd hym whych way he wold bryng the~ | whych sayd he wold bri~g
the~ ouer the same brydge | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.325

nay quod the other ma~ but thou shalt not | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.326

by god quod he but I wyll | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.327

y=e= other agayn said he shuld not | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.328

& he agayn said he wold bryng them ouer spyte of his teth
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,45.329

& so fell at wordys | & at the last to buffertys {COM:sic} that eche one
knokkyd other well about the heddys w=t= theyre fystys . To <P_46> whom
there cam a thyrd man which was a mylner wyth a sak of mele vppo~ a
horse a neybour of theyrs MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,46.330

& partyd them MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,46.331

& askyd the~ what was the cause of theyr varyaunce |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,46.332

whych then shewyd hym the matter & cause as ye haue harde |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,46.333

Thys thyrd man the mylner thought to rebuke theyr folyshnes with a
famylyer example MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,46.334

& toke hys sak of mele from his hors bak MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,46.335

& openyd it MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,46.336

& pouryd all the mele in the sak ouer the bridge into the ronyng riuer
wherby all the mele was lost MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,46.337

& sayd thus . By my trouth neybors because ye stryue for dryuyng ouer
the brydge those shepe which be not yet bought nor wot not wher they be
| me thynkyth therfore there is euyn as mych wyt in your heddys as there
is mele in my sak . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,46.338

Thys tale shewyth you that some man takyth vppo~ hym to shew other men
wysdome when he is but a fole hym self . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,46.339

<P_47>

<heading>

XXV . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,47.342

<font> Of the gray frere that answeryd his penytent . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,47.343

<$$heading>

A man there was that came to confesse hym self to a gray frere
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,47.345

& shroue him that he had layne with a yong gentilwoma~ |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,47.346

y=e= frere than askyd hym in what place | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,47.347

& he said it was in a goodly cha~ber all nyght lo~g in a softe warme bed
| MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,47.348

The frere heryng that shruggyd in hys clothys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,47.349

& sayd | now by swete seynt fraunces then wast thou verye well at ease .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,47.350

<heading>

XXVI . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,47.352

<font> Of the gentylman that bare the sege borde on his nek . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,47.353

<$$heading>

A chandeler bei~g a wydower dwelli~g at holborne brige in lo~do~ had a
fayre doughter | whom a yo~g gentylman of dauys Inne woyd gretly to haue
hys pleasure of her | whych by long sute to her made at <P_48> y=e= last
grau~tyd him & poyntyd hym to co~e vppo~ a night to her faders house in
y=e= euenyng MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,48.355

& she wold conuey him into her cha~ber secretly whych was an inner
chamber wythin her faders cha~ber | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,48.356

so accordi~g to y=e= poi~tme~t all thi~g was p~formyd So y=t= he lay
w=t= her all nyght & made good chere tyll about .iiii. a clok i~ y=e=
morni~g | at which time it fortunyd this yo~g ge~tylma~ fell a coughi~g
| whych ca~ vppo~ hym so sore y=t= he could not refrayn .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,48.357

Thys yong wench then fering her fader that lay in the next chau~ber bad
hym go put hys hed in the draught lest y=t= her fader shuld here him :
which after her councell rose in hys shyrt & so dyd |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,48.358

but the~ because of the fauor of the draught it causyd hym to cough mich
more & louder that y=e= we~chis fader hard hym & askyd of hys doughter
what man was that y=t= coughid i~ her cha~ber |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,48.359

she answeryd MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,48.360

& sayd no body . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,48.361

But euer thys yo~g ma~ coughid styll more & more whom the fader heryng
seyd | by goddys body here thou lyest MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,48.362

I wyll se who hys there MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,48.363

& rose out of hys bed . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,48.364

Thys wench perceyuyng her fader rysyng cam <P_49> to the gentylma~
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.365

& sayd take hede syr to your self MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.366

my fader comyth . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.367

Thys gentylman sode~ly therwyth abashyd wolde haue pullyd hys hed out of
the drawght hole whych was very streyte for hys hed that he pullyd the
sege bord vp therwyth | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.368

& hangyng about hys nek ran vppon the fader beyng an old man
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.369

& gaue hym a gret fall | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.370

& bare hym down MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.371

& hurt hys arme | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.372

& openyd the dorys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.373

& ra~ into y=e= strete wyth y=e= draught borde about hys nek toward
dauys Inne as fast as he could . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.374

This we~ch for fere ra~ out of her faders house
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.375

& ca~ not there a moneth after . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.376

Thys gentylman as he ran vppon holborne brydge met w=t= a colyers cart
laden w=t= colys where there was .ii. or .iii. skyttysh horsys | which
when they saw thys gentylman ro~nyng start asyde & threw down y=e= cart
wyth colys | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.377

& drew it asyde MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.378

& brake y=e= cart rope | wherby the colys fell out some in one place
some in an other | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.379

& after the horsys brake theyr trasys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.380

& ran some toward smythfeld & some toward newgate that the colyer ra~
after them MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.381

& was a~ howre & more or he coud get his horse to_geder agayn | By whych
tyme the people of the strete were rysen and ca~ to y=e= strete & saw yt
strawyd wyth colys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,49.382

euery one for hys part gaderyd vp the <P_50> colys : that y=e= most part
of the colys were gone or the colyer had got hys horsys .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,50.383

But duryng thys whyle the ge~tylman we~t thorow seynt andrews chyrchyard
toward dauys Inne | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,50.384

& there met wyth the sexte~ comyng to church to ri~g to morrow mas :
whych when he saw the gentylman in the churchyarde in hys shyrt w=t= the
draght bord about hys nek | had we~d it had ben a spryt :
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,50.385

& cryed alas alas a spryt MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,50.386

& ran bak agayn to hys house almost at y=e= barrys
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,50.387

& for fere was almost out of hys wyt y=t= he was y=e= worse halfe a yere
after . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,50.388

Thys gentlman than because dauys Inne gatys were not open went on the
bak syde MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,50.389

& lept ouer the garden wall | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,50.390

but in lepyng the sege bord so trobled hym that he fell down in to the
garden & had almost broke~ his nek & there ley styll tyll y=t=
{COM:preceding_word_"y=t="_emended} the pri~cipall cam in to the gardyn
| whych when he saw hym ly there had wend som man had be slayne & there
cast ouer y=e= wall and durst not come nye him tyll he had callyd vp hys
company | whych when many of the gentylmen wher come to_gether | lokyd
well vppo~ him and knew hym & after releuyd hym |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,50.391

But the borde <P_51> y=t= was about hys nek causyd hys hed so to swell
that they coud not get it of tyll they were fayne to cutte it of with
hatchettys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.392

Thus was the wench well Jap~yd | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.393

& for fere she ran fro~ her fader | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.394

her faders arme was hurt MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.395

the colyar lost his colys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.396

the sexte~ was almost out of his wyt | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.397

& the gentylman had almost broke his neck . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.398

<heading>

XXVII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.400

<font> Of the marchau~tys wyfe that seyd she wolde take a nap at sermon
. <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.401

<$$heading>

A marchantys wyfe ther was in bowe parysh in london some what stept in
age to who~ her mayd cam on a sonday in lent after dyner & sayd |
maystres quod she they ryng at seynt Thomas of acres
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.403

for ther shall be a sermo~ prechyd anon | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.404

to whom the maystres answerd & sayd mary goddys blyssyng on thy hart for
warnyng me therof MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,51.405

& because I slept <P_52> not well all this night I pray the brynge my
stole with me MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.406

for I wyll go thyder to loke wether I can take a nap there whyle the
prest is prechyng . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.407

By this ye may se that many on goth to churche as moche for other
thyngys as for deuocyon . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.408

<heading>

XXVIII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.410

<font> Of the woman that seyd & she lyffyd a nother yere she wolde haue
a kokoldis hat of her owne . <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.411

<$$heading>

Ther was a certayn company of women gatheryd to_geder in co~munycacion
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.413

one happenyd thus to say her pyggys after they were farowyd dyed and
wolde not lyue MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.414

and one olde wyfe of her accoyntance heryng her say so bad her get a
cockoldys Hat and put the pyggys therin a whyle after they were farrowyd
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.415

and they sholde lyue | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.416

whych wyfe intendyng to do after her counsell came to one of her
gossyppys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.417

and shewyd her what medecyne was taught her for her pyggys
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.418

& prayd her to lend her her husbandys hat | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,52.419

whych answeryd her angerly and sayd I wold <P_53> thou knewyst it Drabbe
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.420

I haue none MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.421

for my husbande is no cookold MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.422

for I am a good woman MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.423

and so lyke wyse euery wyfe answeryd her in lyke maner that she departyd
from many of them in anger and skoldynge | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.424

But when she sawe she coude get none she came agayne to her gossyppys
all angerly MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.425

and sayd I haue gone round about to borrow a cookoldys hat
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.426

and I can get none wherefore yf I lyue another yere I wyll haue one of
myn own and be out of my neyghbours daunger .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.427

By this tale a man may lerne that it is more wysdome for a man to trust
more to his owne store than to his neyghbours gentylnes .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.428

<heading>

XXIX . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.430

<font> Of the gentylman that wyshyd his toth in the gentylwomans tayle .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.431

<$$heading>

A gentylman & a gentylwoman sat togeder talkyn whiche gentylman had gret
payn in one of his teth . & hapnyd to say to the ge~tylwoman thus .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.433

I wys mastres I haue a toth i~ my hed which greuyth me very sore
wherfore I wold yt were in your tale . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,53.434

She heryng hym saying so . answeryd thus <P_54> In good fayth syr if
your toth were in my tale it coud do yt but lytell good |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.435

but if there be any thynge in my tale that can do your toth good I wold
yt were in your toth . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.436

By this ye may se that a womans answer is seldome to seke .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.437

<heading>

XXX . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.439

<font> Of the welchman that confessyd hym how he had slayn a frere .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.440

<$$heading>

In the tyme of lent a welchman cam to be confessyd of hys curat whych in
hys co~fessyon sayd that he had kyllyd a frere | to who~ the curat sayd
he coude not assoyle hym | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.442

yet quod the welchma~ yf thou knewest all thou woldest assoyle me well
enough | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.443

& when the curat co~mandyd hym to shew hym all the case he sayd thus |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.444

mary ther wer ii freres MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.445

& I might haue slayn them both yf I had lyst MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.446

but I let one skape MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.447

therfore master curat set the tone agaynst the t@ @other & then the
offence ys not so great but ye may assoyle me well ynough .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,54.448

By this ye may se that dyuers menne haue so euyll & large co~scyens that
they thynke yf they do one good dede or refrayne from the doynge <P_55>
of one euyll synne that yt ys a satysfaccyon for other synnis and
offencys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,55.449

<heading>

XXXI . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,55.451

<font> Of the welchman that coude not get but a lytyll male . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,55.452

<$$heading>

There was a company of ge~tylmen in northa~tonshyre whych went to hunte
for deere in the porlews in the gollet besyde stony stratford | Among
which gentylmen ther was one which had a walche man to his syruaunte a
good archer | whiche when they came to a place where they thought they
shold haue game | they made a stondyng and poynted thys welchman to
stand by a tre nygh the hye way and bad hym in any wyse to take hede
that he shot at no raskall nor medle nat without it were a male & yf it
were a male to spare not | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,55.454

wel quod this walchman let me alone . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,55.455

And whan this walchman had stande there a whyle he sawe moche dere
co~mynge | as well of Auntelere as of Rascall |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,55.456

but eur he let them go MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,55.457

and toke no hede to theym . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,55.458

<P_56>

And within an howre after he saw come rydyng in the hye way a man of the
countrey which had a boget hangynge at hys sadyll bowe .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.460

And whan this walche man had espyed hym he bad hym stand
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.461

& began to drawe his bow MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.462

and bad hym deliuer that lyttyll male that hynge at this sadell bowe |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.463

Thys man for fere of hys lyfe was glad to delyuer hym his boget |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.464

& so dyd MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.465

& than rode his way MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.466

& was glad he was so eskapyd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.467

And whan this man of the countrey was gon thys welchman was very glad
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.468

& went incontynent to seke his master MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.469

& at last founde hym with his company | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.470

and wha~ he sawe hym he come to hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.471

& sayd thus | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.472

Master by cottys plut & her nayle I haue stande yonder thys two howrys
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.473

and I cowd se neuer a male but a lytell male that a man had hangyng at
his sadell bow | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.474

& that I haue gotten | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.475

& lo here it is | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.476

and toke his master the boget whych he had taken away from the forsayd
man | for the whyche dede bothe the master & the seruant were afterwarde
in great trouble . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.477

By thys ye may lerne yt ys gret foly for a master to put a seruant to
that besynes wherof he can nothing skyll and wherin he hath nat be vsyd
. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,56.478

<P_57>

<heading>

XXXII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,57.481

<font> Of the gentyll woman that sayd to a gentylman ye haue a berde
a_boue & none benethe . <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,57.482

<$$heading>

A yonge gentylman of the age of .xx. yere some whate dysposyd to myrth
and game on a tyme talkyd with a gentylwoman which was right wyse and
also mery . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,57.484

this gentyll woman as she talkyd with hym happenyd to loke vppon his
berde | whiche was but yong and growen some what vppon the ouer_lyppe
and but lyttyll growen beneth as all yonge mennys berdys co~monly vse to
growe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,57.485

sayd to hym thus . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,57.486

Syr ye haue a berde aboue and none beneth . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,57.487

and he herynge her say so | sayd in sporte mastres ye haue a berde
benethe and none aboue | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,57.488

mary quod she | then set the tone agaynst the t@ @other | which answere
made the gentylman so abashyd that he had not one worde to answer .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,57.489

<P_58>

<heading>

XXXIII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,58.492

<font> Of the frere that sayd our lord fed .v._M. peple with .ij.
fyshys . <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,58.493

<$$heading>

There was a certayn white frere which was a very glotton and a great
nyggyn whyche had an vngracyouse boy that euer folowyd hym and bare hys
cloke | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,58.495

and what for the frerys glottony & for his chorlyshnes the boy where he
went coude skant get mete inough MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,58.496

for the frere wolde eet almoste all hym selfe .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,58.497

But on a tyme the frere made a sermon in the co~trey wherin he touchyde
very many myracles whiche cryst dyd afore his passyon amonge whiche he
specyalli rehersyde the myracle that cryste dyd in fedynge
fyue_thousande people wythe fyue louys of brede and with iij lyttell
fyshys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,58.498

and thys frerys boy which caryd not gretely for hys master herynge hym
say so and consyderyng that his master was so great a churle and glotton
answered with a loude voyce that all the church hard
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,58.499

& sayd by my trouth mayster | Then there were no fryers there . whiche
answere made all the people to fall on suche a lawghynge that for shame
the frere wente out of the pulpet . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,58.500

and as <P_59> for the frerys boy he than departyd out of the church that
the frere neuer saw hym after . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,59.501

By thys ye may se that it is honesty for a ma~ that is at mete to depart
with suche as he has to them that be present .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P1,59.502

