<BEGIN_mhatton-1678-e3-p1>

<P_167.19>

<heading:edcomment:MARY_HATTON>

July y=e= 17 , <bracket> 1678 . <$$bracket> MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,167.19.4

Dearest Brother , My designes , as you know , are broke , since a peace
is absolutly determined . MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,167.19.5

The K. consents to disband the army , onely that in garrisons , in
Flanders , to stand till peace is determined generaly .
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,167.19.6

S=r= Robert Carr is turned out from being Chancelour of the Dutchy .
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,167.19.7

He was too much a freind to L=d= Arlington to stand .
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,167.19.8

The next <P_168> news he gives me is a pleasant storry that begings thus
: MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.9

Daincourt , Lady Gray , and M=is= Smith walked still on .
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.10

In the Park , the first left them , MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.11

and going home in her chair , the L=d= of Monmouth mistaks the Lady Gray
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.12

and gives her a billet . MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.13

When she came home , she gives it her husband , who was angry with her ,
least y=e= L=d= should be displeased at the misfortun of his billet ;
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.14

he caryes it presently to him , MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.15

beggs his pardon in the mistake . MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.16

The L=d= beggs his , lest he should take the giving of the letter ill to
his wife . MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.17

And thus much for Inglish news . MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.18

What I have to aquaint you w=th=all of Paris news is our cosin Montague@
@s being gon last Monday post towards Ingland , opon {COM:sic} my Lord
Sunderland@ @'s being sent hither ambassador , which bussness they say
my Lady Cleavland has intrigued , out of revenge to the ambass. for
being soe jealous of her for one Chevalier Chatillon as to wright it
wheire he thought it might doe her most prejudice , which she being
advertised of , and attributing to it the cold reception she found when
she was laitly in Ingland , has , as they say , acussed him of not being
faithfull to his master in the imployment he gave him here ; too which
there is another particular that dus much agravate her ,
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.19

and that is that , whillest she was in Ingland , the ambas. was every
day with her daughter Sussex , which has ocationed such jealously of all
sides that , for the saffty of my Lady Sussex , it is reported the
ambas. advissed her to a nunnery , and made choice of Belle Chase for
her , where she is at present and will not see her mother .
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.20

The Chevalier Chatillon is a person of quallity , young and handsome ,
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.21

but noe istate , and therefore &c. ; MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,168.22

pour la <P_169> bigotte , si elle ne peut courrir , quelle trotte , with
which French proverb I will now eaise you of this trouble , and onely
begg one favour more of you , that you will ever beleeve me , what
sincerly I am , Deare brother , Yr most affec. sister and humble
servant to command , M. H. MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,169.23

Deare brother , I am not afraid of y=r= getting the small_pox ,
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,169.24

but for God saike have a care of coming neare those that have the
feavour . MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,169.25

<heading:edcomment:THE_SAME>

Sept. y=e= 6th <bracket> 1678? <$$bracket> MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,169.27

It comes in my mind to aske you if you have , in England , stel penns ;
because , if you have not , I will indevour to gett you some by one that
told me of them , and did asseur me neither the glass penns nor any
other sorts are neare soe good . MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,169.28

The Duchesse of Monmouth {COM:preceding_word_"Monmouth"_emended} ,
laitly arrived at Paris , went yesterday towards Bourbon .
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,169.29

She dus gaine upon all that visitts her here for her tender hart to the
Romain Catho. in Ingland . MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,169.30

Doctor Goffe taks ye care of all her affaires here .
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,169.31

Y=r= lo=p= most affec. sister and humble servant to command .
MHATTON-1678-E3-P1,169.32

