<BEGIN_milton-1670-e3-p1>

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_1_here}

<P_X,150>

The same year <font> Kelwulf <$$font> made War on the <font>
South-Saxons <$$font> , bloody , saith <font> Huntingdon <$$font> , to
both sides , but most to them of the <font> South <$$font> :
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,150.4

and four years after dying left the Government of <font> West-Saxons
<$$font> to <font> Kinegils <$$font> and <font> Cuichelm <$$font> the
sons of his brother <font> Keola <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,150.5

Others , as <font> Florent <$$font> of <font> Worster <$$font> and
<font> Mathew <$$font> of <font> Westminster <$$font> , will have <font>
Cuichelm <$$font> son of <font> Kinegils <$$font> , but admitted to
reign with his father , in whose third year they are recorded with joynt
Forces or conduct to have fought against the <font> Britans <$$font> in
<font> Beandune <$$font> , now <font> Bindon <$$font> in <font>
Dorsetshire <$$font> , and to have slain of them above two_thousand .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,150.6

More memorable was the second year following , by the death of <font>
Ethelbert <$$font> the first Christian King of <font> Saxons <$$font> ,
and no less a favourer of all civility in that rude age .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,150.7

He gave Laws and Statutes after the example of <font> Roman <$$font>
Emperors , written with the advice of his sagest Counsellors , but in
the <font> English <$$font> tongue , and observ'd long after . Wherein
his special care was to punish those who had stoln ought from Church or
Churchman , thereby shewing how gratefully he receiv'd at thir hands the
Christian Faith . Which , he no sooner dead , but his son <font>
Eadbald <$$font> took the course as fast to extinguish ; not only
falling back to Heathenism , but that which Heathenism was wont to abhor
, marrying his fathers second wife . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,150.8

Then soon was perceiv'd what multitudes for fear or countenance of the
King had profess't Christianity , returning now as <P_X,151> eagerly to
thir old Religion . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,151.9

Nor staid the Apostacy within one Province , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,151.10

but quickly spread over to the <font> East-Saxons <$$font> ; occasion'd
there likewise , or set forward by the death of thir Christian King
<font> Sebert <$$font> : whose three sons , of whom two are nam'd <font>
Sexted <$$font> and <font> Seward <$$font> , neither in his life time
would be brought to baptism , and after his decease re-establish'd the
free exercise of Idolatry ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,151.11

nor so content , they set themselves in despight to do some op'n
profanation against the other Sacrament . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,151.12

Coming therfore into the Church , where <font> Mellitus <$$font> the
Bishop was ministring , they requir'd him in abuse and scorn to deliver
to them unbaptiz'd the consecrated bread ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,151.13

and him refuseing , drove disgracefully out of their dominion . Who
cross'd forthwith into <font> Kent <$$font> , where things were in the
same plight , and thence into <font> France <$$font> , with <font>
Justus <$$font> Bishop of <font> Rochester <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,151.14

But Divine vengeance deferr'd not long the punishment of men so impious
; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,151.15

for <font> Eadbald <$$font> , vext with an evil Spirit , fell oft'n into
foul fits of distraction ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,151.16

and the Sons of <font> Sebert <$$font> , in a fight against the <font>
West-Saxons <$$font> perish'd , with their whole Army .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,151.17

But <font> Eadbald <$$font> , within the year , by an extraordinary
means became penitent . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,151.18

For when <font> Laurence <$$font> the Archbishop and successor of <font>
Austin <$$font> was preparing to ship for <font> France <$$font> , after
<font> Justus <$$font> and <font> Mellitus <$$font> , the story goes ,
if it be worth beleeving , that St. <font> Peter <$$font> , in whose
Church he spent the night before in watching and praying , appear'd to
him , and to make the Vision more sensible , gave him many stripes for
offering to desert his flock ; at sight whereof the King <paren> to whom
next morning he shew'd the marks of what he had suffer'd , by whom and
for what cause <$$paren> relenting and <P_X,152> in great fear dissolv'd
his incestuous marriage , and appli'd himself to the Christian Faith
more sincerely then before , with all his people .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,152.19

But the <font> Londoners <$$font> addicted still to Paganism , would not
be perswaded to receave again <font> Mellitus <$$font> thir {COM:sic}
Bishop , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,152.20

and to compell them was not in his power . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,152.21

Thus much through all the South was troubl'd in Religion , as much were
the North parts disquieted through Ambition .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,152.22

For <font> Ethelfrid <$$font> of <font> Bernicia <$$font> , as was
touch't before , having thrown <font> Edwin <$$font> out of <font> Deira
<$$font> , and join'd that Kingdome to his own , not content to have
bereav'd him of his right , whose known vertues and high parts gave
cause of suspition to his Enemies , sends Messengers to demand him of
<font> Redwald <$$font> King of <font> East-Angles <$$font> ; under
whose protection , after many years wandring obscurely through all the
Iland , he had plac'd his safety . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,152.23

<font> Redwald <$$font> , though having promis'd all defence to <font>
Edwin <$$font> as to his suppliant , yet tempted with continual and
large offers of gold , and not contemning the puissance of <font>
Ethelfrid <$$font> , yeilded at length , either to dispatch him , or to
give him into thir hands : MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,152.24

but earnestly exhorted by his Wife , not to betray the Faith and
inviolable Law of Hospitality and refuge giv'n , preferrs his first
promise as the more Religious , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,152.25

nor only refuses to deliver him ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,152.26

but since War was thereupon denounc't , determins to be beforehand with
the danger ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,152.27

and with a sudden Army rais'd , surprises <font> Ethelfrid <$$font> ,
little dreaming an invasion , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,152.28

and in a fight near to the East-side of the River <font> Idle <$$font> ,
on the <font> Mercian <$$font> border , now <font> Nottinghamshire
<$$font> , slaies him , dissipating easily those few Forces which he had
got to march out over-hastily with him ; who yet as a testimony
<P_X,153> of his Fortune , not his Valour to be blam'd , slew first with
his own hands , <font> Reiner <$$font> the Kings Son .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,153.29

His two Sons <font> Oswald <$$font> , and <font> Oswi <$$font> by <font>
Acca <$$font> , <font> Edwins <$$font> Sister , escap'd into <font>
Scotland <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,153.30

By this Victory , <font> Redwald <$$font> became so far superior to the
other <font> Saxon <$$font> Kings , that <font> Beda <$$font> reck'ns
him the next after <font> Ella <$$font> and <font> Ethelbert <$$font> ;
who besides this Conquest of the North , had likewise all on the
hitherside <font> Humber <$$font> at his obedience .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,153.31

He had formerly in <font> Kent <$$font> receav'd Baptism ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,153.32

but coming home and perswaded by his Wife , who still it seems , was his
Chief Counseller to good or bad alike , relaps'd into his old Religion ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,153.33

yet not willing to forgoe his new , thought it not the worst way , lest
perhaps he might err in either , for more assurance to keep them both ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,153.34

and in the same Temple erected one Altar to Christ , another to his
Idols . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,153.35

But <font> Edwin <$$font> , as with more deliberation he undertook , and
with more sincerity retain'd the Christian profession , so also in power
and extent of dominion far exceeded all before him ; subdueing all ,
saith <font> Beda <$$font> , English or British , eev'n to the Iles ,
then call'd <font> Mevanian <$$font> , <font> Anglesey <$$font> , and
<font> Man <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,153.36

setl'd in his Kingdome by <font> Redwald <$$font> , he sought in mariage
<font> Edelburga <$$font> , whom others call <font> Tate <$$font> , the
Daughter of <font> Ethelbert <$$font> . To whose Embassadors , <font>
Eadbald <$$font> her Brother made answer , that to wed thir Daughter to
a Pagan , was not the Christian Law . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,153.37

<font> Edwin <$$font> repli'd , that to her Religion he would be no
hindrance , which with her whole Houshold she might freely exercise .
And moreover , that if examin'd it were found the better , he would
imbrace it . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,153.38

These ingenuous offers , op'ning so fair a way to the advancement of
truth , are accepted , and <font> Paulinus <$$font> as a spiritual
<P_X,154> Guardian sent along with the Virgin .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,154.39

He being to that purpose made Bishop by <font> Justus <$$font> , omitted
no occasion to plant the Gospel in those parts , but with small success
, till the next year , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,154.40

<font> Cuichelm <$$font> , at that time one of the two <font> West-Saxon
<$$font> Kings , envious of the greatness which he saw <font> Edwin
<$$font> growing up to , sent privily <font> Eumerus <$$font> a hir'd
Sword-man to assassin him ; who under pretence of doing a message from
his Master , with a poison'd Weapon , stabs at <font> Edwin <$$font> ,
conferring with him in his House , by the River <font> Derwent <$$font>
in <font> Yorkeshire <$$font> , on an Easter-day ; which <font> Lilla
<$$font> one of the Kings Attendants , at the instant perceaving , with
a loyalty that stood not then to deliberate , abandon'd his whole body
to the blow ; which notwithstanding made passage through to the Kings
Person , with a wound not to be slighted . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,154.41

The murderer encompass'd now with Swords , and desperate , fore-revenges
his own fall with the Death of another , whom his Poinard reach'd home .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,154.42

<font> Paulinus <$$font> omitting no opportunity to win the King from
misbeleef , obtain'd at length this promise from him ; that if Christ ,
whom he so magnifi'd , would give him to recover of his wound , and
victory of his Enemies who had thus assaulted him , he would then become
Christian , in pledge whereof he gave his young Daughter <font> Eanfled
<$$font> to be bred up in Religion ; who with 12 others of his Family ,
on the day of <font> Pentecost <$$font> was baptiz'd .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,154.43

And by that time well recover'd of his wound ; to punish the Authors of
so foul a fact , he went with an Army against the <font> West-Saxons
<$$font> : whom having quell'd by War , and of such as had conspir'd
against him , put some to Death , others pardon'd , he return'd home
victorius , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,154.44

<P_X,155>

and from that time worship'd no more his Idols ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,155.46

yet ventur'd not rashly into Baptism , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,155.47

but first took care to be instructed rightly , what he learnt ,
examining and still considering with himself and others , whom he held
wisest ; though <font> Boniface <$$font> the Pope , by large Letters of
exhortation , both to him and his Queen , was not wanting to quicken his
beleef . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,155.48

But while he still deferr'd , and his deferring might seem now to have
past the maturity of wisedome to a faulty lingring , <font> Paulinus
<$$font> by Revelation , as was beleev'd , coming to the knowledge of a
secret , which befell him strangly in the time of his troubles , on a
certain day went in boldly to him , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,155.49

and laying his right hand on the head of the King , ask'd him if he
rememberd what that sign meant ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,155.50

the King trembling , and in a maze riseing up , strait fell at his Feet
. MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,155.51

Behold , saith <font> Paulinus <$$font> , raising him from the ground ;
God hath deliver'd you from your Enemies , and giv'n you the Kingdome ,
as you desir'd : MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,155.52

perform now what long since you promis'd him , to receave his Doctrine
which I now bring you , and the Faith , which if you accept , shall to
your temporal felicity , and {SIC:add} Eternal .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,155.53

The promise claim'd of him by <font> Paulinus <$$font> , how and
wherefore made , though savouring much of Legend , is thus related .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,155.54

<font> Redwald <$$font> , as we heard before , dazl'd with the gold of
<font> Ethelfrid <$$font> , or by his threatning over-aw'd , having
promis'd to yeild up <font> Edwin <$$font> , one of his faithfull
Companions , of which he had some few with him in the Court of <font>
Redwald <$$font> , that never shrunk from his adversity , about the
first howr of night comes in hast to his Chamber ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,155.55

and calling him forth for better secrecy , reveles to him his danger ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,155.56

offers him his <P_X,156> aid to make escape ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.57

but that course not approv'd , as seeming dishonourable without more
manifest cause to begin distrust towards one who had so long bin his
only refuge , the friend departs . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.58

<font> Edwin <$$font> left alone without the Palace Gate , full of
sadness and perplext thoughts , discerns about the dead of night , a man
neither by countnance nor by habit to him known , approaching towards
him . Who after salutation , ask'd him why at this howr , when all
others were at rest , he alone so sadly sat waking on a cold Stone ?
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.59

<font> Edwin <$$font> not a little misdoubting who he might be , ask'd
him again , what his sitting within dores , or without , concern'd him
to know ? MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.60

To whom he again , think not that who thou art , or why sitting heer ,
or what danger hangs over thee , is to me unknown
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.61

But what would you promise to that man , who ever would befriend you out
of all these troubles , and perswade <font> Redwald <$$font> to the like
? MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.62

All that I am able , answer'd <font> Edwin <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.63

And he , what if the same man should promise to make you greater then
any English King hath bin before you ? MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.64

I should not doubt , quoth <font> Edwin <$$font> , to be answerably
gratefull . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.65

And what if to all this he would inform you , said the other , in a way
to happiness , beyond what any of your Ancestors hath known ?
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.66

would you hark'n to his Counsel ? MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.67

<font> Edwin <$$font> without stopping promis'd he would .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.68

And the other laying his right hand on <font> Edwins <$$font> head ,
when this sign , saith he , shall next befall thee , remember this time
of night , and this discourse , to perform what thou hast promis'd ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,156.69

and with these words disappeering , left <font> Edwin <$$font> much
reviv'd , but not less fill'd with wonder , who this unknown should be .
When suddenly the friend who had <P_X,157> bin gon all this while to
list'n furder what was like to be decree'd of <font> Edwin <$$font> ,
comes back and joyfully bids him rise to his repose , for that the Kings
mind , though for a while drawn aside , was now fully resolv'd not only
not to betray him , but to defend him against all Enemies , as he had
promis'd . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,157.70

This was said to be the cause why <font> Edwin <$$font> admonish't by
the Bishop of a sign which had befaln him so strangely , and as he
thought so secretly , arose to him with that reverence and amazement ,
as to one sent from Heav'n , to claim that promise of him which he
perceav'd well was due to a Divine power , that had assisted him in his
troubles . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,157.71

To <font> Paulinus <$$font> therefore he makes answer , that the
Christian Beleef he himself ought by promise , and intended to receave ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,157.72

but would conferr first with his Cheif Peers and Counsellers , that if
they likewise could be won , all at once might be baptiz'd .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,157.73

They therfore being ask'd in Counsel what thir opinion was concerning
this new Doctrine , and well perceaving which way the King enclin'd ,
every one thereafter shap'd his reply . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,157.74

The Cheif-@ @Preist speaking first , discover'd an old grudge he had
against his Gods , for advancing others in the Kings Favour above him
thir Cheif Preist : MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,157.75

another hiding his Court-compliance with a grave sentence , commended
the choise of certain before uncertain , upon due examination ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,157.76

to like purpose answer'd all the rest of his Sages , none op'nly
dissenting from what was likely to be the Kings Creed : wheras the
preaching of <font> Paulinus <$$font> could work no such effect upon
them , toiling till that time without success . Whereupon <font> Edwin
<$$font> renouncing Heathenism , became Christian :
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,157.77

and the Pagan <P_X,158> Preist , offring himself freely to demolish the
Altars of his former Gods , made some amends for his teaching to adore
them . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,158.78

With <font> Edwin <$$font> , his two Sons <font> Osfrid <$$font> and
<font> Eanfrid <$$font> , born to him by <font> Quenburga <$$font> ,
Daughter , as saith <font> Beda <$$font> , of <font> Kearle <$$font>
King of <font> Mercia <$$font> , in the time of his banishment , and
with them most of the people , both Nobles and Commons , easily
converted , were baptiz'd ; he with his whole Family at <font> York
<$$font> , in a Church hastily built up of Wood , the multitude most
part in Rivers . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,158.79

<font> Northumberland <$$font> thus christ'nd , <font> Paulinus <$$font>
crossing <font> Humber <$$font> , converted also the Province of <font>
Lindsey <$$font> , and <font> Blecca <$$font> the Governour of <font>
Lincoln <$$font> , with his Houshold and most of that City ; wherin he
built a Church of Stone , curiously wrought , but of small continuance ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,158.80

for the Roof in <font> Bedas <$$font> time , uncertain whether by
neglect or Enemies , was down ; the Walls only standing .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,158.81

Mean while in <font> Mercia <$$font> , <font> Kearle <$$font> a Kinsman
of <font> Wibba <$$font> , saith <font> Huntingdon <$$font> , not a Son
, having long withheld the Kingdome from <font> Penda <$$font> <font>
Wibba's <$$font> Son , left it now at length to the fiftieth year of his
Age : with whom <font> Kinegils <$$font> and <font> Cuichelm <$$font> ,
the <font> West-Saxon <$$font> Kings , two year after , having by that
time it seems recover'd strength , since the Inrode made upon them by
<font> Edwin <$$font> , fought at <font> Cirencester <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,158.82

then made Truce . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,158.83

But <font> Edwin <$$font> seeking every way to propagate the Faith ,
which with so much deliberation he had receav'd , persuaded <font>
Eorpwald <$$font> the Son of <font> Redwald <$$font> , King of <font>
East-Angles <$$font> , to imbrace the same beleef ; willingly or in aw
is not known , retaining under <font> Edwin <$$font> the name only of a
King . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,158.84

But <font> Eorpwald <$$font> not long surviv'd his conversion , slain in
fight by <font> Ricbert <$$font> a Pagan : wherby the people having
lightly <P_X,159> follow'd the Religion of thir King , as lightly fell
back to thir old superstitions for above 3 years after :
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,159.85

<font> Edwin <$$font> in the mean while , to his Faith adding vertue ,
by the due administration of justice wrought such peace over all his
Territories , that from Sea to Sea , man or woman might have travail'd
in safety . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,159.86

His care also was of Fountains by the way side , to make them fittest
for the use of Travellers . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,159.87

And not unmindful of regal State , whether in War or Peace , he had a
Royal Banner carried before him . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,159.88

But having reign'd with much honour 17 years , he was at length by
<font> Kedwalla <$$font> , or <font> Cadwallon <$$font> , King of the
<font> Britans <$$font> , who with aid of the <font> Mercian <$$font>
<font> Penda <$$font> , had rebell'd against him , slain in Battel with
his Son <font> Osfrid <$$font> , at a place call'd <font> Hethfeild
<$$font> , and his whole Army overthrown or disperst in the year 633.
and the <font> 47th <$$font> of his Age , in the Eye of man worthy a
more peacefull end . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,159.89

His Head brought to <font> York <$$font> , was there buried in the
Church by him begun . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,159.90

Sad was this overthrow , both to Church and State of the <font>
Northumbrians <$$font> : MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,159.91

for <font> Penda <$$font> being a Heathen , and the British King ,
though in name a Christian , yet in deeds more bloody then the Pagan ,
nothing was omitted of barbarous cruelty in the slaughter of Sex or Age
; <font> Kedwalla <$$font> threatning to root out the whole Nation ,
though then newly Christian . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,159.92

For the <font> Britans <$$font> , and , as <font> Beda <$$font> saith ,
eev'n to his dayes , accounted <font> Saxon <$$font> Christianity no
better then Paganism , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,159.93

and with them held as little Communion . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,159.94

From these calamities no refuge being left but flight , <font> Paulinus
<$$font> taking with him <font> Ethilburga <$$font> the Queen and her
Children , aided by <font> Bassus <$$font> , one of <font> Edwins
<$$font> Captains , made escape by Sea to <font> Eadbald <$$font> King
of <font> Kent <$$font> : who <P_X,160> receaving his Sister with all
kindness , made <font> Paulinus <$$font> Bishop of <font> Rochester
<$$font> , where he ended his days . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,160.95

After <font> Edwin <$$font> , the Kingdom of <font> Northumberland
<$$font> became divided as before , each rightfull Heir seising his part
; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,160.96

in <font> Deira <$$font> <font> Osric <$$font> , the Son of <font>
Elfric <$$font> , <font> Edwins <$$font> Uncle , by profession a
Christian , and baptiz'd by <font> Paulinus <$$font> ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,160.97

in <font> Bernicia <$$font> , <font> Eanfrid <$$font> , the Son of
<font> Ethelfrid <$$font> ; who all the time of <font> Edwin <$$font> ,
with his Brother <font> Oswald <$$font> , and many of the young Nobility
, liv'd in <font> Scotland <$$font> exil'd , and had bin there taught
and baptiz'd . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,160.98

No sooner had they gott'n each a Kingdom , but both turn'd recreant ,
sliding back into their old Religion ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,160.99

and both were the same year slain ; <font> Osric <$$font> by a sudden
eruption of <font> Kedwalla <$$font> , whom he in a strong Town had
unadvisedly beseig'd ; <font> Eanfrid <$$font> seeking peace , and
inconsideratly with a few surrendring himself .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,160.100

<font> Kedwalla <$$font> now rang'd at will through both those Provinces
, useing cruelly his Conquest ; when <font> Oswald <$$font> the Brother
of <font> Eanfrid <$$font> with a small but Christian Army ,
unexpectedly coming on , defeated and destroy'd both him and his huge
Forces , which he boasted to be invincible , by a little River running
into <font> Tine <$$font> , neer the antient <font> Roman <$$font> Wall
then call'd <font> Denisburn <$$font> , the place afterwards <font>
Heav'n field <$$font> , from the Cross reported miraculous for Cures ,
which <font> Oswald <$$font> there erected before the Battail , in tok'n
of his Faith against the great number of his Enemies .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,160.101

Obtaining the Kingdom , he took care to instruct again the people in
Christianity . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,160.102

Sending therfore to the Scotish Elders , <font> Beda <$$font> so terms
them , among whom he had receav'd Baptism , requested of them som
faithfull Teacher , who might again settle Religion in his Realm , which
the late <P_X,161> troubles had impar'd ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.103

they as readily hearkning to his request , send <font> Aidan <$$font> a
Scotch Monk and Bishop , but of singular zeal and meekness , with others
to assist him , whom at thir own desire he seated in <font> Lindisfarne
<$$font> , as the Episcopal Seat , now <font> Holy Iland <$$font> :
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.104

and being the Son of <font> Ethelfrid <$$font> , by the Sister of <font>
Edwin <$$font> , as right Heir , others failing , easily reduc'd both
Kingdoms of <font> Northumberland <$$font> as before into one ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.105

nor of <font> Edwins <$$font> Dominion lost any part ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.106

but enlarg'd it rather ; over all the fowr <font> British <$$font>
Nations , <font> Angles <$$font> , <font> Britans <$$font> , <font>
Picts <$$font> and <font> Scots <$$font> , exerciseing regall Authority
. MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.107

Of his Devotion , Humility , and Almes-deeds , much is spok'n ; that he
disdain'd not to be the interpreter of <font> Aidan <$$font> , preaching
in Scotch or bad English , to his Nobles and Houshold Servants ; and had
the poor continually serv'd at his Gate , after the promiscuous manner
of those times : MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.108

his meaning might be upright , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.109

but the manner more antient of privat or of Church contribution , is
doubtless more Evangelical . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.110

About this time , the <font> West-Saxons <$$font> , antiently call'd
<font> Gevissi <$$font> , by the preaching of <font> Berinus <$$font> ,
a Bishop , whom Pope <font> Honorius <$$font> had sent , were converted
to the Faith with <font> Kinegils <$$font> thir King :
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.111

him <font> Oswald <$$font> receav'd out of the Font , and his Daughter
in mariage . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.112

The next year <font> Cuichelm <$$font> was baptiz'd in <font> Dorchester
<$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.113

but liv'd not to the years end . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.114

The <font> East-Angles <$$font> also this year were reclaimed to the
Faith of Christ , which for som years past they had thrown off .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,161.115

But <font> Sigbert <$$font> the Brother of <font> Eorpwald <$$font> now
succeeded in that Kingdom , prais'd for a most Christian and Learned Man
: who while his Brother yet reign'd , living in <font> France <$$font>
an exile , for some displeasure conceav'd against him <P_X,162> by
<font> Redwald <$$font> his Father , lern'd there the Christian Faith ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,162.116

and reigning soon after , in the same instructed his people , by the
preaching of <font> Felix <$$font> a <font> Burgundian <$$font> Bishop .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,162.117

In the year 640. <font> Eadbald <$$font> deceasing , left to <font>
Ercombert <$$font> his Son by <font> Emma <$$font> the French Kings
Daughter , the Kingdom of <font> Kent <$$font> ; recorded the first of
English Kings , who commanded through his limits the destroying of Idols
; laudably , if all Idols without exception , and the first to have
establisht <font> Lent <$$font> among us , under strict penalty , not
worth remembring , but only to inform us , that no <font> Lent <$$font>
was observ'd heer till his time by compulsion :
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,162.118

especially being noted by some to have fraudulently usurp'd upon his
Elder Brother <font> Ermenred <$$font> , whose right was precedent to
the Crown . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,162.119

<font> Oswald <$$font> having reign'd 8 years , worthy also as might
seem of longer life , fell into the same fate with <font> Edwin <$$font>
, and from the same hand , in a great Battel overcom and slain by <font>
Penda <$$font> , at a place call'd <font> Maserfeild <$$font> , now
<font> Oswestre <$$font> , in <font> Shropshire <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,162.120

miraculous , as saith <font> Beda <$$font> , after his Death .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,162.121

His Brother <font> Oswi <$$font> succeeded him ; reigning , though in
much trouble , 28 years : oppos'd either by <font> Penda <$$font> , or
his own Son <font> Alfred <$$font> , or his Brothers Son <font>
Ethilwald <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,162.122

Next year <font> Kinegils <$$font> the <font> West-Saxon <$$font> dying
, left his Son <font> Kenwalk <$$font> in his stead , though as yet
unconverted . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,162.123

About this time <font> Sigebert <$$font> , King of <font> East-Angles
<$$font> , having lernt in <font> France <$$font> , ere his coming to
Reign , the manner of thir Schools , with the assistance of some
Teachers out of <font> Kent <$$font> , instituted a School heer after
the same Discipline , thought to be the University of <font> Cambridge
<$$font> then first founded : MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,162.124

and at length weary of his Kingly Office , betook him to a Monastical
life ; commending <P_X,163> the care of Government to his Kinsman <font>
Egric <$$font> , who had sustain'd with him part of that burden before .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,163.125

It happen'd some years after , that <font> Penda <$$font> made War on
the <font> East-Angles <$$font> : MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,163.126

they expecting a sharp encounter , besought <font> Sigebert <$$font> ,
whom they esteem'd an expert Leader , with his presence to confirm the
Souldiery : MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,163.127

and him refuseing carried by force out of the Monastery into the Camp ;
where acting the Monk rather then the Captain , with a single wand in
his hand , he was slain with <font> Egric <$$font> , and his whole Army
put to flight . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,163.128

<font> Anna <$$font> of the Royal Stock , as next in right , succeeded ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,163.129

and hath the praise of a vertuous and most Christian Prince .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,163.130

But <font> Kenwalk <$$font> the <font> West-Saxon <$$font> having maried
the Sister of <font> Penda <$$font> , and divorc't her , was by him with
more appearance of a just cause vanquisht in fight , and depriv'd of his
Crown : whence retiring to <font> Anna <$$font> King of the <font>
East-Angles <$$font> , after three years abode in his Court , he there
became Christian , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,163.131

and afterwards regain'd his Kingdom . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,163.132

<font> Oswi <$$font> in the former years of his Reign , had sharer with
him , <font> Oswin <$$font> Nephew of <font> Edwin <$$font> , who rul'd
in <font> Deira <$$font> 7 years , commended much for his zeal in
Religion , and for comliness of person , with other princely qualities ,
belov'd of all . Notwithstanding which , dissentions growing between
them , it came to Armes . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,163.133

<font> Oswin <$$font> seeing himself much exceeded in numbers , thought
it more prudence , dismissing his Army , to reserve himself for some
better occasion . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,163.134

But committing his person with one faithfull attendant to the Loyalty of
<font> Hunwald <$$font> an Earl , his imagin'd friend , he was by him
treacherously discoverd , and by command of <font> Oswi <$$font> slain .
After whom within 12 days , and <P_X,164> for greif of him whose death
he foretold , dy'd Bishop <font> Aidan <$$font> , famous for his Charity
, meekness , and labour in the Gospel . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.135

The fact of <font> Oswi <$$font> was detestable to all ; which therfore
to expiate , a Monastery was built in the place where it was don , and
Prayers there daily offerd up for the Souls of both Kings , the slain
and the slayer . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.136

<font> Kenwalk <$$font> by this time reinstall'd in his Kingdom , kept
it long , but with various Fortune ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.137

for <font> Beda <$$font> relates him oft-times afflicted by his Enemies
with great losses : MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.138

and in 652. by the Annals , fought a Battel <paren> Civil War <font>
Ethelwerd <$$font> calls it <$$paren> at <font> Bradanford <$$font> by
the River <font> Afene <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.139

against whom , and for what cause , or who had the Victory , they write
not . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.140

<font> Camden <$$font> names the place <font> Bradford <$$font> in
<font> Wiltshire <$$font> , by the River <font> Avon <$$font> , and
<font> Cuthred <$$font> his neer Kinsman , against whom he fought ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.141

but cites no Autority ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.142

certain it is , that <font> Kenwalk <$$font> fowr years before had giv'n
large possessions to his Nephew <font> Cuthred <$$font> , the more
unlikely therefore now to have rebell'd . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.143

The next year <font> Peada <$$font> , whom his Father <font> Penda
<$$font> , though a Heathen , had for his Princely Vertues made Prince
of <font> Middle-Angles <$$font> , belonging to the <font> Mercians
<$$font> , was with that people converted to the Faith .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.144

For coming to <font> Oswi <$$font> with request to have in mariage
<font> Alfleda <$$font> his Daughter , he was deni'd her but on
condition , that he with all his people should receave Christianity .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.145

Heering therefore not unwillingly what was preach't to him of
Resurrection and Eternal Life , much persuaded also by <font> Alfrid
<$$font> the Kings Son , who had his Sister <font> Kyniburg <$$font> to
Wife , he easily assented , for the truths sake only as he profess'd ,
whether he obtain'd the Virgin or no , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.146

and was baptiz'd with all his followers . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,164.147

Returning , he took with <P_X,165> him fowr Presbyters to teach the
people of his Province ; who by thir daily preaching won many .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,165.148

Neither did <font> Penda <$$font> , though himself no Beleever ,
prohibit any in his Kingdome to heer or beleeve the Gospel ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,165.149

but rather hated and despis'd those , who professing to beleeve ,
atested not thir Faith by good works ; condemning them for miserable and
justly to be despis'd , who obey not that God in whom they choose to
beleeve . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,165.150

How well might <font> Penda <$$font> this Heathen rise up in judgment
against many pretending Christians , both of his own and these daies !
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,165.151

yet being a man bred up to War <paren> as no less were others then
reigning , and oft-times one against another , though both Christians
<$$paren> he warr'd on <font> Anna <$$font> , King of the <font>
East-Angles <$$font> , perhaps without cause ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,165.152

for <font> Anna <$$font> was esteem'd a just man ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,165.153

and at length slew him . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,165.154

About this time the <font> East-Saxons <$$font> , who as above hath bin
said , had expell'd thir Bishop <font> Mellitus <$$font> , and renounc'd
the Faith , were by the means of <font> Oswi <$$font> thus reconverted .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,165.155

<font> Sigebert <$$font> surnam'd the small , being the Son of <font>
Seward <$$font> , without other memory of his Reign , left his Son King
of that Province , after him <font> Sigebert <$$font> the Second , who
coming oft'n to visit <font> Oswi <$$font> his great friend , was by him
at several times fervently disuaded from Idolatry , and convinc't at
length to forsake it , was there baptiz'd ; on his return home taking
with him <font> Kedda <$$font> a laborious Preacher , afterwards made
Bishop ; by whose teaching with some help of others , the people were
again recoverd from misbeleef . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,165.156

But <font> Sigebert <$$font> some years after , though standing fast in
Religion , was by the Conspiracy of two Brethren in place neer about him
, wickedly murder'd ; who being ask'd what mov'd <P_X,166> them to do a
deed so hainous , gave no other then this barbarous answer ; that they
were angry with him for being so gentle to his Enemies , as to forgive
them thir injuries whenever they besought him .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,166.157

Yet his Death seems to have happ'nd not without some cause by him giv'n
of Divine displeasure . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,166.158

For one of those Earls who slew him , living in unlawfull wedlock , and
therfore excommunicated so severely by the Bishop , that no man might
presume to enter into his House , much less to sit at meat with him ,
the King not regarding this Church censure , went to feast with him at
his invitation . Whom the Bishop meeting in his return , though
penitent for what he had don , and faln at his feet , touch'd with the
rod in his hand , and angerly thus foretold : because thou hast
neglected to abstain from the House of that Excommunicate , in that
House thou shalt die ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,166.159

and so it fell out , perhaps from that prediction , God bearing witness
to his Minister in the power of Church Discipline , spiritually executed
, not juridically on the contemner thereof .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,166.160

This year 655. prov'd fortunate to <font> Oswi <$$font> , and fatal to
<font> Penda <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,166.161

for <font> Oswi <$$font> by the continual inrodes of <font> Penda
<$$font> , having long endur'd much devastation , to the endangering
once by assault and fire <font> Bebbanburg <$$font> , his strongest City
, now <font> Bamborrow <$$font> Castle , unable to resist him , with
many rich presents offerd to buy his Peace . Which not accepted by the
Pagan , who intended nothing but destruction to that King , though more
then once in affinity with him , turning guifts into vows , he implores
Divine Assistance , devoting , if he were deliverd from his Enemy , a
Child of one year old , his Daughter to be a <P_X,167> Nun , and 12
portions of land whereon to build Monasteries .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.162

His vows , as may be thought , found better success then his profferd
guifts ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.163

for heerupon with his Son <font> Alfrid <$$font> , gathering a small
power , he encounterd and discomfited the <font> Mercians <$$font> , 30
times exceeding his in number , and led on by expert Captains : at a
place call'd <font> Loydes <$$font> , now Leeds in <font> Yorkeshire
<$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.164

Besides this <font> Ethelwald <$$font> , the Son of <font> Oswald
<$$font> , who rul'd in <font> Deira <$$font> , took part with the
<font> Mercians <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.165

but in the fight withdrew his Forces , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.166

and in a safe place expected the event : with which unseasonable retreat
, the <font> Mercians <$$font> perhaps terrifi'd and misdoubting more
danger , fled ; thir Commanders , with <font> Penda <$$font> himself ,
most being slain , among whom <font> Edilhere <$$font> the Brother of
<font> Anna <$$font> , who rul'd after him the <font> East-Angles
<$$font> , and was the Author of this War ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.167

many more flying were drown'd in the River , which <font> Beda <$$font>
calls <font> winved <$$font> , then swoln above his Banks .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.168

The Death of <font> Penda <$$font> , who had bin the Death of so many
good Kings , made generall rejoicing , as the Song witness'd .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.169

At the River <font> Winwed <$$font> , <font> Anna <$$font> was aveng'd .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.170

To <font> Edelhere <$$font> succeeded <font> Ethelwald <$$font> his
Brother , in the <font> East-Angles <$$font> ; to <font> Sigebert
<$$font> in the <font> East-Saxons <$$font> , <font> Suidhelm <$$font>
the Son of <font> Sexbald <$$font> , saith <font> Bede <$$font> , the
Brother of <font> Sigebert <$$font> , saith <font> Malmsbury <$$font> ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.171

he was baptiz'd by <font> Kedda <$$font> , then residing in the <font>
East-Angles <$$font> , and by <font> Ethelwald <$$font> the King ,
receav'd out of the Font . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.172

But <font> Oswi <$$font> in the strength of his late Victory , within
three years after subdu'd all <font> Mercia <$$font> , and of the
Pictish Nation greatest part , at which time he gave to <font> Peada
<$$font> his Son in Law the Kingdome of <font> South-Mercia <$$font> ,
divided from the Northern by <font> Trent <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,167.173

But <font> Peada <$$font> the Spring following , as was said , by the
Treason of <P_X,168> his Wife the Daughter of <font> Oswi <$$font>
married by him for a special Christian , on the Feast of <font> Easter
<$$font> , not protected by the holy time , was slain .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,168.174

The <font> Mercian <$$font> Nobles , <font> Immin <$$font> , <font> Eaba
<$$font> , and <font> Eadbert <$$font> , throwing off the Government of
<font> Oswi <$$font> , set up <font> Wulfer <$$font> the other Son of
<font> Penda <$$font> to be thir King , whom till then they had kept hid
, MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,168.175

and with him adherd to the Christian Faith .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,168.176

<font> Kenwalk <$$font> the <font> West-Saxon <$$font> , now settl'd at
home , and desirous to enlarge his Dominion , prepares against the
<font> Britans <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,168.177

joins Battel with them at <font> Pen <$$font> in <font> Somersetshire
<$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,168.178

and over_coming persues them to <font> Pedridan <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,168.179

Another fight he had with them before , at a place call'd <font>
Witgeornesbrug <$$font> , barely mention'd by the Monk of <font>
Malmsbury <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,168.180

Nor was it long ere he fell at variance with <font> Wulfer <$$font> the
Son of <font> Penda <$$font> , his old Enemy , scarce yet warm in his
Throne , fought with him at <font> Possentesburg <$$font> , on the
<font> Easter <$$font> Holy-days , and as <font> Ethelwerd <$$font>
saith , took his Prisner ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,168.181

but the <font> Saxon <$$font> Annals , quite otherwise , that <font>
Wulfer <$$font> winning the field , wasted the <font> West-Saxon
<$$font> Country as far as <font> Eskesdun <$$font> ; nor staying there
, took and wasted the Ile of <font> Wight <$$font> , but causing the
Inhabitants to be baptiz'd , till then unbeleevers , gave the Iland to
<font> Ethelwald <$$font> King of <font> South-Saxons <$$font> , whom he
had receav'd out of the Font . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,168.182

The year 664. a Synod of Scotish and English Bishops , in the presence
of <font> Oswi <$$font> and <font> Alfred <$$font> his Son , was held at
a Monastery in those parts , to debate on what Day <font> Easter
<$$font> should be kept ; a controversie which long before had disturb'd
the Greek and Latin Churches : wherin the Scots not agreeing with the
way of <font> Rome <$$font> , nor yeilding to the disputants on that
side , to whom the King most enclin'd , such as <P_X,169> were Bishops
heer , resign'd , and return'd home with thir Disciples .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,169.183

Another clerical question was there also much controverted , not so
superstitious in my opinion as ridiculous , about the right shaving of
crowns . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,169.184

The same year was seen an Eclips of the Sun in May , followed by a sore
pestilence beginning in the South , but spreading to the North , and
over all <font> Ireland <$$font> with great mortality . In which time
the <font> East-Saxons <$$font> after <font> Swithelms <$$font> Decease
, being govern'd by <font> Siger <$$font> the Son of <font> Sigebert
<$$font> the small , and <font> Sebbi of Seward <$$font> , though both
subject to the <font> Mercians <$$font> . <font> Siger <$$font> and his
people unstedie of Faith , supposing that this Plague was come upon them
for renouncing thir old Religion , fell off the second time to
Infidelity . Which the <font> Mercian <$$font> King <font> Wulfer
<$$font> understanding , sent <font> Jarumannus <$$font> a Faithfull
Bishop , who with other his fellow Labourers , by sound Doctrin and
gentle dealing , soon recur'd them of thir second relaps .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,169.185

In <font> Kent , Ercombert <$$font> expiring , was succeeded by his Son
<font> Ecbert <$$font> . In whose fowrth year , by means of <font>
Theodore <$$font> , a learned Greekish Monk of <font> Tarsus <$$font> ,
whom Pope <font> Vitalian <$$font> had ordain'd Archbishop of <font>
Canterbury <$$font> , the Greek and Latin Tongue , with other liberal
Arts , Arithmetic , Music , Astronomie , and the like ; began first to
flourish among the <font> Saxons <$$font> ; as did also the whole Land ,
under potent and religious Kings , more then {it_had_flourished} ever
before , as <font> Bede <$$font> affirms , till his own days .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,169.186

Two years after , in <font> Northumberland <$$font> dy'd <font> Oswi
<$$font> , much addicted to Romish Rites , and resolv'd , had his
Disease releas'd him , to have ended his days at <font> Rome <$$font> :
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,169.187

<font> Ecfrid <$$font> the eldest of his Sons begot in Wedlock ,
succeeded him . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,169.188

After other three years , <font> Ecbert <$$font> <P_X,170> in <font>
Kent <$$font> deceasing , left nothing memorable behind him , but the
general suspition to have slain or conniv'd at the slaughter of his
Uncles two Sons , <font> Elbert <$$font> , and <font> Egelbright
<$$font> . In recompence whereof , he gave to the Mother of them part
of <font> Tanet <$$font> , wherein to build an Abbey ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.189

the Kingdom fell to his Brother <font> Lothair <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.190

And much about this time , by best account it should be , however plac'd
in <font> Beda <$$font> , that <font> Ecfrid <$$font> of <font>
Northumberland <$$font> , having War with the <font> Mercian <$$font>
<font> Wulfer <$$font> , won from him <font> Lindsey <$$font> , and the
Country thereabout . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.191

<font> Sebbi <$$font> having reign'd over the <font> East-Saxons
<$$font> 30 years , not long before his Death , though long before
desireing , took on him the Habit of a Monk ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.192

and drew his Wife at length , though unwilling , to the same Devotion .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.193

<font> Kenwalk <$$font> also dying , left the Government to <font>
Sexburga <$$font> his Wife , who out-liv'd him in it but one year ,
driv'n out , saith <font> Mat. West. <$$font> by the Nobles ,
disdaining Female Government . After whom several petty Kings , as
<font> Beda <$$font> calls them , for ten years space divided the <font>
West-Saxons <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.194

others name two , <font> Escwin <$$font> the Nephew of <font> Kinigils
<$$font> , and <font> Kentwin <$$font> the Son , not petty by thir deeds
: MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.195

for <font> Escwin <$$font> fought a Battell with <font> Wulfer <$$font>
, at <font> Bedanhafde <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.196

and about a {TEXT:missing_"a"} year after both deceas'd ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.197

but <font> Wulfer <$$font> not without a stain left behind him , of
selling the Bishoprick of <font> London <$$font> , to <font> Wini
<$$font> the first Simonist we read of in this story ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.198

<font> Kenwalk <$$font> had before expell'd him from his Chair at <font>
Winchester <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.199

<font> Ethelred <$$font> the Brother of <font> Wulfer <$$font> obtaining
next the Kingdom of <font> Mercia <$$font> , not only recoverd <font>
Lindsey <$$font> , and what besides in those parts <font> Wulfer
<$$font> had lost to <font> Ecfrid <$$font> some years before ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,170.200

but found himself strong enough to extend his Armes another way , as far
as <font> Kent <$$font> , wasting that Country without respect to
<P_X,171> Church or Monastery , much also endamaging the City of <font>
Rochester <$$font> : Notwithstanding what resistance <font> Lothair
<$$font> could make against him . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.201

In <font> August <$$font> 678. was seen a Morning Comet for 3 Months
following , in manner of a fiery Pillar . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.202

And the <font> South-Saxons <$$font> about this time were converted to
the Christian Faith , upon this occasion . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.203

<font> Wilfrid <$$font> Bishop of the <font> Northumbrians <$$font>
entring into contention with <font> Ecfrid <$$font> the King , was by
him depriv'd of his Bishoprick , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.204

and long wandring up and down as far as <font> Rome <$$font> , return'd
at length into <font> England <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.205

but not dareing to approach the North , whence he was banish'd ,
bethought him where he might to best purpose elsewhere exercise his
Ministery . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.206

The South of all other <font> Saxons <$$font> remain'd yet Heathen ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.207

but <font> Edilwalk <$$font> thir King not long before had bin baptiz'd
in <font> Mercia <$$font> , persuaded by <font> Wulfer <$$font> , and by
him , as hath bin said , receav'd out of the Font . For which relations
sake he had the Ile of <font> Wight <$$font> , and a Province of the
<font> Meannari <$$font> adjoining , giv'n him on the Continent about
<font> Meanesborow <$$font> in <font> Hantshir <$$font> , which <font>
Wulfer <$$font> had a little before gott'n from <font> Kenwalk <$$font>
. MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.208

Thether <font> Wilfrid <$$font> takes his journey ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.209

and with the help of other Spiritual Labourers about him , in short time
planted there the Gospel . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.210

It had not rain'd , as is said , of three years before in that Country ,
whence many of the people daily perish'd by Famin ; till on the first
day of thir public Baptism , soft and plentifull showers descending ,
restor'd all abundance to the Summer following .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.211

Two years after this , <font> Kentwin <$$font> the other <font>
West-Saxon <$$font> King above-nam'd , chac'd the <font> Welch-Britans
<$$font> , as is Chronicl'd without circumstance , to the very Sea shoar
. MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,171.212

But in the year , by <font> Beda's <$$font> reck'ning , 683 , <font>
Kedwalla <$$font> a <P_X,172> <font> West-Saxon <$$font> of the Royal
Line <paren> whom the <font> Welch <$$font> will have to be <font>
Cadwallader <$$font> , last King of the <font> Britans <$$font>
<$$paren> thrown out by faction , return'd from banishment ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,172.213

and invaded both <font> Kentwin <$$font> , if then living , or whoever
else had divided the succession of <font> Kenwalk <$$font> , slaying in
fight <font> Edelwalk <$$font> the <font> South-Saxon <$$font> , who
oppos'd him in their aid ; MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,172.214

but soon after was repuls'd by two of his Captains , <font> Bertune
<$$font> , and <font> Andune <$$font> , who for a while held the
province in thir power . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,172.215

But <font> Kedwalla <$$font> gathering new force , with the slaughter of
<font> Bertune <$$font> , and also of <font> Edric <$$font> the
successor of <font> Edelwalk <$$font> , won the Kingdom .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,172.216

But reduc'd the people to heavy thraldome . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,172.217

Then addressing to Conquer the Ile of <font> Wight <$$font> , till that
time <font> Pagan <$$font> , saith <font> Beda <$$font> <paren> others
otherwise , as above hath bin related <$$paren> made a vow , though
himself yet unbaptiz'd , to devote the fowrth part of that Iland , and
the spoils therof , to holy uses . MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,172.218

Conquest obtain'd , paying his vow as then was the beleef , he gave his
fowrth to Bishop <font> Wilfrid <$$font> , by chance there present ; and
he to <font> Bertwin <$$font> a Priest , his Sisters Son , with
commission to baptise all the vanquisht , who meant to save thir lives .
MILTON-1670-E3-P1,X,172.219

