<BEGIN_morewol-1524-e1-p1>

<P_1.1,195>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXVIII_SIR_THOMAS_MORE_TO_CARDINAL_WOLSEY>

<P_1.1,196>

Hit may lyke your good Grace to undrestand that yisternyght the Kings
Grace commanded me to deliver un to your servant Foreste a Supplication
put un to his Grace by menne of Waterford in the name of the Citee , by
which they complain agaynste the Towne of New Rosse in Ireland for
disturbyng the citie of Waterford in the use of a certayn graunt of
prise_Wynys made and confermed un to theym as they allegge by the Kyngs
progenitors : Wherein the Kings Grace commaunded me to advertise your
Grace that he calleth to mynd that the Citee of Waterford in all such
rebellions as hath happed in Irleland hath allways byden fermely in
theire allegiauns , and often tymys done very good and faithefull
service to the Kinge his father <P_1.1,197> and other his progenitors ;
for which he saith he bereth theym as your Grace well knoweth very
speciall favor . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,197.5

His Grace saith also that he knoweth well and your Grace also that there
is mych beryng agaynste theym in Ireland , and that ther the citie
standeth so in the daynger of the wild Irishe peple that they can not
without great ieopardie resort for the pursuit of theyre right in to
such placis of Ireland as the Lawes be ministred in . Wherfore his
Grace commaunded me to write un to your Grace , that he requyreth your
Grace that it may lyke you either in the Starre Chambre to examine the
mater of the said citee , or ellis to committe the same to the
examination of sum justices or other , such as your Grace shall thynk
convenient , so that they may have expedition with such lawfull favor as
it may be a cumfort to theym to se that their trew service is by the
Kinge and his Counsaile in England considered ; wherby the Kings Grace
thinketh that other Cities and Lordis also , in Ireland , shal@ @be
encoraged un to the lyke . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,197.6

Sir , if it lyke your Grace , at my retorne whan I spake with the King ,
his Grace was very ioyfull that notwithstanding your so continuall
labors in his maters <paren> in which he saied ye have many moo than
appere to theym that see you but at Westminster or with the Counsaile
<$$paren> your Grace is so well in helth as he hereth by diverse ;
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,197.7

and he saith that ye may thank his counsaile thereof by which ye leve
the often takyng of medicines <P_1.1,198> that ye were wont to use ;
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,198.8

and while ye so do he saith ye shall not faile of helth , which our Lord
long preserve . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,198.9

At Okyng MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,198.10

the v=th= day of July . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,198.11

Your moste humble servaunt and mooste bounden beedman Thomas More .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,198.12

To my Lord Legats grace . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,198.13

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXIX_SIR_THOMAS_MORE_TO_CARDINAL_WOLSEY>

Hit may lyke your good Grace to undrestand that the Kings Grace hath
commaunded me to advertise your Grace that the Embassiator of the King
of Castile hath this present Wedynesday spoken with his Grace and
declared un to hym such newis on the byhalfe of his maister the King of
Castile as your Grace knoweth of , for which the Kings Grace requyreth
your Grace that there may be such Lettres of gratulation devised un to
the said King of Castell as your politique wisedome shall thinke moost
convenient . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,198.15

The Kings Grace hath also commaunded me to shew your Grace that th'@
@embassiator hath requyred his Grace to send his advice to the King of
Castile concernyng <P_1.1,199> the mater of the laste Diete , in which
the great Maister of Fraunce deceaced , in which thing th'@ @embassiator
desireth to have Lettres of Credence of the Kings Grace by which he
myght hym selfe declare to his maister by mowth the Kings advice
concernyng the premissis , how be it the Kings Grace thinketh hit mych
better that his hole advice be written at length by Lettres devised by
the prudent caste of your Grace . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,199.16

The Kings Grace commaunded me ferther to wrighte un to your Grace that
among other communications had with th@ @embassiator , his Grace
remembred un to hym that he had allway been a very hartie frend un to
the King of Castil and during his life so entended to percever , and
wold of none erthely thing be more loth than if eny occasion shold fall
<paren> which he trusted shold never fall <$$paren> wherby he myghte be
constrayned un to the contrary ; for the avoiding wherof his Grace
advised th'@ @embassiator that he shold in eny wise counsaile his
Maister that he no thing attempte herafter that shold extend to the
breche of eny article comprised in the amitee concluded bytwen his Grace
and the King of Castil and the French King , which if he did , hys Grace
shold think hym selfe bounden to regard the frendship of none erthely
man so highly as his othe geven to God for the observation of the said
Amite and Liege . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,199.17

The Embassiator is riden fro the court now after diner ,
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,199.18

and I think he wil@ @be with your Grace very shortely .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,199.19

And <P_1.1,200> thus our Lord long preserve your Grace in honor and
helth . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,200.20

At Okyng MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,200.21

the vj=th= day of July MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,200.22

Your mooste humble servaunt and mooste bounden beedman Thomas More .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,200.23

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXX_SIR_THOMAS_MORE_TO_CARDINAL_WOLSEY>

Hit may lyke your good Grace to undrestand that the Kingis Grace hath
commaunded me to wryte un to your Grace that he geveth You harty thankis
for your diligent advertisement of all such things as your Grace hath
written un to hym in your latter Lettres , towching the contents wherof
his Grace hath commaunded me to shew you that he very well lyketh your
politique ordre taken with hedyng the King of Castile his orator , which
his Grace thinketh very good and honorable .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,200.25

And as towching the overture made by my Lord of Shevers for the mariage
of my Lord of Devonshire , the King is well content , and as me semeth ,
very glad of the motion , wherein he requireth your Grace that it may
lyke you to call my Lord of <P_1.1,201> Devonshire to your Grace , and
to advise hym secretely to forbere eny ferther treatie of mariage with
my Lord Mountjoy , for a while ; staying the matter , not casting hit
off : shewing hym that ther is a farre bettre offre made hym , of which
the King wold that he shold not know the specialtie byfor he speke with
his Grace . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,201.26

As towching the demeanure of the Cardinall Sedunense concernyng the
truste that the Kings Grace did put in hym his Grace commaunded me to
shew your Grace that he mystrusted the same hymselfe byfore : and that
he so shewed your Grace at Richemount . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,201.27

And though he be not glad of the Cardinallis delyng , yit is he glad he
saith that your Grace may se that he fore_saw it , wherby he thinketh
your Grace will the bettre truste his conjecture hereafter .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,201.28

I send un to your Grace by your servaunt , this berer , certayn Wryting
which the Kings Grace commaunded me to send un to your Grace , to take
such ordre in the same as your moost politique wisedom shall thynke
convenient . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,201.29

And thus our Lord long preserve your good Grace in honor and helth .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,201.30

At Oking MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,201.31

this present Saterday the ix=th= day of July .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,201.32

Your moost humble servaunt and moste bownden beedman THOMAS MORE .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,201.33

<P_1.1,202>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXXI_SIR_THOMAS_MORE_TO_CARDINAL_WOLSEY>

Hit may like your good Grace to be advertised that according to your
Grace's commaundement geven me by your Lettres dated the xxx.=th= day of
Auguste I have shewed un to the Kings Grace the byll devised for Sir
Richard Wyngfeld subscribed by your Grace , and the old Bill also
advertisyng his Grace of such things as your Grace in the new Bill
caused to be left owte for th'@ @advantage of his Highnes which points I
shewed his Grace cancelled in the old Bill and omitted in the new , for
which his Highnes with hartie thanks to your Grace for your labor taken
therin hath signed the new , which I have delivered to hym of whom I
receaved hit . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,202.36

And thus our Lord long preserve your good Grace in honor and helth .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,202.37

At Okyng MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,202.38

the fyrst day of Septembre . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,202.39

Yo=r= humble Orator and moost bounden bedeman THOMAS MORE .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,202.40

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample,_letter_72,_here}

<P_1.1,207>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXXIII_SIR_THOMAS_MORE_TO_CARDINAL_WOLSEY>

Hit may lyke your good Grace to be advertised that the Kings Highnes
this nyght going to his souper called me to hym secretely , and
commaunded me to wryte unto your Grace that where as hit hath pleased
our Lord to call to his mercy M=r=. Myrfyn late Aldreman of London ,
his Grace very greatly desireth for the speciall favor which he bereth
toward Sir William Tyler , that the same Sir William shold have the
widoo of the said late Aldreman in mariage . For the furtheraunce
whereof his Highnes considering your Grace's well approved wisedome and
dexteritie in th'@ @acheving and bringing to good passe his vertuouse
and honorable appetites , commaunded me with diligence to advertise your
Grace that his Highnes in moost hartie wise requyreth your Grace that
hit may lyke you , at the contemplation of this his affectuouse request
, by your high wisedome to devise , put in ure , and pursue the moost
effectuall meanys by which his Grace's desire may in this mater best be
brought abowt and goodly take effecte ; wherein his Highnes saith that
your Grace shall do him a right speciall pleasure , and <P_1.1,208> bynd
the said Sir William duryng his life to pray for your good Grace .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,208.44

Thus mych hath his Grace in this byhalfe commanded me to write to Yours
; whom both Our Lord long preserve in honor and helth together .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,208.45

At Esthamstede MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,208.46

the xvij=th.= day of Septembre . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,208.47

Yo=r=. humble Orator and moost bounden Beedman . Thomas More .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P1,1.1,208.48

