<BEGIN_moreric-1513-e1-p1>

<P_18>

And as sone as they came in his presence , they <P_19> lighte adowne
with all their companie aboute them . To whome the Duke of Buckingham
saide , goe afore Gentlemenne and yomen , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,19.3

kepe youre rowmes . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,19.4

And thus in a goodly arraye , thei came to the kinge ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,19.5

and on theire knees in very humble wise , salued his grace : whiche
receyued them in very ioyous and amiable maner , nothinge earthlye
knowing nor mistrustinge as yet . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,19.6

But euen by and by in his presence , they piked a quarell to the Lorde
Richard Graye , the kynges other brother by his mother , sayinge that
hee with the lorde Marques his brother and the Lorde Riuers his vncle ,
hadde coumpassed to rule the kinge and the realme , and to sette
variaunce among the states , and to subdewe and destroye the noble blood
of the realm . Toward y=e= accoumplishinge whereof , they sayde that
the Lorde Marques hadde entered into the Tower of London , and thence
taken out the kinges Treasor , and sent menne to the sea . All whiche
thinge these Dukes wiste well were done for good purposes and necessari
by the whole counsaile at London , sauing that sommewhat thei must sai .
Vnto whiche woordes , the king aunswered , what my brother Marques hath
done I can@ @not saie . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,19.7

But in good faith I dare well aunswere for myne vncle Riuers and my
brother here , that thei be innocent of any such matters .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,19.8

Ye my liege quod the Duke of Buckingham thei haue kepte theire dealing
in these matters farre fro the knowledge of your good grace .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,19.9

And foorthwith thei arrested the Lord Richarde and sir Thomas Waughan
knighte , in the kinges presence , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,19.10

and broughte the king and all backe vnto Northampton , where they tooke
againe further counsaile . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,19.11

And there they sente awaie from the kinge whom it pleased them ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,19.12

and sette newe seruauntes <P_20> aboute him , suche as lyked better them
than him . At whiche dealinge hee wepte and was nothing contente ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,20.13

but it booted not . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,20.14

And at dyner the Duke of Gloucester sente a dishe from his owne table to
the lord Riuers , prayinge him to bee of good chere ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,20.15

all should be well inough . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,20.16

And he thanked the Duke , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,20.17

and prayed the messenger to beare it to his Nephewe the lorde Richard
with the same message for his comfort , who he thought had more nede of
coumfort , as one to whom such aduersitie was straunge .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,20.18

But himself had bene al his dayes in vre therw=t= ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,20.19

and therfore coulde beare it the better . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,20.20

But for al this coumfortable courtesye of the Duke of Gloucester he sent
the lord Riuers and the Lorde Richarde with sir Thomas Vaughan into the
Northe countrey into diuers places to prison , and afterward al to
Pomfrait , where they were in conclusion beheaded .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,20.21

In this wise the Duke of Gloucester tooke vpon himself the order &
gouernance of y=e= young king , whom with much honor & humble reuerence
he conuayed vppewarde towarde the citye . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,20.22

But anone the tidinges of this mater came hastely to y=e= quene , a
litle before y=e= midnight folowing , & that in the sorest wise , y=t=
the king her sonne was taken , her brother , her sonne and her other
frendes arested , & sent no man wist whither , to be done w=t= god wot
what . With which tidinges y=e= quene in gret flight & heuines ,
bewailing her childes ruin , her frendes mischance , & her own infortune
, damning the time that euer shee diswaded the gatheryng of power aboute
the kinge , gate her selfe in all the haste possible with her yonger
sonne and her doughters oute of the Palyce of westminster in whiche shee
then laye , <P_21> into the Sainctuarye , lodginge her selfe and her
coumpanye there in the Abbottes place . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,21.23

Nowe came there one in likewise not longe after myddenighte , fro the
Lorde Chaumberlayn vnto the arch_bishoppe of Yorke then Chaunceller of
Englande , to his place not farre from Westminster .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,21.24

And for that he shewed his seruauntes that hee hadde tidinges of soo
greate importaunce , that his maister gaue him in charge , not to
forbeare his reste , they letted not to wake hym , nor hee to admitte
this messenger in to his bedde syde . Of whome hee hard , that these
dukes were gone backe with the Kynges grace from Stonye Stratforde vnto
Northampton . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,21.25

Notwithstanding sir quod hee , my Lorde sendeth youre Lordeshippe woorde
, that there is no feare . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,21.26

For hee assureth you that all shall bee well . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,21.27

I assure him quod the Archebishoppe bee it as well as it will , it will
neuer bee soo well as wee haue seene it . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,21.28

And thereuppon by and by after the messenger departed , hee caused in
all the haste al his seruauntes to bee called vppe ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,21.29

and so with his owne householde aboute hym , and euerie manne weaponed ,
hee tooke the greate Seale with him , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,21.30

and came yet beefore daye vnto the Queene . Aboute whome he found muche
heauinesse , rumble , haste and businesse , carriage and conueyaunce of
her stuffe into Sainctuary , chestes , coffers , packes , fardelles ,
trusses , all on mennes backes , no manne vnoccupyed , somme lading ,
somme goynge , somme descharging , somme commynge for more , somme
breakinge downe the walles to bring in the nexte waye ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,21.31

and somme yet drewe to them that holpe to carrye a wronge waye .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,21.32

The Quene her self satte alone alowe on the rishes all desolate and
dismayde , whome the Archebishoppe coumforted in the best manner hee
coulde , shewinge her that hee trusted the matter was nothynge <P_22>
soo sore as shee tooke it for . And that he was putte in good hope and
oute of feare , by the message sente him from the Lorde Chamberlaine .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.33

Ah woo worthe him quod she , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.34

for hee is one of them that laboureth to destroye me and my bloode .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.35

Madame quod he , be ye of good chere . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.36

For I assure you if thei crowne any other kinge then your sonne , whome
they nowe haue with them , we shal on the morowe crowne his brother
whome you haue here with you . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.37

And here is the greate Seale , whiche in likewise as that noble prince
your housebande deliuered it vnto me , so here I deliuer it vnto you ,
to the vse and behoofe of youre sonne , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.38

and therewith hee betooke her the greate Seale ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.39

and departed home agayne , yet in the dauninge of the daye . By which
tyme hee might in his chaumber window , see all the Temmes full of
bootes of the Duke of Gloucesters seruantes , watchinge that no manne
shoulde go to Sainctuary , nor none coulde passe vnserched .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.40

Then was there greate commocion and murmure as well in other places
about , as specially in the city , the people diuerselye diuininge vppon
this dealinge . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.41

And somme Lordes , Knightes , and Gentlemenne either for fauoure of the
Quene , or for feare of themselfe , assembled in sundry coumpanies ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.42

and went flockmele in harneis : and manye also , for that they reckened
this demeanoure attempted , not so specially againste the other Lordes ,
as agaynste the kinge hymselfe in the disturbaunce of hys Coronacion .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.43

But then by and by the Lordes assembled together at London . Towarde
which meting , the Archebishoppe of Yorke fearing that it wold be
ascribed <paren> as it was in dede <$$paren> to his ouermuch lightnesse
, that he so sodainly had yelded vp the great seale to the Quene , to
whome the custodye thereof nothing partained , w=t=out especial
commaundement , of the kynge , secretely sent for the Seale againe ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,22.44

and brought <P_23> it with him after y=e= customable maner .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,23.45

And at this meting , y=e= lord Hasting , whose trouth towarde the king
no manne doubted nor neded to doubte , perswaded the Lordes to belieue ,
that the Duke of Gloucester , was sure and fastlye faithfull to hys
prince , and that the lorde Riuers and lord Richard with the other
knightes wer for maters attempted by them against ye dukes of Gloucester
& Buckingham , putte vnder arreste for theire surety , not for the
Kynges ieopardye : and that thei were also in sauegarde , and there no
lenger shoulde remayn , then tyll the matter wer , not by the dukes
onelye , but also by all the other Lordes of the Kynges counsayle
indifferentelye examyned , and by other discrecions ordered , and eyther
iudged or appeased . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,23.46

But one thynge hee aduised them beware , that they iudged not the matter
to farre@ @foorth , ere they knewe the trueth , nor turnynge theire
priuate grudges into the common hurte , yrritinge and prouoking menne
vnto anger , and disturbynge the Kynges Coronacion , towarde whiche the
Dukes were commynge vppe , that thei mighte paraduenture brynge the
matter so farre oute of ioynt , that it shold neuer be brought in frame
agayne . Whiche stryfe if it shoulde happe as it were lykelye to come
to a fielde , though both parties were in all other thynges egall , yet
shoulde the authoritie bee on that syde where the Kynge is hymselfe .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,23.47

With these parswasions of the Lorde Hastynges , whereof parte hym selfe
belieued , of parte he wist the contrarye , these commocions were
sommewhat appeased . But specyally , by that that the Dukes of
Gloucester and Buckingham were so nere , and came so shortelye on with
the kynge , in none other maner , with none other voyce or semblaunce ,
then to his coronacion , causynge the fame to bee blowen about , that
these Lordes and knyghtes whiche were taken , hadde contryued the
destruccyon of the Dukes of Gloucester and <P_24> Buckingham , and of
other the noble bloode of the Realme , to the ende that them selfe
woulde alone , demeane and gouerne the king at their pleasure .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,24.48

And for the colourable proofe thereof , such of the Dukes seruantes as
rode with the cartes of theyr stuffe that were taken <paren> amonge
whiche stuffe no meruayle thoughe somme were harneys , whiche at the
breakinge vp of that householde , muste needes eyther bee broughte awaye
or caste awaye <$$paren> they shewed vnto the people al the waye as they
wente : loe here bee the barelles of harneys that this traitours had
priuelye conuayd in theyr carryage to destroye the noble lordes with all
. MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,24.49

This deuise all_be_it that it made the matter to wise men more vnlykely
, well perceyuying that the intendours of suche a purpose , wolde rather
haue hadde theyr harneys on theyr backes , then t@ @aue bounde them vppe
in barrelles , yet muche part of the common people were therewith verye
well satisfyed , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,24.50

and said it wer almoise to hange them . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,24.51

When the kynge approched nere to the citie , Edmonde Sha goldesmithe
then Mayre , with Willyam White and Iohn Mathewe sheriffis , and all the
other aldermenne in scarlette with fiue_hundred horse of the citezens in
violette , receiued hym reuerentlye at Harnesey :
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,24.52

and rydynge from thence , accoumpanyed him in to the citye , whiche hee
entered the fowrth daye of Maye , the firste and laste yeare of hys
raygne . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,24.53

But the Duke of Gloucester bare him in open sighte so reuerentelye to
the Prince , with all semblaunce of lowlinesse that from the great
obloquy in which hee was soo late before hee was sodainelye fallen in
soo great truste , that at the counsayl next assembled , hee was made
the onely manne chose and thoughte moste mete , to bee protectour of the
king and hys realme , so <paren> that wer it destenye or were it foly
<$$paren> the lamb was betaken to the wolfe to kepe . At whiche
counsayle also the Archebishoppe of Yorke Chauncelloure of Englande ,
whiche hadde deliuered vppe the greate Seale to the Quene , was thereof
greatlye reproued , and the Seale taken from hym and deliuered to
doctour Russell , bysshoppe of Lyncolne , a wyse manne & a good and of
muche experyence , and one of the beste learned menne vndoubtedlye that
Englande hadde in hys time . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,24.54

Diuers Lordes and knightes were appoynted vnto dyuerse rowmes .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,24.55

The Lorde Chaumberlayne and somme other , kepte styll theyr offices that
they hadde beefore . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,24.56

Nowe all were it soo that the protectoure so soore thyrsted for the
finyshynge of that hee hadde begonne , that thoughte euerye daye a yeare
tyll it were atchyeued , yet durste hee no further attempte as longe as
he had but halfe hys praye in his hande : well wittinge that yf hee
deposed the one brother , all the Realme woulde falle to the t@ @other ,
yf hee either remayned in Sainctuarye , or shoulde happelye bee
shortelye conuayde too hys farther libertye . Wherefore incontinente at
the nexte metynge of the Lordes at the counsayle , hee preposed
{COM:sic} vnto them , that it was a haynous deede of the Quene , and
procedinge of greate malyce towarde the Kynges counsayllers , that she
should keepe in Saynctuarye the Kynges brother from hym , whose specyall
pleasure and coumforte were to haue his brother with hym . And that by
her done to none other entente , but to brynge all the Lordes in
obloquie and murmure of the people . As thoughe they were not to bee
trusted with the Kynges brother , that by the assente of the nobles of
the lande wer appoynted as the Kynges nereste friendes , to the tuicyon
of his owne royall parsone . <P_26> The prosperytye whereof standeth
<paren> quod hee <$$paren> not all in keepynge from enemyes or yll
vyande , but partelye also in recreacion and moderate pleasure : which
he can@ @not in this tender youthe take in the coumpanye of auncient
parsons , but in the famylier conuersacyon of those that bee neyther
farre vnder , nor farre aboue his age . And nathlesse of estate
conuenient to accoumpanye his noble magestie . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,26.57

Wherefore with whom rather then with his owne brother ?
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,26.58

And yf anye manne thinke this consideracion light <paren> whiche I
thynke no manne thynketh that loueth the Kynge <$$paren> lette hym
consyder that sommetime withoute smal thinges greatter can@ @not stande
. MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,26.59

And verelye it redowndeth greatelye to the dishonoure bothe of the
kinges highnesse and of al vs that bene about his grace , to haue it
runne in euery mans mouth , not in this realme onely , but also in other
landes <paren> as euyll woordes walke farre : <$$paren> that the Kynges
brother shoulde bee fayne to keepe Saynctuarye .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,26.60

For euerye manne wyll weene , that no manne wyll so dooe for noughte .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,26.61

And suche euyll oppinyon once fastened in mennes heartes , harde it is
to wraste oute , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,26.62

and maye growe to more grief than anye manne here canne diuine .
Wherefore mee thynketh it were not woorste to sende vnto the Quene for
the redresse of this matter , somme honourable trustye manne , suche as
bothe tendereth the Kynges weale , and the honoure of his counsaile ,
and is also in fauoure and credence wyth her . For al which
consideracions , none seemeth mee more metelye than oure reuerente
father here presente , my Lorde Cardynall , who maye in this matter dooe
moste good of anye manne , y=f= it please hym to take the payne .
Whiche I doubte not of his goodnesse he wyll not refuse , <P_27> for the
Kynges sake and ours , and wealthe of the younge Duke hym self the
kinges moste honourable brother , and after my soueraygne Lorde hymself
, my moste dere Nephewe : considered that thereby shall bee ceased the
slaunderous rumoure and obloquye nowe goynge and the hurtes auoyded that
thereof mighte ensue , and much rest and quyete growe to all the realme
. MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,27.63

And yf shee bee percase so obstynate , and so preciselye sette vppon her
own wyl , that neyther his wise and faithful aduertysemente canne moue
her , nor any mannes reason content her : then shall wee by myne aduyse
, by the Kynges authoritye fetche hym out of that prisone , and brynge
hym to his noble presence , in whose contynuall coumpanye he shal bee so
well cherished and so honourablye entreated , that all the worlde shall
to our honor and her reproch , perceiue that it was onelye malyce ,
frowardenesse , or foly , that caused her to keepe him there .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,27.64

This is my minde in this matter for this time , excepte any of your
Lordeshippes anye thinge perceiue to the contrarye .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,27.65

For neuer shal I by gods grace so wedde my selfe to myne own wyll , but
that I shall bee readye to chaunge it vppon youre better aduyses .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,27.66

When the protectoure hadde said , al the counsayl affyrmed that the
mocion was good and reasonable , and to the kynge and the Duke his
brother , honourable , and a thing that should cease greate murmure in
the realme , if y=e= mother might be by good meanes enduced to delyuer
hym . Whiche thynge the Archebishoppe of Yorke , whome they all agreed
also to bee thereto moste conuenyente , tooke vppon hym to moue her ,
and therein to dooe hys vttermoste deuowre . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,27.67

Howe_bee_it if shee coulde bee in no wyse entreated with her good wyll
to delyuer hym , then thoughte hee and suche other as were of the
spiritualtye present , that it were not in anye wyse to be attempted to
take him oute agaynste her wil . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,27.68

For it would bee a thynge that shoulde tourne to the greate grudge of
all menne , and hyghe dyspleasure of Godde , yf the priueledge of that
holye place should nowe bee broken ? Whiche hadde so manye yeares bee
kepte , whyche bothe Kynges <P_28> and Popes soo good hadde graunted ,
so many hadde confirmed , and whiche holye grounde was more then
fyue_hundred yeare agoe by Saincte Peter his own parsone in spirite ,
accoumpanyed with greate multitude of Aungelles , by nyghte so
specyallye halowed and dedicate to Godde , <paren> for the proofe wherof
they haue yet in the Abbay Sainct Peters cope to shewe <$$paren> that
from that tyme hytherwarde , was there neuer so vndeuowte a Kinge , that
durst that sacred place violate , or so holye a Bishoppe that durste it
presume to consecrate . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.69

And therefore <paren> quod the Archebishoppe of Yorke <$$paren> Godde
forbydde that anye manne shoulde for anye thynge earthlye enterpryse to
breake the immunitee , and libertye of that sacred Sainctuary , that
hath bene the safegarde of so many a good mannes life .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.70

And I truste <paren> quod he <$$paren> with Gods grace , we shal not
nede it . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.71

But for ani maner nede , I would not we shoulde dooe it .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.72

I truste that shee shall bee with reason contented , and all thynge in
good maner obtayned . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.73

And yf it happen that I brynge it not so to passe , yet shall I towarde
it so farre@ @foorth dooe my beste , that ye shall all well perceiue ,
that no lacke of my deuoure , but the mothers drede and womannishe feare
, shall bee the let . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.74

Womannishe feare , naye womannishe frowardenesse <paren> quod the Duke
of Buckyngham . <$$paren> MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.75

For I dare take it vppon my soule , she well knoweth she needeth no such
thyng to feare , either for her sonne or for her selfe .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.76

For as for her , here is no manne that wil bee at warre with women .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.77

Woulde God some of the men of her kynne , were women too ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.78

and then shoulde al bee soone in reste . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.79

Howe_bee_it there is none of her kinne the lesse loued , for that they
bee her kinne , but for their owne euill deseruinge .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.80

And nathelesse if we loued neither her nor her kinne , yet were there no
cause to thinke that we shoulde hate the kynges noble brother , to whose
Grace wee oure selfe bee of kynne . Whose honoure if shee as muche
desyred as oure dishonoure , and as muche regarde tooke to his wealthe ,
as to her owne will , she woulde bee as lothe to suffer him from the
kinge , as anye of vs bee . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,28.81

For if shee haue anye witte , <P_29> <paren> as woulde Godde she hadde
as good will as she hathe shrewde witte <$$paren> she reckoneth her
selfe no wiser then shee thinketh some that bee here , of whose
faithefull mynde , she nothing doubteth , but verelye beleueth and
knoweth , that they woulde bee as sorye of his harme as her selfe , and
yet would haue hym from her yf she byde there .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,29.82

And wee all <paren> I thinke <$$paren> {COM:sic} contente , that bothe
bee with her , yf she come thence and bide in suche place where they
maie with their honoure bee . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,29.83

Nowe then yf she refuse in the deliueraunce of hym , to folowe the
counsaile of them whose wisdom she knoweth , whose trouth she wel
trusteth : it is ethe to perceiue , that frowardnesse letteth her , and
not feare . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,29.84

But goe to suppose that she feare <paren> as who maye lette her to feare
her owne shadowe <$$paren> the more she feareth to delyuer hym , the
more oughte wee feare to leaue him in her handes .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,29.85

For if she caste suche fonde doubtes , that shee feare his hurte : then
wyll she feare that hee shall bee fette thence .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,29.86

For she will soone thinke , that if menne were sette <paren> whiche
Godde forbydde <$$paren> vppon so greate a mischiefe , the saintuarye
woulde litle let them . Which good menne mighte as mee thynketh without
sinne sommewhat lesse regarde then they do . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,29.87

Nowe then if she doubte leste hee mighte bee fetched from her , is it
not likelye ynoughe that she shall sende him somme where out of the
realme ? MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,29.88

Verely I looke for none other . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,29.89

And I doubte not but shee nowe as sore myndeth it , as wee the lette
thereof . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,29.90

And yf she myghte happen to brynge that to passe , <paren> as it were no
greate maistrye , wee lettinge her alone <$$paren> all the worlde woulde
saye that wee wer a wyse sorte of counsaylers aboute a kynge , that
lette his brother bee caste awaye vnder oure noses .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,29.91

And therefore I ensure you faythfully for my mynde , I wyll rather
maugrye her mynde , fetche hym awaye , <P_30> then leaue hym ther , til
her frowardnes or fond feare conuay hym awaye .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.92

And yet will I breake no Saintuarye therefore .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.93

For verelye sithe the priuileges of that place and other lyke , haue
bene of long continued , I am not he that woulde bee aboute to breake
them . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.94

And in good faith if they were nowe to begynne , I woulde not bee he
that shoulde bee aboute to make them . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.95

Yet wyll I not saye naye , but that it is a deede of pitie , that suche
menne as the sea or theyr euill dettours haue broughte in pouertye ,
shoulde haue somme place of libertye , to keepe their bodies oute of the
daunger of their cruell creditours . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.96

And also yf the Crowne happen <paren> as it hathe done <$$paren> to
comme in questyon , whyle eyther parte taketh other as Traytours , I
wyll well there bee somme places of refuge for bothe .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.97

But as for theeues , of whiche these places bee full , and which neuer
fall fro the crafte , after thei once falle thereto , it is pitie the
saintuarye shoulde serue them . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.98

And muche more mannequellers whome Godde badde to take from the aulter
and kyll them , yf theyr murther were wylfull .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.99

And where it is otherwyse there neede wee not the sayntuaryes that God
appointed in the olde lawe . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.100

For yf eyther necessitie , hys owne defence , or misfortune drawe hym to
that dede , a pardon serueth which eyther the law graunteth of course ,
or the Kynge of pitie maye . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.101

Then looke me nowe how few saintuarye menne there bee , whome any
fauourable necessitie compelled to gooe thyther .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.102

And then see on the t@ @other syde what a sorte there be commonlye
therein , of them whome wylfull vnthriftynesse hathe broughte to nought
. MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.103

What a rabble of theues , murtherers , and malicious heyghnous Traitours
, MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.104

and that in twoo places specyallye . The tone at the elbowe of the
Citie , the t@ @other in the verye bowelles . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,30.105

I dare well auowe it , waye the good that they dooe , with the hurte
that commeth of them , <P_31> and ye shall fynde it muche better to
lacke bothe , then haue bothe . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.106

And this I saye , although they were not abused as they nowe bee , and
so longe haue bee , that I feare mee euer they wyll bee whyle menne bee
a_fearde to sette theyr handes to the mendement : as thoughe Godde and
Saincte Peter were the Patrons of vngracious lyuinge .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.107

Nowe vnthriftes ryote and runne in Dette , vppon the boldnesse of these
places : MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.108

yea and ryche menne runne thither with poore mennes goodes ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.109

there they builde , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.110

there thei spende MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.111

and bidde their creditours gooe whistle them .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.112

Mens wyues runne thither with theyr housbandes plate ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.113

and saye , thei dare not abyde with theyr housbandes for beatinge .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.114

Theues bryng thyther theyr stollen goodes , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.115

and there lyue thereon . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.116

There deuise thei newe roberies , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.117

nightlye they steale out , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.118

they robbe and reue , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.119

and kyll , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.120

and come in again as though those places gaue them not onely a
safe_garde for the harme they haue done , but a licence also to dooe
more . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.121

Howe_bee_it muche of this mischiefe if wyse menne woulde sette their
handes to , it myghte bee amended , with greate thank of god and no
breache of the priueledge . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.122

The residew , sith so long agoe I wote neere what Pope and what Prince
more pyteous then politique hathe grauntd it and other menne since of a
certayne relygious feare haue not broken it , lette vs take a payne
therewith , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.123

and lette it a Goddes name stande in force , as farre@ @foorth as reason
wyll . Whiche is not fullye so farre@ @foorth , as may serue to lette
vs of the fetchynge foorthe of this noble manne to hys honoure and
wealthe , oute of that place in whiche he neither is , nor canne bee a
Saynctuary manne . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.124

A Sainctuarye serueth alway to defende the bodie of that manne that
standeth in daunger abrode , not of greate hurte onelye , but also of
lawful hurte . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,31.125

For agaynste vnlawfull harmes , neuer Pope nor <P_32> Kynge entended to
priueledge anye one place . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.126

For that priueledge hath euery place . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.127

Knoweth anye manne anye place wherein it is lawefull one manne to dooe
another wrong ? MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.128

That no manne vnlawfully take hurt , that libertie , the Kynge , the
lawe , and verye nature forbiddeth in euery place ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.129

and maketh to that regarde for euerye manne euerye place a Saintuarye .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.130

But where a man is by lawful meanes in perill , there needeth he the
tuicion of some special priuilege , which is the only ground and cause
of al saintuaryes . From whiche necessitie this noble prince is far .
Whose loue to his king , nature & kinred proueth , whose innocence to al
y=e= world , his tender youth proueth . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.131

And so saintuary as for him , neither none he nedeth ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.132

nor also none can haue . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.133

Men come not to saintuary as they come to baptisme , to require it by
their Godfathers . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.134

He must ask it himself y=t= muste haue it . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.135

And reason , sithe no man hath cause to haue it , but whose conscience
of his own faut maketh hym faine neede to require it , what wil then
hath yonder babe ? which and if he had discrecion to require it , y=f=
nede were , I dare saye would nowe bee right angry with them y=t= kepe
him ther . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.136

And I woulde thynke withoute anye scruple of conscience , w=t=out any
breache of priueledge , to bee sommewhat more homely with them that be
there saintuary men in dede . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.137

For if one go to saintuary with another mannes goodes , why should not
the kyng leauinge his bodye at libertie , satisfy the part of his goodes
euen within the saintuary ? MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.138

For neither king nor Pope can geue any place such a priueledge , that it
shall discharge a man of his dettes being able to paye .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.139

And with that diuers of y=e= clergy y=t= wer present , whither thei said
it for his pleasure , or as thei thought , agreed plainly , that by the
law of god and of the church the goodes of a saintuarye man shoulde be
deliuered in paiment of his dets , and stollen goodes to the owner , and
onelye libertie reserued him to geat his lyuing with the labour of his
handes . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.140

Verely <paren> quod the duke <$$paren> I thinke you say very trueth .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.141

And what if a mannes wyfe will take saintuary , because she lyste to
runne from her husbande : MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,32.142

I woulde wene if she can allege none <P_33> other cause , he may
lawfullye without any displeasure to sainct Peter , take her out of .S.
Peters churche by the arme . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.143

And yf no body maye bee taken out of saintuarye that sayth he wyll bide
there : Then yf a childe will take saintuarie , because hee feareth to
goe to schole , hys mayster must lette hym alone .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.144

And as simple as that saumple is , yet is there lesse reason in our case
, then in that . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.145

For therein though it be a childishe feare , yet is ther at the
leastwise some feare . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.146

And herein is there none at all . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.147

And verelye I haue often heard of saintuarye menne .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.148

But I neuer heard erste of saintuarye chyldren .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.149

And therefore as for the conclusion of my minde , who so maie haue
deserued to neede it , yf thei thinke it for theyr suretye , lette them
kepe it . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.150

But he canne bee no saintuarye manne , that neither hath wisedom to
desire it , nor malice to deserue it , whose lyfe or libertye can by no
lawfull processe stande in ieopardie . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.151

And he that taketh one oute of saintuary to dooe hym good , I saye
plainely that he breaketh no saintuary . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.152

When the Duke hadde done , the temporall menne whole , and good part of
the spirituall also , thinking none hurt erthly ment towarde the younge
babe , condescended in effecte , that if he were not deliuered , he
should be fetched . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.153

Howbeit they thoughte it all beste , in the auoydyng of all maner of
rumour , that the Lorde Cardinall shoulde fyrst assaye to geat him with
her good will . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.154

And thervppon all the counsaile came vnto the sterrechaumber at
westminster . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,33.155

And the Lorde Cardinall leauinge the protectour with the counsell in the
sterrechaumber , departed into the saintuary to the Quene , with diuers
other lordes with him , were it for the respecte of hys honoure , or
that she shoulde by presence of so manye perceyue that this erande was
not one mannes minde , or were it for that the protectour entended not
in this matter to trust any one manne alone , or els <P_34> that if she
finally wer determined to kepe him , somme of that company had happely
secret instruccion incontinent magry her minde to take him and to leaue
her no respite to conuaye hym , whiche she was likely to mind after this
matter broken to her , yf her time would in any wyse serue her .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,34.156

When the Quene and these Lordes were comme together in presence , the
Lorde Cardinall shewed vnto her , that it was thought vnto the
protectour and vnto the whole counsayle , that her kepyng of the kinges
brother in that place was the thing whiche highlye souned , not onelye
to the greate rumoure of the people and theyr obloquye , but also to the
importable griefe and displeasure of the kinges royall maiestie . To
whose grace it were as singuler coumforte , to haue his naturall brother
in company , as it was their bothe dishonour and all theirs and hers
also , to suffer hym in saintuarye . As though the tone brother stode
in danger and perill of the t@ @other . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,34.157

And he shewed her that the counsel therfore had sent him vnto her , to
require her the deliuerye of him , that hee might bee brought unto the
kinges presence at his libertie , oute of that place whiche they
reckoned as a prisone . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,34.158

And ther should he be demeaned accordyng to his estate .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,34.159

And she in this doing should bothe dooe great good to the realme ,
pleasure to the counsell and profyt to her selfe , succour to her
frendes that were in distres , and ouer that <paren> which he wiste well
she speciallye tenderid <$$paren> , not onely great comfort and honour
to the king , but also to the yong duke himself , whose both great
welthe it were to bee together , as well for many greater causes , as
also for their both disporte and recreacion : which thing the lord
estemed not slight , thoughe it seme lyght , well pondering that their
youthe without recreacion & play , can@ @not endure nor any estraunger
for the conuenience of their both ages & estates , so metely in that
pointe for any of them as either of them for other .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,34.160

My lord <paren> quod y=e= quene : <$$paren> I saye not nay , but that it
were very conuenient , <P_35> that this gentilman whom ye require , were
in the company of the kinge hys brother . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,35.161

And in good faith me thinketh it were as great commoditie to them both
as for yet a while , to ben in the custody of their mother , the tender
age consydred of the elder of them both both , but speciall the yonger ,
which besides his infancie that also nedeth good loking to , hath a
while ben so sore diseased with sicknes , and is so newly rather a
lyttle amended then well recouered , that I dare put no parson erthly in
trust with his keping but my selfe onely , considering , that there is
as phisicians saye , & as we also finde , double the perill in the
recidiuacion , that was in the first sicknes , with which disease nature
being forelaborid , foreweried and weaked , waxeth the lesse able to
beare out a new surfet . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,35.162

And albeit there might be founden other , that would happely doe theyr
best vnto him : yet is there none y=t= either knoweth better how to
order him , then I that so long haue kept him : or is more tenderly like
to cherishe him , then hys own mother that bare him .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,35.163

No man denieth good madam <paren> quod the Cardinal <$$paren> but that
your grace were of all folke most necessary aboute your children :
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,35.164

& so woulde al the counsell , not onely be content , but also glad that
ye were , if it might stand with your pleasure to be in such place as
might stande with their honour . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,35.165

But yf you appoint your selfe to tary here , then thinke they yet more
conuenient , that the duke of yorke were w=t= the king honorably at his
liberte to the comfort of them both , then {COM:he_were} here as a
saintuary man to their both dishonour and obloquy : sith there is not
alwaye so great necessitie to haue the childe bee with the mother , but
that occasion may sometime be such , that it should be more expedient to
kepe him els where . Which in this well appereth y=t= at suche time as
your derest sonne then prince and now king , should for his honour and
good order of the Countrey , kepe householde in Wales farre out of your
company : your grace was well contente there wyth your selfe .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,35.166

Not very well content , quod the Quene : MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,35.167

And yet the case is not like : MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,35.168

for the tone was then in helthe , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,35.169

and the t@ @other is now sike . In which case I merueile greatly that
my lord protectour is so disirous to haue him in his keping where if the
child in his <P_36> sicknes miscaried by nature , yet might he runne
into slaunder and suspicion of fraude . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,36.170

And where they call it a thinge so sore against my childes honour and
theirs also , that he bydeth in this place : it is all their honours
there to suffer him byde , where no manne doubteth , hee shall be beste
kepte . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,36.171

And that is here , while I am here , whiche as yet intende not to come
forthe and iubarde my selfe after other of my frendes : which woulde god
wer rather here in suertie with me , then I were there in iubardy with
them . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,36.172

Whye Madame <paren> quod another Lorde <$$paren> know you any thing why
thei should be in iubardye ? MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,36.173

Nay verely sur quod shee , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,36.174

nor why they should be in prison neither , as they now be .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,36.175

But it is I trow no great maruaile though I fere , lest those that haue
not letted to put them in duresse with_out colour , wil let as lytle to
procure their distruccion without cause . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,36.176

The Cardinall made a countinance to the t@ @other Lord , that he should
harp no more vpon that string . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,36.177

And then said he to the Quene , that he nothing doubted , but that those
lordes of her honorable kinne , which as yet remained vnder arrest
should vpon <P_37> the matter examined , do wel ynough . And as toward
her noble person , neither was nor coulde be , any maner iubardy .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.178

Wherby should I truste that <paren> quod the Quene <$$paren>
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.179

In that I am giltles ? As though they were gilty .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.180

In y=t= I am with their enemies better beloued then thei ? When they
hate them for my sake . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.181

In that I am so nere of kinne to the king ? MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.182

And how farre be they of , if y=t= would helpe as god send grace it hurt
not . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.183

And therfore as for me , I purpose not as yet to departe hence .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.184

And as for this gentilman my sonne , I mynde that he shal@ @be where I
am till I see further . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.185

For I assure you , for that I se some men so gredye withowte any
substaunciall cause to haue him , this maketh me much the more farder to
deliuer him . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.186

Truely madame , quod he , and the farder that you be to delyuer him ,
the farder bene other men to suffer you to kepe hym , lest your causeles
fere might cause you ferther to conuay him . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.187

And many be there that thinke that he can haue no priuelege in this
place , which neither can haue wil to aske it , nor malyce to deserue it
. MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.188

And therefore they recken no pryuilege broken , though thei fetche him
out . Which if ye fynally refuse to deliuer him , I verely thynke they
will . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.189

So much drede hath my Lorde his vncle , for the tender loue he bereth
him , lest your grace shold hap to send him awaye .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.190

A syr quod the Quene , hath the protectour so tender zele to him , that
he fereth nothing but lest he should escape hym .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.191

Thinketh he that I would sende hym hence , which neyther is in y=e=
plight to sende out {COM:blank_in_edition} , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,37.192

and in what place coulde I recken him sure , if he be not sure in this
the sentuarye whereof , was there neuer tiraunt yet so deuelish , that
durste presume <P_38> to breake . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,38.193

And I trust god as strong now to withstande his aduersaries , as euer he
was . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,38.194

But my sonne can deserue no sentuary , MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,38.195

and therefore he can@ @not haue it . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,38.196

Forsoth he hath founden a goodly glose , by whiche that place that may
defend a thefe , may not saue an innocent . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,38.197

But he is in no iupardy MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,38.198

nor hath no nede therof . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,38.199

Wold god he had not . MORERIC-1513-E1-P1,38.200

