<BEGIN_morelet2-1534-e1-p1>

<P_464>

<heading:edcomment:192_TO_ELIZABETH_BARTON>

<heading:edcomment:CHELSEA_TUESDAY_1533?>

<P_465>

Good Madam , and my righte dearelie beloved Syster in our Lorde God .
After my moste {COM:preceding_word_"moste"_emended} hartie
{COM:preceding_word_"hartie"_emended} recommendacion , I shall beseche
you to take my good mynde in good worthe , and pardon
{COM:preceding_word_"pardon"_emended} me
{COM:preceding_word_"me"_emended} that I am so homelye as of my selfe
vnrequired , and allso without necessitie , to gyve cowncell
{COM:preceding_word_"cowncell"_emended} to you , of whome for the good
inspiracions , and greate revelacions that it likethe Allmighty
{COM:preceding_word_"Allmighty"_emended} God of his goodnes to gyve and
shew , as manye wise , well lerned , and very vertuous
{COM:preceding_word_"vertuous"_emended} folke testifye , I my selfe haue
nede , for the comforte of my soule , to require and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} aske advise ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,465.6

for surelie , good Madam , sithe it pleasethe God sometyme to suffer
{COM:preceding_word_"suffer"_emended} such
{COM:preceding_word_"such"_emended} as are
{COM:preceding_word_"are"_emended} far vnder and of litle estimacione ,
to gyve yet frutefull aduertisement to {COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended}
other as are in the lighte of the Spirite , so farre above them , that
there were {COM:preceding_word_"were"_emended} betwen
{COM:preceding_word_"betwen"_emended} them no comparison ; as he suffred
his highe prophet Moyses to be in some thinges
{COM:preceding_word_"thinges"_emended} advised and cowncelled by Jetro ,
I can not for the love that in our Lorde I bear
{COM:preceding_word_"bear"_emended} you
{COM:preceding_word_"you"_emended} refreyne to put you in remembrance of
one thinge , which in my poore mynde I {COM:preceding_word_"I"_emended}
thinke {COM:preceding_word_"thinke"_emended} highelie necessarie to be
by your wisdom conscidered , referringe th@ @end and order therof , to
God and his holye Spirite , to directe you . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,465.7

Good Madam , I doubt {COM:preceding_word_"doubt"_emended} not , but that
you remembre that in the begynninge of my communicacione with you , I
shewed {COM:preceding_word_"shewed"_emended} you that I neither was ,
nor wolde be , curious of eny knowledge of other mennes
{COM:preceding_word_"mennes"_emended} matters , and lest of all of eny
matter of princes or of the realme , in case it
{COM:preceding_word_"it"_emended} so {COM:preceding_word_"so"_emended}
were that God had , as to manye good folkes before tyme he hathe eny
thinges {COM:preceding_word_"thinges"_emended} reveled vnto you
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,465.8

suche thinges , I saide vnto your ladiship , that I was not onely not
desirous to heare of , but allso woulde not heare of .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,465.9

Now , Madam , I consider {COM:preceding_word_"consider"_emended} well
that manye folke desier to speake with you , which are not all
peraduenture of my {COM:preceding_word_"my"_emended} mynde in this
poynte ; MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,465.10

but some happe to be curiouse and inquisitive of thinges that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} litle perteine vnto theire partes ;
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,465.11

and some mighte peraduenture happe to talke
{COM:preceding_word_"talke"_emended} of suche thinges , as mighte
peraduenture after turne to muche harme , as I thinke
{COM:preceding_word_"thinke"_emended} you have harde how the late Duke
of Buckingham <P_466> moved with the fame of one
{COM:preceding_word_"one"_emended} that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} was reported for an holye monke and
had suche talkinge with hyme as after was
{COM:preceding_word_"was"_emended} a {COM:preceding_word_"a"_emended}
grete parte of his distruction and disheritinge of his bloude , and
greate slaunder and infamy {COM:preceding_word_"infamy"_emended} of
religion . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,466.12

It sufficethe me , good Madam , to put you in remembrance of suche
thinge , as {COM:preceding_word_"as"_emended} I
{COM:preceding_word_"I"_emended} no {COM:preceding_word_"no"_emended}
thinge doubt your wisedome and the spirite of God shall keepe you frome
talkinge with any persons {COM:preceding_word_"persons"_emended}
speciallye with ley persons , of eny suche maner thinges as perteyne to
princes' {COM:preceding_word_"princes'"_emended} affeirs
{COM:preceding_word_"affeirs"_emended} , or the state of the realme ,
but onelye to common and talke with eny person highe and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} low
{COM:preceding_word_"low"_emended} , of suche maner thinges as maye to
the soule be profitable for you to shew and for them
{COM:preceding_word_"them"_emended} to {COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended}
know {COM:preceding_word_"know"_emended} . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,466.13

And {COM:preceding_word_"And"_emended} thus
{COM:preceding_word_"thus"_emended} my good Ladie , and derelie beloved
suster in our Lorde , I make an end {COM:preceding_word_"end"_emended}
of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} this
{COM:preceding_word_"this"_emended} my {COM:preceding_word_"my"_emended}
nedelesse {COM:preceding_word_"nedelesse"_emended} aduertisement vnto
you , whome the blessed Trinitie preserve and increase in
{COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended} grace
{COM:preceding_word_"grace"_emended}

and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} put
{COM:preceding_word_"put"_emended} in {COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended}
your {COM:preceding_word_"your"_emended} mynde to recommende me and myne
vnto hym , in your devout prayers {COM:preceding_word_"prayers"_emended}
. MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,466.15

At {COM:preceding_word_"At"_emended} Chelseith
{COM:preceding_word_"Chelseith"_emended}

this Tuesday MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,466.17

by the hand of Your hartie loving Brother and Beadsman , Thomas More ,
Kt. MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,466.18

<P_507>

<heading:edcomment:201_TO_MARGARET_ROPER>

<heading:edcomment:TOWER_OF_LONDON_APRIL_MAY?_1534>

Myne owne good Doughter , Our Lorde be thanked , I am in good health of
body , and in good quiet of minde : MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,507.22

and of worldly thinges I no more desire then I haue .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,507.23

I besech hym make you all mery in the hope of heauen .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,507.24

And such thinges as I somewhat longed to talke with you all ,
concerninge the worlde to come , our Lorde put them in to your mindes ,
as I trust he doth , and better to , by his Holie Spirite : who blesse
you and preserue you all all . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,507.25

Writen with a cole by your tender louinge father , who in his pore
prayers forgetteth none of you all , nor your babes , nor your nurses ,
nor your good husbandes , nor your good husbandes shrewde wiues , nor
your fathers shrewde wyfe neyther , nor our other frendes .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,507.26

And thus fare you hartely well for lacke of paper .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,507.27

Thomas More , Knight . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,507.28

Our Lorde kepe me continually true faithful and plaine , to the contrary
whereof I beseche hym hartely neuer to suffre me lyue .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,507.29

For as for longe lyfe <paren> as I haue often tolde the Megge <$$paren>
I neither loke for , nor longe for , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,507.30

but am well content to goe , if God call <P_508> me hence to morowe .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,508.31

And I thanke our Lorde I knowe no person lyuing that I wolde had one
philippe for my sake : of which minde I am more gladde than of all the
worlde beside . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,508.32

Recommende me to your shrewde Wyll and mine other sonnes , and to John
Harrys my frende , and your selfe knoweth to whome els , and my shrewde
wyfe aboue all , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,508.33

and God preserue you all , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,508.34

and make and kepe you his seruauntes all . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,508.35

<P_511>

<heading:edcomment:204_TO_ALL_HIS_FRIENDS>

<heading:edcomment:TOWER_OF_LONDON_1534>

To all my louinge Frendes . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,511.39

For_as_much as being in prison I can@ @not tell what nede I may haue ,
or what necessitie I may happe to stande in , I hartely besech you all ,
that if my welbeloued doughter Margaret Roper <paren> which only of all
my frendes hath by the Kynges gracious fauour licens to resort to me
<$$paren> doe anything desire of any of you , of such thinge as I shall
happe to nede , that it may lyke you no lesse to regarde and tender it ,
then if I moued it vnto you and required it of you parsonally present my
selfe . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,511.40

And I besech you all to praye for me , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,511.41

and I shall pray for you . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,511.42

Your faithful louer and pore bedeman , Thomas More , Knight , prisoner .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,511.43

<P_540>

<heading:edcomment:210_TO_MARGARET_ROPER>

<heading:edcomment:TOWER_OF_LONDON_1534>

The Holy Spirite of God be with you . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.47

If I wolde with my writing , <paren> mine owne good daughter <$$paren>
declare how much pleasure and comfort , your daughterlye louing letters
wer vnto me MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.48

a pecke of coles wolde not suffice to make me the pennes .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.49

And other pennes haue I <paren> good Margaret <$$paren> none here :
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.50

and therfore can I wryte you no long processe ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.51

nor dare aduenture , good doughter , to wryte often .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.52

The cause of my close keping againe did of lykelyhed growe of my
negligent and very plaine true worde which you remember .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.53

And verely where as my mind gaue me <paren> as I tolde you in the
gardein <$$paren> that some such thinge were lykely to happen , so doth
my mynde alway geue me , that some folke yet wene that I was not so
poore as it appeared in the search , and that it may therfore happen ,
that yet eftsone ofter than once , some new sodain searches may happe to
be made in euery house of ours as narowly as is possible . Which thinge
if euer it so should happe , can make but game to vs that know the
trouth of my pouertie , but if they find out my wyues gay gyrdle and her
golden bedes . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.54

Howbeit veryly beleue in good faith , that the Kynges Grace of his
benigne pitie will take nothing from her . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.55

I thought and yet thinke , that it may be that I was shett vp againe ,
vpon some newe causeles suspicion , growen peraduenture vpon some secret
sinister information , wherby some folke happely thought , that there
shoulde be founde out against me some other gretter thinges .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.56

But I thanke our Lorde when so euer this coniecture hath fallen in my
mynde , the clearnesse of my conscience hath made mine hearte hoppe for
ioy . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.57

For one thinge am I very sure of hetherto , and trust in Godes mercye to
be while I lyue , that as often I haue sayd vnto you , I shall for any
thinge toward my prince , neuer take great harme , but if I take grete
wronge , in the sight of God I say , how so euer it shall seme in the
sight of men . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,540.58

For to the worlde , wronge may seme right sometyme by false <P_541>
coniecturing , sometimes by false witnesses , as that good Lorde sayd
vnto you , which is I dare say my very good lorde in his mynde , and
said it of very good wyll . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,541.59

Before the worlde also , my refusing of this othe is accounted an
heighnous offence , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,541.60

and my religious feare , toward God , is called obstinacy toward my
Prince . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,541.61

But my Lordes of the Counsaile before whom I refused it , might well
perceiue by the heuines of my hart appearing well mo wayes than one vnto
them , that all sturdy stubbernesse whereof obstinacy groweth , was very
farre fro my mynde . For the clearer profe wherof , sith they semed to
take for one argument of obstinacy in me , that refusing of the othe , I
wolde not declare the causes why , I offred with a full heauy heart ,
that albeit I rather wolde endure all the payne and peryll of the
statute than by the declaring of the causes , geue any occasion of
exaspiracion vnto my most dradde Souerain Lorde and Prince , yet rather
than his Highnes shoulde for not disclosing the causes , accounte me for
stubberne and obstinate , I wolde vpon such his gracious licence and
cammaundement as shoulde discharge me of his displeasure and peryll of
any statute , declare those poyntes that letted my poore conscience to
receyue that othe ; MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,541.62

and wolde ouer that be sworne before , that if I shoulde after the
causes disclosed and declared find them so answered as my conscience
shoulde thinke it selfe satisfied , I wolde therupon sweare the othe
that I there refused . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,541.63

To this , Maister Secretary answered me , that though the Kynges Grace
gaue me suche a lycence , yet it coulde not discharge me against the
statutes , in saying any thing that were by them vpon haynous paynes
prohibited . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,541.64

In this good warning he shewed hymselfe my specyall tender frende .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,541.65

And now you see well Margaret , that it is no obstinacy to leaue the
causes vndeclared , while I coulde not declare them without peryll .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,541.66

But now is it accounted great obstinacy that I refuse the othe , what so
euer my causes be , considering that of so many wiser and better men
none stycked therat . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,541.67

And M. Secretary of a great zeale that he bare vnto me , sware there
before them a gret othe , that for the displeasure that he thought the
Kynges Highnes wolde beare me , and the suspicion that his Grace woulde
conceiue of me , which wolde now thinke in his mynde that all the Nunnes
busines was wrought and deuised by me , he had leuer than I shoulde haue
refused the othe , that his owne only sonne <paren> which <P_542> is a
goodly yonge gentillman of whome our Lorde send hym much ioye <$$paren>
had hadde his head stricken of . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,542.68

This worde Margaret , as it was a merueylous declaration of M.
Secretaries great good minde and fauour towarde me , so was it an heauy
hearing to me , that the Kinges Grace my most drad Souerain Lorde , wer
lykely to conceiue such highe suspicion of me , and beare such greuous
indignacion toward me , for the thinge , which without the daunger and
perill of my poore soule , lay not in my hande to helpe , nor dooth .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,542.69

Now haue I herd since , that some say that this obstynate maner of mine
, in still refusinge the othe , shall peraduenture force and driue the
Kynges Grace to make a ferther lawe for me . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,542.70

I can@ @not let such a law to be made . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,542.71

But I am very sure , that if I dyed by such a law , I shoulde die for
that poynt innocent afore God . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,542.72

And albeit <paren> good doughter <$$paren> that I thinke , our Lorde
that hath the heartes of kynges in his hand , woulde neuer suffer of his
high goodnes , so gracious a Prince , and so many honorable men , and so
many good men as be in the Parlement to make such an vnlawfull law , as
that shoulde be if it so mishapped , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,542.73

yet lest I note that poynt vnthought vpon , but many tymes more than one
reuolued and cast in my minde before my commynge hither , both that
peryll and all other that myght put my bodie in peryll of death by the
refusing of this othe . In deuising wherupon , albeit <paren> myne owne
good daughter <$$paren> that I founde my selfe <paren> I cry God mercie
<$$paren> very sensuall and my fleshe much more shrinkinge from payne
and from death , than me thought it the part of a faithfull Christen man
, in such a case as my conscience gaue me , that in the sauing of my
bodie shoulde stande the losse of my soule , yet I thanke our Lorde ,
that in that conflict , the Spirite had in conclusion the maistry , and
reason with helpe of faith finally concluded , that for to be put to
death wrongefully for doinge well <paren> as I am very sure I doe , in
refusing to swere against mine owne conscience , beinge such as I am not
vpon peryll of my soule bounden to chaunge whither my death shoulde come
without law , or by colour of a law <$$paren> it is a case in which a
man may leese his head and yet haue none harme , but in stede of harme
inestimable good at the hande of God . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,542.74

And I thanke our Lorde <paren> Megge <$$paren> since I am come hether I
sett by death euery daye lesse than other . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,542.75

For thoughe a man leese of his yeres in this worlde , it is more than
manyfolde recompensed <P_543> by cominge the sooner to heauen .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.76

And thoughe it be a paine to die while a man is in health yet see I very
fewe that in sickenes dye with ease . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.77

And finally , very sure am I that when so euer the tyme shal come that
may happe to come , God wote how sone , in which I shoulde lye sicke in
my death bed by nature , I shal than thinke that God had done much for
me , if he had suffred me to dye before by the colowr of such a lawe .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.78

And therfore my reason sheweth me <paren> Margaret <$$paren> that it wer
gret foly for me to be sory to come to that death , which I wolde after
wyshe that I had dyed . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.79

Beside that , that a man may happe with lasse thanke of God , and more
aduenture of his soule to dye as violently , and as painefully by many
other chaunces , as by enemies or theues . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.80

And therfore mine owne good dowghter I assure you <paren> thankes be to
God <$$paren> the thinkynge of any such albeit it hath grieued me ere
this , yet at this day grieueth me nothinge .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.81

And yet I knowe well for all this mine owne frailtie , and that Saint
Peter which fered it much lesse than I , fell in such feare sone after ,
that at the worde of a simple gyrle he forsoke and forsware our Sauiour
. MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.82

And therfore am I not <paren> Megge <$$paren> so mad , as to warraunt my
selfe to stande . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.83

But I shall praye , and I praye the mine owne good daughter to praye
with me , that it may please God that hath geuen me this minde , to geue
me the grace to kepe it . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.84

And thus haue I mine owne good daughter disclosed vnto you , the very
secrete botome of my minde , referring the order therof onely to the
goodnes of God , and that so fully , that I assure you Margaret on my
faith , I neuer haue prayde God to bringe me hence nor deliuer me fro
death , but referring all thing whole vnto his onely pleasure , as to
hym that seeth better what is best for me than my selfe dooth .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.85

Nor neuer longed I since I came hether to set my fote in mine owne howse
, for any desire of or pleasure of my howse , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.86

but gladlie wolde I sometime somewhat talke with my frendes , and
specially my wyfe and you that pertein to my charge .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.87

But sith that God otherwise disposeth , I committe all wholy to his
goodnes MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.88

and take dayly great coumfort in that I perceiue that you lyue together
so charitably and so quietly : MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.89

I besech our Lorde continue it . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.90

And thus , mine owne good daughter , putting you finally in remembraunce
, that albeit if the necessite so shoulde require , I thanke our Lorde
in this quiet and comfort is mine heart at this day ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.91

and I trust in Goddes goodnes so shall haue grace to continue ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,543.92

yet <paren> as I said before <$$paren> I <P_544> verely trust that God
shall so inspire and gouerne the Kynges heart , that he shall not suffre
his noble heart and courage to requite my true faithfull heart and
seruice , with such extreme vnlawfull and vncharitable dealing , only
for the displeasure that I can not thinke so as other doo .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,544.93

But his true subiect wil I lyue and dye , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,544.94

and truely praye for hym wil I , both here and in the t@ @other worlde
too . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,544.95

And thus mine owne good daughter have me recommended to my good
beddefelowe and all my children , men , women and all , with all your
babes and your nursis and all the maydes and all the seruauntes , and
all our kynne , and all our other frendes abrode .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,544.96

And I besech our Lorde to saue them all and kepe them .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,544.97

And I praye you all praye for me , and I shall praye for you all .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,544.98

And take no thought for me what so ewer you shal happe to heare ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,544.99

but be mery in God . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,544.100

<P_550>

<heading:edcomment:214_TO_MARGARET_ROPER>

<heading:edcomment:TOWER_OF_LONDON_2_OR_3_MAY_1535>

Owr Lorde blisse you . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,550.104

My derely belouyd Doughter . I dout not but by the reason of the
Counsaylours resortyng hyther , in thys tyme <paren> in whych our Lord
be {COM:preceding_word_"be"_emended} theyr comforte <$$paren> <P_551>
these fathers of the Charterhous
{COM:preceding_word_"Charterhous"_emended} and Master Reynoldis
{COM:preceding_word_"Reynoldis"_emended} of Syon <paren> that be nowe
<$$paren> {COM:sic} iudged to deth for treson , <paren> whose maters and
causes I know not <$$paren> may happe to put yow in trouble and fere of
mynde concernyng me beyng here prisoner
{COM:preceding_word_"prisoner"_emended} , specyally for that it ys not
vnlykely but that you haue herd that {COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended}
I {COM:preceding_word_"I"_emended} was brought also before the Counsayle
here my selfe . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,551.105

I haue thought {COM:preceding_word_"thought"_emended} yt necessary to
aduertyse yow of the very trouth , to th@ @ende that you
{COM:preceding_word_"you"_emended} neyther conceyue more hope than the
mater gyueth , lest vppon other torne yt myght aggreue your heuynes ,
nor more griefe {COM:preceding_word_"griefe"_emended} and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} fere than the mater gyueth of , on
the t@ @other syde . Wherfore shortly
{COM:preceding_word_"shortly"_emended} ye
{COM:preceding_word_"ye"_emended} shall vnderstand that on Fryday the
last day of Apryle in the afternone , Mr. Leuetenaunt cam in here vnto
me , and shewed me that Mr. Secretary
{COM:preceding_word_"Secretary"_emended} wold speke with me . Wheruppon
I shyfted my gowne , and went owt with
{COM:preceding_word_"with"_emended} Mr. Leuetenaunt into the galery to
hym . Where I met many , some knowen and some vnknowen in the way .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,551.106

And in conclusion {COM:preceding_word_"conclusion"_emended} commyng in
to the chamber wher hys Mastershyp sat with Mr. Attorney
{COM:preceding_word_"Attorney"_emended} , Mr. Soliciter , Mr. Bedyll
and Mr. Doctour Tregonnell , I was offred to syt with them , whych in
no wyse I wolde . Wheruppon Mr. Secretary shewed
{COM:preceding_word_"shewed"_emended} vnto me , that he dowted not , but
that I had by such frendes {COM:preceding_word_"frendes"_emended} as
{COM:preceding_word_"as"_emended} hyther had resorted to me sene the new
statutis {COM:preceding_word_"statutis"_emended} made at the last
{COM:preceding_word_"last"_emended} syttyng of the Parlyament .
Wherunto I answered : ye verely . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,551.107

Howe_be_yt {COM:preceding_word_"Howe_be_yt"_emended} for_as_much as
beyng here , I haue no conuersacion with eny people , I thought yt
lytell nede for me to bestow mych tyme vppon
{COM:preceding_word_"vppon"_emended} them , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,551.108

and therefore <P_552> I redelyuerd the boke shortly
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.109

and th@ @effect of the statutis {COM:preceding_word_"statutis"_emended}
I neuer marked nor studyed to put in remembraunce .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.110

Than he {COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} asked me whether I had not red
the fyrst statute of them , of the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended}
Kyng beyng Hed of the Chyrche . Wherunto I answerd , yes .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.111

Than his {COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended} Mastershyp declared vnto me
, that syth yt was now by act of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended}
Parlyament ordeyned that hys Hyghnes and hys heyres be , and euer
{COM:preceding_word_"euer"_emended} ryght haue bene , and perpetually
shuld be , Supreme Hed in yerth {COM:preceding_word_"yerth"_emended} of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} the Chyrch of Englande vnder Cryst ,
the Kyngis {COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended} plesure was , that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} those
{COM:preceding_word_"those"_emended} of hys Counsaylle there assembled
shuld demaund myne {COM:preceding_word_"myne"_emended} oppinion
{COM:preceding_word_"oppinion"_emended} , and what my mynde was therin .
Wherunto I answerd {COM:preceding_word_"answerd"_emended} that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} in {COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended}
good fayth I had well trusted that the Kyngis
{COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended} Hyghnesse
{COM:preceding_word_"Hyghnesse"_emended} woulde
{COM:preceding_word_"woulde"_emended} neuer
{COM:preceding_word_"neuer"_emended} haue commaunded eny such questyon
to be {COM:preceding_word_"be"_emended} demaunded
{COM:preceding_word_"demaunded"_emended} of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} me {COM:preceding_word_"me"_emended} ;
consydryng that I euer from the begynnyng well and trewly from tyme to
tyme declared my mynde vnto hys Hyghnesse , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.112

and syns that tyme I had {COM:preceding_word_"had"_emended} <paren> I
sayd <$$paren> vnto your Mastershyp Mr. Secretory also , both by mouth
and by wrytyng . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.113

And now I haue in good fayth dyscharged my mynde of all such maters ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.114

and neyther wyll dyspute Kyngis {COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended}
tytles nor Popys , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.115

but the Kyngis {COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended} trew faythfull
subiect I am and wyl@ @be , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.116

and dayly I pray for hym and for all hys , and for yow all that are of
hys honorable Counsayle , and for all the realme ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.117

and otherwyse than thus I neuer entend
{COM:preceding_word_"entend"_emended} to medell . Wherunto Mr.
Secretory answerd that he thought thys maner answere shuld not satysfye
nor content the Kyngis {COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended} Hyghnes ,
but that hys Grace wold exact a more full answer .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.118

And hys Master-shypp {COM:preceding_word_"Master-shypp"_emended} added
therunto , that the Kyngis {COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended} Hyghnes
was a prynce not of rygour but of mercy and pytty , and though that he
had founde obstynacy at some tyme in eny of hys subiectis
{COM:preceding_word_"subiectis"_emended} , yet when he shuld fynde them
at an other tyme comfyrmable and submyt them selfe , hys Grace wolde
shew mercy . And that concernyng my selfe , hys Hyghnesse wolde be
glade to se me take such confyrmable ways , as I myght be abrode in the
worlde agayne among other men as I haue bene before . Wherunto I
shortly <paren> after the inwarde affeccion of my mynde <$$paren>
answered for a very trouth , that I wolde neuer medle in the worlde
agayne , to haue the worlde gyuyn me . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.119

And to the remenaunt of the mater , I answerd in effect as byfore ,
shewyng that I had fully determyned with my selfe , neyther to study nor
medle with eny mater of thys worlde , but that my hole study shulde be ,
vppon the passyon of Chryst and myne owne passage owt of thys worlde
{COM:preceding_word_"worlde"_emended} . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,552.120

<P_553>

Vppon thys I was commaunded to go forth for a whyle , and after called
in agayne . At whych tyme Mr. Secretory sayd vnto me that though I was
{COM:preceding_word_"was"_emended} prisoner and condemned to perpetuall
prison , yet I was not therby dyscharged
{COM:preceding_word_"dyscharged"_emended} of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} myne obedyence and allegeaunce vnto
the Kyngis {COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended} Hyghnesse .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.122

And thereuppon {COM:preceding_word_"thereuppon"_emended} demaunded me
whyther that I thought , that the Kyngis
{COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended} Grace myght exact of me such
thyngis {COM:preceding_word_"thyngis"_emended} as are conteyned in the
statutes and vppon lyke {COM:preceding_word_"lyke"_emended} paynes as he
myght of other men . Wherto I answerd that I wold
{COM:preceding_word_"wold"_emended} not say the contrary . Wherto he
seyd , that lykewyse as the Kyngis {COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended}
Hyghnesse {COM:preceding_word_"Hyghnesse"_emended} wolde be gracyous to
them that he founde conformable
{COM:preceding_word_"conformable"_emended} , so
{COM:preceding_word_"so"_emended} his {COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended}
Grace wolde folow the course of hys laws toward such as
{COM:preceding_word_"as"_emended} he {COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended}
shall {COM:preceding_word_"shall"_emended} fynde
{COM:preceding_word_"fynde"_emended} obstynate .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.123

And hys Mastershyp sayd ferther , that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} my {COM:preceding_word_"my"_emended}
demeanour {COM:preceding_word_"demeanour"_emended} in
{COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended} that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} matter
{COM:preceding_word_"matter"_emended} was of a thyng that of likelyhode
{COM:preceding_word_"likelyhode"_emended} made
{COM:preceding_word_"made"_emended} now other men so styffe therin as
they be . Wherto I answerd , that {COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} I
gyue no man occasyon to holde ony poynte one or other , nor
{COM:preceding_word_"nor"_emended} neuer
{COM:preceding_word_"neuer"_emended} gaue any man aduyse or counsayle
therin one way or other . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.124

And {COM:preceding_word_"And"_emended} for conclusyon I coude no ferther
go , what so euer payne shulde come {COM:preceding_word_"come"_emended}
therof . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.125

I am , quoth I , the Kyngis {COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended} trew
faythfull subiect and daily bedesman
{COM:preceding_word_"bedesman"_emended}

and pray for hys Hyghnesse and all hys and all the realme .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.127

I do nobody harme , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.128

I say none harme , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.129

I thynk none harme , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.130

but wysh euerye bodye good . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.131

And yf thys be not ynough to kepe a man alyue in good
{COM:preceding_word_"good"_emended} fayth
{COM:preceding_word_"fayth"_emended} I long not to lyue .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.132

And I am dying alredy , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.133

and haue syns I came here , bene dyuers tymes in the case that I thought
to dye within {COM:preceding_word_"within"_emended} one houre ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.134

and I thank our Lorde I was neuer sory for yt , but
{COM:preceding_word_"but"_emended} rather
{COM:preceding_word_"rather"_emended} sory whan I saw the pang past .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.135

And therfore my pore body ys at {COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} Kyngis
{COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended} plesure ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.136

wolde God my deth myght do hym good . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.137

After this {COM:preceding_word_"this"_emended} Mr. Secretory sayd :
well ye fynde no fawte in that statute , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.138

fynde yow {COM:preceding_word_"yow"_emended} eny in eny of the other
statutis {COM:preceding_word_"statutis"_emended} after ? Wherto I
answerd , Sir , whatso {COM:preceding_word_"whatso"_emended} euer thyng
shuld seme to me other than good , in eny of the statutis
{COM:preceding_word_"statutis"_emended} or in that statute eyther , I
wolde not declare what fawte {COM:preceding_word_"fawte"_emended} I
{COM:preceding_word_"I"_emended} fownde , nor speke therof . Wherunto
fynally hys mastershyp sayd ful gentylly that of eny thyng that I had
spokyn , there shuld {COM:preceding_word_"shuld"_emended} none
{COM:preceding_word_"none"_emended} aduauntage be takyn ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.139

and whyther he sayd ferther that ther be none to be taken , I am not
well remembryd . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,553.140

But he sayd that {COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} reporte shulde be
made vnto the Kyngis {COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended} Hyghnes , and
hys gracyous plesure knowen . <P_554> Wheruppon I was delyuerd agayne
to Mr. Leuetenaunt {COM:preceding_word_"Leuetenaunt"_emended} , whych
was then called in , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,554.141

and so was I by Mr. Leuetenaunt brought
{COM:preceding_word_"brought"_emended} agayne into my chamber ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,554.142

and here am I yet in such case as I was
{COM:preceding_word_"was"_emended} , neyther better nor worse .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,554.143

That that shall folow lyeth in the hande
{COM:preceding_word_"hande"_emended} of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} God {COM:preceding_word_"God"_emended}
, whom I besech to put in the {TEXT:missing_"the"} Kyngis
{COM:preceding_word_"Kyngis"_emended} Graces mynde that thyng
{COM:preceding_word_"thyng"_emended} that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} may be to hys hygh plesure , and in
myne , to mynde onely the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} weale of my
sowle , with lytell regarde of my body . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,554.144

And yow with al yours , and my wyfe and all my chylderne and all our
other frendis {COM:preceding_word_"frendis"_emended} both bodily and
gostely hertely well to fare . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,554.145

And I pray yow and all them pray {COM:preceding_word_"pray"_emended} for
{COM:preceding_word_"for"_emended} me , MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,554.146

and take no thought what so euer shall happen me .
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,554.147

For I {COM:preceding_word_"I"_emended} verely
{COM:preceding_word_"verely"_emended} trust in the goodnesse of God ,
MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,554.148

seme yt neuer so euyll to this worlde , yt shall in dede in a nother
worlde be for the best . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,554.149

Your louing {COM:preceding_word_"louing"_emended} father
{COM:preceding_word_"father"_emended} , Thomas
{COM:preceding_word_"Thomas"_emended} More
{COM:preceding_word_"More"_emended} Knyghte
{COM:preceding_word_"Knyghte"_emended} . MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,554.150

written the third MORELET2-1534-E1-P1,554.151

