<BEGIN_mowntayne-1555-e1-p1>

<P_177>

<heading>

THE TROUBLES OF THOMAS MOWNTAYNE , RECTOR OF ST. MICHAEL TOWER-RYALL ,
IN THE REIGN OF QUEEN MARY : WRITTEN BY HIMSELF
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,177.4

<$$heading>

<P_178>

God is my defense . {COM:cf._note_on_p._217} MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,178.7

In the yeare of Lorde God a_thowsand_fyffe_hundrethe_and_iij quene Marye
was crownyd Quene of Ingeland , swche a daye of the monthe beynge
Sondaye ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,178.8

and the next Sondaye after , I Thomas Mowntayne , parson of Sent
Myhellys in the towere ryall , otherwysse callyd Wythtyngeton college yn
London , dyd ther mynystere al kyend of servys acordynge to the godly
order than sett forthe by that moste grasyus and blessyd prence kynge
Edward the syxte ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,178.9

and the hole paryshe , beynge than gatheryd togeather , dyd than and
there moste joyfully communycate together with me the holly supper of
the Lorde Jesus , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,178.10

and manye other godly sytysyns wher than partakers of the same , whoe ,
with byter terys of repentance , dyd not onlye lament ther former wycked
lyves , but also the lacke and lose of our moste dred sufferent lorde
kynge Edward the syxte , whome we wher not worthye of , for our
unthankefulnes and dyssobedyence bothe towardes All_mightye God and his
magestie . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,178.11

Nowe , wyll I was even a brekynge of the bred at the table , sayenge to
the communycants thes wordys , <font> Take and eate thys <$$font> , &c.
, and <font> Drynke thys <$$font> , &c. , ther where standynge by , to
see and here , sartayne sarvynge men belongyng to the bushope of
Wynchester , amonge home , one of them most shamefully blasphemyd God ,
sayenge " Ye , Godys blud , standys thowe ther yet ? sayenge <font>
Take and eate , Take and drynke <$$font> ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,178.12

wyl not thys geare be lefte yet ? MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,178.13

yow shal be made to synge another songe withyn thys fewe dayes I trowe ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,178.14

or elys I have loste my marke . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,178.15

The nexte Weddynsdaye followyng the bushop of Wynchester sent one of hys
servantes for me to come and speake with my lorde hys <P_179> master ;
to home I answeryd , that I wolde wayte one hys lordshyp after that I
had done mornyng prayer . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.16

" Naye , <paren> saythe hys man , <$$paren> I maye not tarye so longe
for yow . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.17

I ham commaundyd to take yow whersoever I fyend you , and to brynge yow
with me ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.18

that ys my charge gevyn unto me by my lordys owne mowthe . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.19

" Wel than , <paren> sayed I , <$$paren> I wyll goo with yow owte of
hande , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.20

and God be my comforde , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.21

and strengthyn me with hys holy spryte thys daye and ever , in that same
truthe wher unto he hathe calyd me , that I may contynue theryn to the
end . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.22

Amen ! " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.23

Nowe , whan I came ynto the greate chamber at Saint Marye Overy's , ther
I fownd the bushop standyng at a baye wyndowe with a great companye
aboute hym , and manye swters bothe men and wemen ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.24

for he was gooynge to the courte ; amonge home ther was one mr.
Sellinger , a knyghte and lord debytye of Iyerland , beinge a swtter
also to my lorde . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.25

Than the bushope callyd me unto hym MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.26

and sayed , " Thou herytyke ! how darste thow be so bowlde to use that
sysmatycall service styll , of late set forthe ? seynge that God hath
sent us nowe a catholycke quene , whose lawys thow haste broken , as the
rest of thy fellowse hathe don , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.27

and you shall knowe the pryse of yt yffe I do lyffe .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.28

Ther ys suche abomynable companye of yowe , as ys able to poyesyne a
hole realme with your herysys . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.29

" My lorde , <paren> sayed I , <$$paren> I ham none heretyke ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.30

for that waye that yow counte heresy , so worshupe we the lyvynge God ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.31

and as our fore_fathers hathe done and belevyd , I mene Habraham ,
Isaake , and Jacob , with the reste of the holly prophetes and
apostyllys , even soo doo I beleve to be savyd , and by no other meanes
. " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.32

" Godys pasyon ! <paren> sayd the bushop , <$$paren> dyd not I tel yow
, my lorde debyty {COM:preceding_word_"debyty"_emended} , howe yow
sholde knowe an heretyke ? MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,179.33

he ys up with the ' lyvynge <P_180> God , ' as thoo ther were a dead God
. MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.34

They have nothynge yn ther mowthes , thes herytykys , but ' the Lord
lyvythe , the lyvyng God rwlythe , the Lorde , the Lorde , ' and nothyng
but the Lorde . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.35

Here he chaffyed lyke a bushop , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.36

and , as his mannar was , many tymys he put of hys cape
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.37

and rubbyd to and froo , up and done , the fore parte of hys heed , wher
a locke of hare was alwayes standynge up , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.38

and that as some saye wase hys grace ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.39

but , to passyffye thys hastye bushop and cruell man , the lord debytye
sayed , " My good lorde chaunseler , trobyl not yourselve with thys
herytyke , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.40

I thynke all the worlde ys full of them , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.41

God bles me from them ! MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.42

but as your lordshyp sayed even now full well , havynge a chrystyan
quene nowe raynynge over us , I truste ther wyl@ @be shortly a
reformasyon and an order taken for these herytykes ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.43

and I trust God hathe presarvyd your honorable lordshyp even for the
very same porpoose . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.44

Than sayed mr. Selynger unto me , " Submyt yourselve unto my lorde ,
and so yow shall fynd favor at hys hand . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.45

" I thanke yow , syr , <paren> sayd I , <$$paren> ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.46

plye your owne swete {GLOSS:suit} , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.47

and I pray yow let me alone , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.48

for I never offendyd my lord , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.49

neyther yet wyll I make any suche submysyon has he wolde have me to doo
, MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.50

be assueryd of that , God wyllynge . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.51

" Wel , <paren> sayed he , <$$paren> you are a stuburne man . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.52

Than stode ther one by muche lyke unto docter Martyn ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.53

and sayed , " My lorde , the tyme pasythe awaye ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.54

trubule your selve no longer with thys herytyke ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.55

for he ys not onlye an herytyke , but also a traytor to the quenes
magesty , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.56

for he was one of them that wente forthe with the ducke of
Northethumberland and was yn open felde agaynste here grace ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.57

and therfor as a traytor he ys one of them that ys exsemte owte of the
generall pardon , and hathe loste the benyfytt of the same . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,180.58

" Ys yt even so ? <paren> saythe <P_181> the bushope , <$$paren>
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.59

feche me the boke that I maye see yt . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.60

Than was the boke broughte hym , weryn he loked as one ingnorante what
had bene done , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.61

and yet he beynge the cheffe doere hymselve therof .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.62

Than asked he of me what my name was . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.63

I sayed my name was Thomas Mownttayne . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.64

" Thow haste wronge , " sathe he . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.65

" Why so , my lorde ? " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.66

" That thow haste not <font> mowntyd <$$font> to Tyborne , or to soche a
lyke place . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.67

Than sayed I unto hym , " I beseeche your lordshyp be so good lord unto
me , as to let me knowe myn acusars who they {SIC:they_they} be ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.68

for I truste that I have not desarvyd nether to be hangyd as a theffe ,
nor yet to be burnyd as a {COM:preceding_word_"a"_emended}
{COM:missing_in_text} herytyke , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.69

for I onely beleve yn one God yn trinitye , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.70

and as for the lawes of the realme , I truste I have not offendyd or
brokyn anye of them . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.71

" No ? <paren> sayd the bushop , <$$paren> MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.72

I wyll make thee to synge a newe songe or thow and I have done ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.73

for thes ij be alwayes lynked together , treson and herysy ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.74

and thow haste lyke a shameles man offendyd in bothe ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.75

and that shalte thow knowe . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.76

I wyl scole thee myselve . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.77

Than he called for the marshall or some of his men ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.78

and ther was none of them ther . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.79

Than calyd he for one mr. Hungerford , one of his owne jentellemen ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.80

hyme he rowndyd yn the eare a pretty whyele ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.81

and than openly the bushop sayed with a loude woysce , " I praye yow ,
mr. Hungerford , take thys trayterus herytike ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.82

and have hym to the Marshallsee , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.83

and remember wel whate I have sayed unto yow ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.84

for thys ys one of our new brochyd bretheryn that spekethe agayenste al
good workes . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.85

" No , my lorde , <paren> sayed I , <$$paren> I never prechyd or spake
agaynste anye of those good workys which be comawndyd of God yn the holy
scryptures to be done ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.86

for yn those good workys every chrystyan man awghte to exsersys hymselve
al the dayes of hys lyffe , and yet not to thynke hymselve to be
justyffyed therby , but rather to cownte hymselve an unprovytable
servant whan he hathe don the beste he can . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.87

" That ys true , <paren> qothe the bushop ; <$$paren>
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,181.88

ynded your fraternyte was , ys , and ever wyll be altogether
unprophytabull yn al ages , and good for nothynge but <P_182> for the
fyere . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.89

Tel me , I praye the , whate good workes was ther done , other yn kynge
Hary's days , or yn kyng Edward's days ? " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.90

" Truely , my lorde , <paren> sayd I , <$$paren> ther was doone yn the
dayes of these ij notable kynges , of moste worthye memorye , manye
notable thynges moste worthye of perpetuall memory to the ende .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.91

Fyrste , the bushop of Rome was uterly abollyshyd owte of thys realme ,
with alle his usurpyd powre and auctoritye
{COM:preceding_word_"auctoritye"_emended} over all crystyan prynsys ; al
idolatrye , superstysyon , and ipocrysye supressyd ; all false and
faynyd erelygyus men and women dischargyd of ther longe lowtrynge yn
cloysters , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.92

and th@ @aute hence to serve God yn spirete and truthe , and no longer
to worshup hym yn wayne , devoyrynge poore whydoose howsys under the
pretence of longe prayers . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.93

Also , and that lyke your lordeshype , they did erecte many colegyes .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.94

Also the unyversytys of Cambryge and Oxforde fyrst by wyse men were
vysytyd , than purgyd , wel furnyssyd with godly learnyd masters of
every howse , and laste of all contynuallie relevyd and mayentaynyd from
tyme to tyme by the good and well_dysposyd people of thys sytye of
London , that lernyd men myghte floryshe . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.95

Al these , my lord , were good workes . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.96

Further , they dyd erecte manye fayer ospytallys ; one for orfaynes and
fatherlese chylderyn , wheryn they maye be towghte to knowe ther duety
and obedyence bothe to God and man , havynge bothe a scolmaster and also
an husher , to theche them ther grammer ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.97

these lykewaies also have meat , drynke , clothe , and logynge ,
lawnders , surgyns , and phisysyons , with al other nessesarys .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.98

Yn the other howsys , my lorde , ther ys the blyend , the lame , the
doume , the deaffe , and al kynd of syke , sore , and dessesyd peple ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.99

they have alwayes with them an honeste learnyd mynyster to comforte them
, and to gyve them good cownsell that they myghte pasyently take yn good
parte Godys vysytasyon . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.100

Thys they have : bysyed meate , dryuke , lodgynge , surgyns , and
physysyons . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.101

Are not al these good workes , my lord ? " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,182.102

Than the bushop sayed unto me yn mokage , " Ser , you have made a greate
<P_183> speke ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.103

for , wheras yow have set upe one begarlye howse , yow have pulde downe
an_C. prynsly howsys for yt ; puttyng owte godly , lernyd , and devoyte
men that sarvyd God daye and nyghte , and thrust {TEXT:thurte} yn ther
plase a sorte of scurvye and lowsye boyes .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.104

Wel , to be shorte with thee , whate sayeste thow to the blysyd
sacramente of the alter ? MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.105

howe belevyste thow yn that ? " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.106

" Not as yow beleve , my lord ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.107

for I never reed yn the scryptur of anye suche sacrament so callyd , and
so unreverently to be hangyd up yn a rope , over a hepe of stones ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.108

and that same to be {COM:preceding_word_"be"_emended} worshuppyd of the
people as God . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.109

Woo be unto them that so dothe theache the people thus to beleve !
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.110

for they be false prophetes , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.111

beleve them who wyll ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.112

for trewlye I wyl not . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.113

Thus ham I tawghte to beleve . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.114

" By home ? " saythe the bushope . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.115

" For sothe , even by Jesus Chryste , the hye bushop and pryest of our
sowlys ; who by the offerynge up of hys owne blysyd bodye on the crosse
once for all , as saint Pawl sayth to Ebrwse , and ther shedynge hys
moste presyus blude hathe clensyd us from al our synnes ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.116

and I trust only by his deathe to have everlastynge lyffe . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.117

" What sayeste thow nowe , thow shameles heretike , unto the holy and
blysyd mase ? " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.118

" My lorde , suffer me to speake my consyence , I beseche yow ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.119

I nother beleve yt to be holly nor yet blyssyd , but rather to be
abomynable before God and man , and the same to be acursyd ; "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.120

and with that I knellyd doune MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.121

and hylde up my handys , lokynge up unto hevyn ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.122

and sayed yn the presence of them all , " O Father of heaven and of
earthe ! I moost whomblye beseche thee to increase my faythe and to
help my unbeleve , and shortly cast doune for ever that shameful idolle
the mase , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.123

even for {COM:preceding_word_"for"_emended} Jesus Chrystes sake I aske
yt . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.124

Amen . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.125

God grawnte yt for hys marsy sake shortly to come to pase . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.126

" I crye you marsy , syr , <paren> sayed the bushop , <$$paren>
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.127

howe holy you ar nowe ! MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.128

Dyd you never saye mase , I praye yow ? " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.129

" Yese , my lorde , that I have , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.130

and I aske God marsy , and moost hartely forgyfenes for doynge so wycked
a dede . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.131

" And wyll yow never saye yt agayne ? " sayd the bushop .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,183.132

" No , my lord , God wylynge : <P_184> never while I lyve , knoynge that
I doo knowe ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.133

not to be drawne insunder with whyld horse .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.134

I trust that God wyll not so gyve me over and leve me to myselve . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.135

Than he cryed , " Awaye with hyme ! MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.136

yt ys the stoburnste knave that ever I talkyd with , " etc.
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.137

Than mr. Hungerford callyd for iij or iiij of my lordys men to wayet
apon hym to the Marshalsee ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.138

and by the waye as wee went he myghtyly persuadyd with me , that I
showld gyve over myne herysys and wyckyd opynnyons as he termyd them ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.139

and he wolde be a mean for me unto my lord ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.140

and offeryd me to goo bake agayn . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.141

I thanked hym for hys good wyll , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.142

and dysyryd hyme that I myghte goo forward to the plase apoyentyd by my
lorde . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.143

" Wel , <paren> saythe he , <$$paren> and ther be no remedye , come one
. MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.144

I ham sory for yow . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.145

Than cam we to the Marshallsee ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.146

and the porter , calyd Bryttyne , opynyd the doore ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.147

and let us yn , sayenge , " Whate have yow broughte here , mr.
Hungerfurde , an herytyke ? " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.148

He sayed " Ye , and a trayter to . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.149

" No , <paren> sayed I , <$$paren> I am none ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.150

I ham even as trwe a man bothe to God and to the crowne of Ingland as
anye of yew bothe are , or my lorde your mastar other . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.151

" Well , <paren> sayd the porter , <$$paren> wee shall hamper yow wel
inoughe . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.152

Come one with me . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.153

Then the jentelman rowndyd hyme yn the eare ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.154

and so went hys wayes . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.155

Than was I browghte unto the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} greate
blocke . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.156

" Sete up your feete here , master herytyke , <paren> sayed Bryttyne the
porter , <$$paren> MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.157

and let me see howe thes cramp ryngynes wylle become yow . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.158

" I hame not to good <paren> sayed I , <$$paren> to were these for the
truthe sake ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.159

seynge that Jesus Chryste dyed for my sake , they are welcome unto me ,
with all my harte : MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.160

for by moche trybulasyon we muste enter ynto the kyngdome of God . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.161

Than he toke a greate hammer yn hys hand , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.162

and dyd set them one , and that surelye . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.163

Than he brughte me to my lodgynge , a place calyd Bonnares cool-house ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.164

ther he put me yn MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.165

and locked the dore apon me , sayeing that he was commandyd to keape me
as a cloose prysonar , and that no man myghte speake with me .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.166

" Content , <paren> sayd I , <$$paren> MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.167

and yete wyll I speake with one I truste every daye , and aske yow no
beleve . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,184.168

<P_185>

" Whoo ys that ? <paren> sayed he , <$$paren>
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.170

I wolde I myghte knowe hym . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.171

" So wolde I trwely ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.172

than were yow a greate dell more nearar to the kyngdom of God than yow
are nowe . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.173

Repent therfore your papestrye , mr. Brytyn , and beleve the Gospell ;
so shall yew be suere to be savyd , or eles lost for ever . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.174

So he shake hys hed at me , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.175

and whente hys wayes . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.176

Withyn a_ten dayes after , the bushopes amner came yn with hys mayster's
awmese basketes , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.177

and thes woordys he sayed to the porter : MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.178

" My lordys plesure is that none of thoos herytykes that ly here ,
sholde have anye parte of hys almes that he dothe send hether ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.179

for yef he maye knowe that they have anye of it , thys house shal never
have yt agayne so longe as he lyffe . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.180

" Weel ! <paren> sayd Brytyn , <$$paren> I wyll see to yt well inowght
, mr. Broox ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.181

and they have no meate tyl that theye have of that ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.182

some of them are lyke to starfe I warante you ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.183

and so tel my lorde , for anye favore they get at my hande . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.184

Than Broxe whent hys wayes ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.185

and , goynge owte , he behelde a peese of scrypture that was payentyd
over the doore , yn the tyme of kyng Edwardes rayne ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.186

" Whate have we here ? <paren> saythe he , <$$paren> a pees of herysye
! MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.187

I command yow yn my lordys name that yt be clene put owte agaynst I come
agayne ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.188

for if I fynd yt here my lord shall knowe yt , by the holy mase ! "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.189

Now , wylle I was prysonar yn the Marshallse , they came yn dayly thyke
and threefold for relygyone , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.190

and than mr. Wyate was up yn Kente , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.191

and so comynge to London and lyenge yn Southewarke , he sent one of hys
chaplaynes unto me and to the reste of my fellow prysonares , to knowe
whether that we wolde be delyvered owte of pryson or no .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.192

Yf we wolde so doo , he wolde set us at libertye so manye as laye for
relygyon ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.193

with the reste he wold not medylle . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.194

Than we all agreyd MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.195

and sent hym thys answere , " Syr , wee gyve you moste hartye thankes
for thys your jentell offer ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,185.196

but , for as mouche as we came yn for our consyences , and sent hether
by the <P_186> counsell , we thynke yt good here styll to remayne tyl yt
please God to worke our delyverance as yt shall seme beste to hys glorye
and owre lawfull dyscharge ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.197

whether yt be {COM:preceding_word_"be"_emended} by lyffe or deathe we
are contente , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.198

hys wyll be done apon us ! MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.199

and thus fayer you well . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.200

With this our answer he was very well content , as afterward reporte was
made unto us . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.201

That same Lente ther came unto me doctor Chadse , doctor Penulton , mr.
Udalle , parson Pyttyes , and one Wackelyn a petye cannon of Powllys .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.202

Al these laboryd me very sore for to recant ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.203

and yf that I wolde grawnte so to doo , " my lorde chancelar wyll
delyver yow , I dare saye , <paren> sayed mr. Chadsey , <$$paren>
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.204

and yow shall have as good lyvynges as ever yow had and better . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.205

To whom I answeryd that " I wolde not by my libertye nor yet my lordys
favore so dear , and to forsake my good God , as some of yow hafe done ;
the pryse wherof you are lyke one daye to feel yf that yow repent not yn
tyme . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.206

God turne your harttys MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.207

and make yow of a better myend ! MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.208

Fayer yow well . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.209

Yow have loste your marke , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.210

for I hame not he that yow loke for . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.211

And so we partyd . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,186.212

<P_187>

Doctor Martyn also dyd one tyme send for me lykewyse , to come speake
with hyme at my lorde of Wynchester@ @'s howse , offerynge me good
lyvynges , yf that I wolde submyte unto my lorde .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.214

I tolde hym that " yf I sholde goo abowghte to plese men , I knowe not
howe sone my Maker wolde take me awaye , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.215

for a dubyle-hartyd man ys unconstante yn all hys wayes .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.216

I truste that your swete barmyse {GLOSS:balms} therfor shalle never
break my hede ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.217

and , seynge that I have begone yn the spryte , God forbyd that I sholde
nowe end yn the fleshe ! " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.218

And he herynge thys partyd from me yn a greate furye ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.219

and goynge out of hys chamber , he sware a great othe , sayinge that I
was as craftye an herytyke knave as ever he talked with , and that I dyd
nothynge but mocke my lorde . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.220

" Thow shalte gayne nothynge by it , I warrante ye .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.221

Kepar , have hyme awaye , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.222

and loke strayetly to hym , I counsell yow , tyl that yow knowe further
of my lordys plesure . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.223

So I returnyd to the Marshalse agayne withe my keapar ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.224

and within a whylle after , kynge Phyllyp beynge come yn to Ingland , a
sartayne dyscrypsyon was made of hys parson , queen Mary beynge joynyd
yn the same , and somethynge sayed of her , as well as of the Spanyardes
; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.225

and , because that I hade a copye of the same , yt was layed to my
charge that I dyd make yt ; wherupon sartayne jentelmen were apoyented
to syte yn commysyon for the tryall theroff , and to examyne me and iij
moo of my fellowse . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,187.226

The commysyonars wher these : sir Jhon Baker , sir Thomas Moyelle , sir
Rychard Sothwelle , and mr. Brygysg the lefftenante , and sir Thomas
Holdcrofte , <P_188> beyng knyghte marshall .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.227

All thees sate yn comysyon withyn the Towere of London , yn a gallerye
of the quenes syede ; afore home we were commandyd to come ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.228

that ys I myselve one , Jamys Proctor , Edmond Lawrance , and Thomas
Stonynge , everye one of us beynge fyrste severally examynyd .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.229

We utterly denyinge that anye of us ever were the fyrste awctores
theroff , " No , <paren> sayd they , <$$paren>
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.230

that wyll be provyd the contrarye to some of your paynes . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.231

Than sayed sir Rychard Sothewelle , " To the racke with them !
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.232

to the racke with them ! MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.233

sarve them lyke erytyckes and traytors as they be ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.234

for one of these knavys ys able to undoo a hole syttye . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.235

Thys was spoken at afternone , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.236

and soudaynly he fell faste aslepe as he sate at the borde .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.237

Than sir Jhon Baker asked of me wer I had the coppy , and howe I came by
yt . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.238

" For sothe , <paren> sayed I , <$$paren> ther was one Warter , cuerte
{GLOSS:curate} of St. Bryedys yn Fletstrete ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.239

and he fyrste browghte yt yn amongste us , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.240

and so came I by the coppye of yt . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.241

" Whoo wryte yt ? " sayd they . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.242

" That dyd I , " sayed Tomas Stonynge . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.243

" And ys thys your hand ? " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.244

" Ye , <paren> sayed he , <$$paren> and yt lyke your honors , I wyll
never deny yt . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.245

" Onester man yow , " sayd they . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.246

Than were we all commandyd to goo asyed . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.247

Than dyd they consulte togeather , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.248

and whan they hade done , we were calde yn agayne , and so commytyd unto
the leftennant to be locked up , every man by hyme selve alone .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.249

Tomas Stonynge was stayed by_hynde , and so had downe to the rake ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.250

and was layed on yt and so pulde that he began to crake under the
armepytes and yn other partes of his bodye ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.251

and than was he takyn of and put yn a brake of iorne , hys necke ,
handys , and feet ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.252

and so he stod al nyghte agaynste a walle , and the next day takyn owte
agayne . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,188.253

<P_189>

Thus dyd we contynywe prysonars yn the Tower a quarter of a yare or ther
abowghte , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,189.255

and than , at the commandement of the counsel , we were sent to the
Marshallse agayne , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,189.256

and ther I remaynyd untyl suche tyme as my lord chanseler sent a wryte
to remove <P_190> me from thence to Cambryge castelle ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.257

and over nyghte I had warnynge to prepare myselve agaynste the nexte
daye yn the mornynge . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.258

Shorte warnynge I hade ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.259

but there was no remedye . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.260

In the mornynge I made me redy by_tymes , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.261

and rekenyd with my keper ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.262

went downe MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.263

and toke my leve of al my felowe prysonars withe the reste of my frendys
, movynge them and exortynge them , as the tyme dyd serve , " to be
constante yn the truthe , to serve God and feare hyme , and to be
obedyent unto the deathe , and not to resyst the hyere powers , havynge
alwayes with yow the testymonye of a good consyence , belevynge that
Jesus of Nazarethe was crusyfyed for your synnes , lettynge all other
trache and trumperye goo . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.264

Yea and <font> thoo an angell sholde come from heven and preche anye
other gospell unto yow than that which we have prechyd alredye <$$font>
yn the dayes of kynge Edward , beleve them not ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.265

but holde hyme acursyd , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.266

for <font> there ys a waye that some men thynke to be ryghte , but the
end therof ledyth unto deathe <$$font> . <paren> Prov. xiiij .
<$$paren> MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.267

Chryst ys therfore the onely waye and meane unto God the Father :
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.268

he is truthe and lyfe , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.269

he is alone our onlye medyator and advocate , sytynge at the ryghte
hande of hys Father . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.270

Yt ys he , as S. Powle saythe , that ys our onlye redempsion ,
salvasyon , justyffycasyon , and reconsylyation .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.271

Take yow heed therfore , my deare bretheryn , lest yow be abusyd and led
awaye from the truthe by false prophetes ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.272

let them not make you to shute at a wronge marke ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.273

for they wyll onlye labore to make shypwrake of your faythe , and to
brynge yow to pardysyon . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.274

Yow see whate a sort of greedie wolves are alredye enteryd yn amonge
Christes flocke to devour them . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.275

" Staye there , syr , I pray yew , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.276

and make an end , <paren> sayed the under_marshall , <$$paren>
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.277

yow have talked long inowghe , I trowe , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.278

and that be good . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,190.279

To home {GLOSS:whom} I sayd , " Sir , I thanke yew moste hartely for
your jentelnes , yn that yow have so pasyently sufferyd <P_191> me
freely thus to speake , and to take my leve of thys house .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.280

I truste I have not spoken anye thyng here yn your presens that hathe
offended ether God or anye good man . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.281

" Well , <paren> sayd he , <$$paren> dyspache , I pray yow ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.282

for the wryte ys come , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.283

and they tarye for yow at the doore . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.284

With that I fell prostrate to the grownd , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.285

and sayed , " O hevenly Father , yf yt be thy blyssyd will
{COM:preceding_word_"will"_emended} and plesure , delyver me owte of
thys trouble , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.286

and suffer me not to be temptyd above my strenght , I beseche thee
{COM:preceding_word_"thee"_emended} , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.287

but yn the mydyste of the temptasyon make suche a waye for my
delyverance as shall be moste to thy glory , my comforde , and the
edyfyenge of mye bretheryn . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.288

Never the lese , thy wyll be done , and not myne .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.289

Geve me pasyens , I beseche thee , O Father , for Christes sake ! "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.290

To thys they all sayd Amen . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.291

So I kyssyd the earthe , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.292

and roose up , byddyng them all fayre_well , and dyssyerynge them to
praye for me , and not to forgete whate I had sayd unto them , as they
wolde answer afor God . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.293

Than wente I owte of the doores , fyendynge ther betwen the gates vj
tale {GLOSS:tall} men yn blwe cottyes with swordys and buckelers and
jauflynges yn ther handys , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.294

and one of them broughte unto me a geldynge , desyerynge me to lyghte on
hym quyckely , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.295

" for the daye ys fare spente , " sayde he .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.296

" Content I ham so to do . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.297

And , beynge on horsebake , one of good wyll broughte me a coup of wyne
to comford me with ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.298

so I toke yt MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.299

and dronke to all the peple that were present there ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.300

and thanked them al hartely for there jentelnes .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.301

The under-marshall than toke me faste by the hand ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.302

and roundyd me yn the eare , sayeng thus , " Syr , I ham commandyd by my
lorde chanseler to charge yow in the kinge and quenes name , that yew
doo keape your tongue as yow doo ryde throwe the syttye , and quietly to
pase the same , as yow wyll answer to the contrary {TEXT:contrye} before
the counsel ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.303

and thus muche more I saye unto yow , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.304

I feare that I shall here of thys dayes worke for your sake .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.305

Never the lese , God strengthen yow yn that same truthe wherunto he hath
callyd yow , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.306

for I parsave and also beleve that yow are yn the ryghte waye .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.307

Fayer yow wel ! MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.308

for I dare stand no longer with yew . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.309

Praye for me , and I wyll praye for yew . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.310

And thus we partyd at ix of the cloke yn the forenone .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,191.311

<P_192>

Than iij of them ryd afor me , and the other iij behynde me , tyl I came
to Ware , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.313

and there we alytyd at the syene of the Crowne ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.314

and I was browghte yn to a fayer parlar , a greate fyer made afore me ,
and a tabulle coveryd . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.315

Than they asked me yf that I were not wery and a_hungeryd .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.316

" Not gretly , " sayd I . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.317

" Wel , <paren> sayd they , <$$paren> cal for whate yow wyll , and yow
shall heve yt , yf yt be to be gotyn for gold ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.318

for so are we commawndyd ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.319

and be of good cheer , for Godys sake . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.320

I trust yow shall have none other cawse . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.321

So doune I sate at the borde , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.322

sayed grase , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.323

and made as I thoughte a good meale ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.324

and , so fare as I can remember , the reconynge came to a_viij or ix.
=s= , bysyed our horsemeate . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.325

So , grace beynge sayed , and the table taken up , the cheffyste of thes
vj sarvynge_men sayed unto me , " Sir , howe are yow myendyd nowe ?
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.326

anye other wyse than yew were whan yow came owte of London ? "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.327

" No , trwelly , <paren> sayed I , <$$paren> I thanke God I ham even the
same man nowe that I was than , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.328

and I truste yn God so to remayne unto the end ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.329

or els I wold be sory and also ashamyd ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.330

and I tell yew trwe , that <font> I hame not ashamyd of the gospell of
Jesus Chryste , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.331

for yt ys the power of God unto salvasyon to as manye as doo beleve
<$$font> ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.332

and to tel you further , <font> yf thys gospell be hyde yt ys hyde from
thoos that shall peryshe <$$font> , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.333

for unto the good yt ys the savore of lyfe unto lyffe ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.334

and unto the wycked and ungodly yt ys the savore of deathe unto deathe .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.335

Take yow all heed therefore , dearly belovyd ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.336

beware yn tyme , leste bothe yow and your teachers have your porsyon yn
the fyerye lacke amonge the ipocrytes , wher there ys wepynge ,
wayllynge , and gnashynge of teethe ; weras the worme of consyence shall
never dye , but yow to dwell yn payne so longe as God raynythe yn glorye
. MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.337

O whate should yt prophyte a man to have thys whole worlde at wyll , and
to leese hys owne sowle ? MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.338

and whan yt ys lost wherwithall wyl you redeme yt agayne ?
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,192.339

<P_193>

I tel yow thys ys no maseynge matter , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.341

neyther yet wyll any pardones , purgatorye , or pylgramagyes sarve your
turne . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.342

No , and my lord chancelar , or the pope hymselve , shulde saye mass for
one of yow , and synge iij tryntallys for yew , yt wolde not goo for
payement before God ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.343

for , as the prophet Davyd saythe yn the sphalme , <font> Ther ys no man
that can make agrement to God for hys brother ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.344

he must let that alone , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.345

for yt coste moor than so : MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.346

and Yf one man syn agaynst another , dayes-men maye be judges ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.347

but yf a man synne agaynst the Lord , who wyl be hys dayesman ?
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.348

Yow are dearly bought , <$$font> saythe sent Petter , <font> not with
coryptyble gold and silver , pearle or presyus stones , but by the moste
presyus and ynnosent blude-shedinge of Jesus Chryste , the only begottyn
son of God <$$font> . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.349

Than sayed they one to another , " Never let us talke any longer with
hym , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.350

yt ys but lost labor . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.351

Yow see that he ys at a pownte ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.352

there ys no good to be done of hym , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.353

I perceive that he wylle dye yn hys opynyons . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.354

" Ye , <paren> sayd I , <$$paren> I truste yn God so ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.355

for yt ys wrytyn , happye and blessyd are al they that dye yn the Lorde
, MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.356

for they shall be sartayne and suer of a joyfull resurecsyon .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.357

Aryse therfor , I praye yow , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.358

and let us be gooynge . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.359

So to horsbake we wente , a gret nomber of people beynge yn the yarde
and yn the stretes , to see and behold me , the poore prysonar that came
from London . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.360

Every man spake there fansy , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.361

and some broughte me wyne to comforde me with , for the which I gave
them moste harty thankes , desyerynge them all to pray for me ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.362

and I wolde praye for them . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.363

And thus with teres of all handys we partyd from Ware ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.364

and so came to Rayston to our bed ; wher@ @as they made me good chere
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.365

and sparde for no coste . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.366

Than they once ageyne dyd asawte me , desyerynge me to wryght my mynde
to my lorde chansler , or to some other of the cownsell , to home I
wolde , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,193.367

and they wolde delyver <P_194> yt wyth spede ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.368

" and yf that yow wyll so do , we wyl send one of our companye to cary
the same , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.369

and wee wyll tarye here styll tyl that he bryng word agayne what the
counsel's plesure ys . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.370

To home I answeryd , " I thanke yew for your good wyl .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.371

I yntend never to wryghte unto anye of the counsell whyll I lyve , for
thys matter ; MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.372

and therfore I praye yew content yourselves ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.373

and ses your vayne swyte {GLOSS:suit} so oftyn atemptyd ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.374

for yew doo but stryve agaynste the streme ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.375

for I see that yew are not wyth Chryst , but agaynst Chryste .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.376

Yew savore of earthly thynges and not of hevenly .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.377

Yew goo aboughte to hynder my helthe and salvasyon layd up yn Chryst ,
and to plucke down whate God hathe byeldyd .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.378

Yew know not what yow doo . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.379

And therefore once agayne I praye yow hartely , lefve of ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.380

and take yn good part whate I have sayed alredy ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.381

and so judge al to the beeste . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.382

" Wel , <paren> sayed theye one to another , <$$paren> yt were good that
my lord chanseler dyd knowe all hys sayenges .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.383

One of us muste tel hym by mouthe as well as we can . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.384

They were not yet agreyd than whoo shold tel the tale .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.385

Than desyeryd they me to goo unto my lodgynge , wher there was a great
fyer made redy agaynste I came , and al other thynges verye swett and
cleane . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.386

So yn the name of God to bed I wente , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.387

and all they vj wachyd me that nyghte , all the doores beynge faste
locked apone me , and they kepynge the keyes themselves .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.388

They myghte goo owte , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.389

but no man colde come yn to them withowte there leve .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.390

In the mornynge they calde me very earlye , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.391

and wylde me with speed to make me redye to horsbake ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.392

" for <paren> sayd they <$$paren> we muste ryed to the hye shyryff to
dynnar . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.393

" Whoo ys that ? <paren> sayd I , <$$paren>
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.394

and where dothe he dwell ? " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.395

" Viij myllys beyoned Huntyngton , <paren> sayed they , <$$paren>
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,194.396

and hys name ys sir Ollyver Leader , a man of muche <P_195> worshyp and
one that keapyth a good howsse . " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.397

" The poore shall fayer the better therby , " sayed I .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.398

So whan we came to Huntyngton they made me to drynke ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.399

and we came to the shyryffes howse even as the tabull were coveryd .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.400

Than they herynge that the prysonar was come from London , ther was no
small adoo . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.401

Worde was caryed to the churche , where syr Olyver was at mase ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.402

and yt was no nede to yntrete hyme to come ;
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.403

for with speed bothe he and my lady hys whyffe departyd owte of the
churche , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.404

and the paryshe followyd them , lyk a sorte of shepe , stayryng and
wonderynge at me . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.405

The shyryffe gently toke me by the hand MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.406

and led me ynto a fayer parlor , dyssyeryeng me to stand to the fyer and
to warme me , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.407

for wee were all thorowe wet with rayne , snowe , and hail {TEXT:halle}
. MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.408

Than to dynnar we went , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.409

and greate cheare I had , with many welcomys ; and oftyn tymes dronke to
, bothe by the shyryffe hymselve and the reste hys freendys .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.410

When dynar was done , ynto the parler I was callyd ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.411

and a great sorte of jentellmen beynge there set on the one syed , and
jentelwomen on the other syed with my ladye the shyryffes wyffe ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.412

than mr. shyryffe sayed unto the knyghte marshalles men , " Where ys
the wryte that yow have browghte as towchynge the resayte of thys
prysonar ? " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.413

" Here yt ys , syr , " sayed one of them . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.414

So he reasavyd yt , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.415

and whan he had red yt , he toke me by the hand agayne
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.416

and sayed that I was welcome . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.417

I thanked hyme for hys jentel frendshyp . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.418

Than callyd he for a payer of yndentores . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.419

So they were browghte yn and rede . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.420

That done , one of them was gyven to the knyghte marshalles man ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.421

and the other the shyryffe kepte . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.422

Than the knyghte marshalles man toke me by the hand ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.423

and sayed to the shyryffe , " Syr , I doo here , yn the presense of al
these people , delyver thys prysonar unto you ,
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,195.424

and your mastarshyp from henceforthe <P_196> to stand chargyd with hyme
, MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,196.425

and my maystar sir Thomas Holdecroffte , the kynght marshall ,
dyschargyth hymselve of the sayd prysonar callyd Thomas Mowntayne . "
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,196.426

And with that he dellyveryd hym bothe me and the yndentor .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,196.427

Than the shyryffe sayed unto hym , " I do here resave that same prysonar
so callyd , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,196.428

and discharge your master of the same ; " MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,196.429

and so toke me by the hand , MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,196.430

and delyveryd unto hym hys yndentor . MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,196.431

All thys was done with greate sollemnytye .
MOWNTAYNE-1555-E1-P1,196.432

