<BEGIN_moxinden-1640-e2-p1>

<P_179>

<heading:edcomment:CLIV_MARGARET,_LADY_OXINDEN_OF_DEANE,_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Good Nephew , I am very sorry to hear that my Neece is so ill still ,
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,179.4

but shuch is the Nature of this kind of sikneses that I am veryly
perswayd it is not in the powr of any phisition to alter ;
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,179.5

they are the helpes of natur which if thay be to beisi prove the
destriors . MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,179.6

Natur helps her self by the cof that my cosin hath which desier her to
bear with as much cherfullnes as she may . MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,179.7

I send her heer an oyntmen which I desire her to anoynt her forhed with
when she goeth to bead and take this Cordiall to procur rest .
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,179.8

I dare not go beyond a Cordiall whear ther is so much illness
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,179.9

butt this pray her to be confidend the queene may take at my hands .
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,179.10

I will make her a tisain to morow and send her to eas the paynfullnes of
her coff , which you shall have sent you by to or thre of the clok ,
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,179.11

so praying god to send her ese I am Your afectionat Ant M. O.
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,179.12

<P_191>

<heading:edcomment:CLXVII_MARGARET,_LADY_OXINDEN_OF_DEANE,_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Good Cosin , I am exceding sory my sister Oxinden is so ill :
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,191.15

I will not fayell to visit her so sone as I can posible ;
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,191.16

in the mene time I have sent her a water for wind that I have found very
excellent efects of : MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,191.17

I desire her to take it with shuger , a <P_192> spoonfull of the water
filled full of shuger and so rather cay it then drink it .
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,192.18

I send her allso a powder which I wold have her take in a litel beer or
posit , which she likes best , MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,192.19

as much as will ly a_pon 3@ @d. will be enuf at a time ,
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,192.20

that or the water may@ @be taken at any tim when she is ill .
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,192.21

She may take this water with heat as other hot water is takin ,
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,192.22

so wishing her health and you all hapines I rest Your afectionat frend
and Ant Marg: Oxinden Dean MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,192.23

the 14 1640 MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P1,192.24

