<BEGIN_mroper-1534-e1-p1>

<P_514>

<heading:edcomment:206_MARGARET_ROPER_TO_ALICE_ALINGTON>

When I came next vnto my father after , me thought it both conuenient
and necessary , to shewe hym your letter . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,514.4

Conuenient , that he might therby see your louing labour taken for hym .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,514.5

Necessarie , that sith he might perceiue therby , that if he stande
still in this scruple of his conscience <paren> as it is at the lest
wise called by manie that are his frendes and wise <$$paren> all his
frendes that seme most able to do hym good either shall finally forsake
hym , or peraduenture not be hable in dede to doe hym any good att all .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,514.6

And for these causes , at my next being with hym after your letter
receyued , when I had a while talked with hym , first of his diseases ,
both in his brest of olde , and his reynes now by reason of grauell and
stone , and of the crampe also that diuers nightes grypeth hym in his
legges , and that I founde by his wordes that they wer not much
increased , but continued after their maner that they dyd before ,
sometyme very sore and sometyme little grief , <P_515> and that at that
tyme I founde hym out of payne , and <paren> as one in his case might
<$$paren> , metely well_minded , after our vii psalmes and the letany
said , to sit and talke and be mery , beginning first with other thinges
of the good comforte of my mother , and the good order of my brother ,
and all my sisters , disposing them self euery day more and more to set
litle by the worlde , and drawe more and more to God , and that his
howsholde , his neighbours , and other good frendes abrode , diligently
remembred hym in their prayers , I added vnto this : ' I pray God , good
Father , that their praiers and ours , and your owne therwith , may
purchase of God the grace , that you may in this great matter <paren>
for which you stande in this trouble and for your trouble all we also
that loue you <$$paren> take such a way by tyme , as standing with the
pleasure of God , may content and please the King , whome ye haue alway
founden so singularly gracious vnto you , that if ye shoulde stifly
refuse to doe the thing that were his pleasure , which God not
displeased you might doe <paren> as many great wise and well_learned men
say that in this thing you may <$$paren> it wolde both be a great blott
in your worship in euery wise mans opinion and as my self haue herd some
say <paren> such as your self haue alway taken for well_learned and good
<$$paren> a peryll vnto your soule also . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,515.7

But as for that point <paren> Father <$$paren> will I not be bolde to
dispute vpon , sith I trust in God and your good mynde , that ye will
loke surely therto . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,515.8

And your learning I knowe for such , that I wot well you can .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,515.9

But one thinge is there which I and other your frendes finde and
perceiue abrode , which but if it be shewed you , you may peraduenture
to your great peryll , mistake and hope for lesse harme <paren> for as
for good I wot well in this worlde of this matter ye loke for none
<$$paren> than I sore feare me , shall be likely to fall to you .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,515.10

For I assure you Father , I haue receyued a letter of late from my
sister Alington , by which I see well that if ye chaunge not your mynde
, you are likely to lose all those frendes that are hable to do you any
good . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,515.11

Or if ye leese not their good willes , ye shall at the lest wise lese
the effect therof , for any good that they shall be hable to doe you .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,515.12

' With this my father smiled vpon me MROPER-1534-E1-P1,515.13

and saide : ' What , maistres Eue , <paren> as I called you when you
came first <$$paren> hath my doughter Alington played the serpent with
you , and with a letter set you a worke to come tempt your father again
, and for the fauour that you beare hym labour to make hym sweare
against his conscience , and so sende hym to the deuill ? '
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,515.14

And after that , he loked sadly <P_516> againe ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.15

and earnestli said vnto me , ' Doughter Margaret , we two haue talked of
this thinge ofter than twise or thrise , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.16

and that same tale in effect , that you tel me now therin , and the same
feare to , haue you twise tolde me before , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.17

and I haue twise answered you too , that in this matter if it were
possible for me to doe the thinge that might content the Kynges Grace ,
and God therwith not offended , there hath no man taken this oth
all_redy more gladly than I wolde doe : as he that rekeneth hym self
more depely bounden vnto the Kinges Highnes for his most singular
bountie , many waies shewed and declared , than any of them all beside .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.18

But sith standinge my conscience , I can in no wise doe it , and that
for the instruction of my conscience in the matter , I haue not
sleightly loked , but by many yeres studied and aduisedly considered ,
and neuer could yet see nor heare that thing , nor I thinke I neuer
shall , that coulde induce mine owne minde to thinke otherwise than I
doe , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.19

I haue no maner remedy , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.20

but God hath geuen me to the straight , that either I must dedlie
displease hym , or abide any worldly harme that he shall for mine other
sinnes , vnder name of this thinge , suffer to fall vpon me . Wherof
<paren> as I before this haue told you to <$$paren> I haue ere I came
here , not left vnbethought nor vnconsidered , the very worst and the
vttermost that can by possibilite fall . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.21

And al_be_it that I know mine owne frailtie full well and the naturall
faintnes of mine owne hart , yet if I had not trusted that God shoulde
geue me strength rather to endure all thinges , than offend hym by
sweringe vngodly against mine owne conscience , you may be very sure I
wold not haue come here . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.22

And sith I looke in this matter but only vnto God , it maketh me litle
matter , though men cal it as it pleaseth them and say it is no
consciens but a foolishe scruple . ' MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.23

At this worde I toke a good occasion , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.24

and said vnto hym thus : MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.25

' In good faith Father for my parte , I neither doe , nor it can@ @not
become me , either to mistrust your good minde or your learninge .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.26

But because you speake of that that some cal it but a scruple , I assure
you you shall see my sisters letter , that one of the greatest estates
in this realme and a man learned too , and <paren> as I dare say your
self shall thinke whan you know hym , and as you haue al_ready right
effectuallie proued hym <$$paren> your tender frende and very speciall
good lord , accounteth your conscience in this matter , for a right
simple scruple , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,516.27

and you may be sure he saith it of good <P_517> minde and layeth no
litle cause . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.28

For he saith that where you say your conscience moueth you to this , all
the nobles of this realme and almost all other men too , go boldly furth
{COM:preceding_word_"furth"_emended} with the contrary , and sticke not
therat , saue only your self and one other man : whom though he be right
good and very well_learned too , yet wolde I wene , fewe that loue you ,
geue you the counsaile against all other men to lene to his minde alone
. ' MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.29

And with this worde I toke hym your letter , that he might see my wordes
wer not fayned , but spoken of his mought , whom he much loueth and
estemeth highly . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.30

Therupon he read ouer your letter . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.31

And when he came to the ende , he began it afresh
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.32

and read it ouer again . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.33

And in the reading he made no maner hast , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.34

but aduised it laisorly MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.35

and poynted euery word . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.36

And after that he paused , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.37

and than thus he said : ' Forsoth , doughter Margaret , I find my
doughter Alington such as I haue euer founde her , and I trust euer
shall , as naturally mindinge me as you that are mine owne .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.38

How_be_it , her take I verely for mine owne too , sith I haue maried her
mother , and brought vp her of a child as I haue brought vp you , in
other thinges and learninge both , wherin I thanke God she findeth now
some fruite , and bringeth her owne vp very vertuously and well .
Wherof God , I thanke hym , hath sent her good store ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.39

our Lord preserue them MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.40

and send her much ioy of them and my good sonne her gentle husbande too
, MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.41

and haue mercy on the soule of mine other good sonne her first ;
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.42

I am dayly bedeman <paren> and so write her <$$paren> for them all .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.43

In this matter she hath vsed her self lyke her self , wisely and lyke a
very doughter towarde me , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.44

and in the ende of her letter , geueth as good counsell as any man that
witt hath wolde wish , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.45

God giue me grace to folow it MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.46

and God rewarde her for it . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.47

Now doughter Margaret , as for my Lorde , I not only thinke , but haue
also founde it , that he is vndoutly my singuler good lorde .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.48

And in myne other busines concerninge the sely nunne , as my cause was
good and clere , so was he my good lorde therin , and Master Secretary
my good master too . For which I shall neuer cease to be faithfull
bedeman for them both MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.49

and dayly do I by my trueth , praye for them as I doe for my selfe .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,517.50

And when so euer it shulde happen <paren> which I trust in God shall
neuer happen <$$paren> that I be founde other <P_518> than a true man to
my prince , let them neuer fauour me neither of them both ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.51

nor of trouth no more it coulde become them to do .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.52

But in this matter , Megge , to tell the trouth betwene the and me , my
lords Esops fables do not greatly moue me . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.53

But as his wisdome for his pastime tolde them meryly to mine owne
doughter , so shall I for my pastime , answer them to the , Megge , that
art mine other doughter . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.54

The first fable of the raine that washte away all their wittes that
stode abrode when it fell , I haue herde oft or this :
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.55

It was a tale so often tolde amonge the Kinges Counsaile by my Lorde
Cardinall whan his Grace was chauncellor , that I can@ @not lightlye
forgett it . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.56

For of trouth in tymes past when variance began to fall betwene the
Emperour and the French Kynge , in such wise that they were likely and
dyd in dede , fall to_gither att warre , and that ther were in the
Counsaile here somtime sondry opinions , in which some were of the minde
, that they thought it wisdome , that we shoulde sitt still and let them
alone : MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.57

but euermore against that way , my Lorde vsed this fable of those wise
men , that because they wolde not be wasshed with the raine that shoulde
make all the people fooles , went them self in to caues , and hyd them
vndre the grounde . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.58

But when the raine had once made all the remenaunt fooles and that they
come out of their caues and wolde vtter their wisdome , the fooles
agreed together against them , and ther all to bete them .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.59

And so said his Grace that if we wolde be so wise that we wolde sit in
pece while the fooles fought , they wolde not fayle after , to make
peace and agree and fall at lenght all vpon vs .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.60

I wil not dispute vpon his Graces counsaile , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.61

and I trust we neuer made warre but as reason wolde .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.62

But yet this fable for his parte , did in his daies helpe the Kynge and
the realme to spende many a faire peny . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.63

But that geare is passed MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.64

and his Grace is gone , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.65

our Lord assoyle his soule . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.66

And therfor shal I now come to this Esops fable , as my Lorde full
merily laide it forth for me . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.67

If those wismen , Megge , when the raine was gone at their cominge
abrode , where they founde all men fooles , wished them selues fooles to
, because they coulde not rule them , than semeth it , that the folish
raine was so sore a showre , that euen thorowe the grounde it sanke into
their caues , and powred downe vpon their heades , and wette them to the
skynne , and made them more nodies than them that stode abrode .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,518.68

<P_519>

For if they had had any witt , they might well see , that thoughe they
had ben fooles too , that thinge wolde not haue suffised to make them
the rulers ouer the other fooles , no more than {COM:to_make} the t@
@other fooles {COM:rulers} ouer them : MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.70

and of so manye fooles all might not be rulers .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.71

Now when they longed so sore to bere a rule amonge fooles , that so they
{SIC:so_they_they_so} might , they wolde be glad to lese their witt and
be fooles too , the foolish raine had washed them metely well .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.72

How_be_it , to say the trought , before the raine came , if they thought
that all the remenaunt shoulde turne in to fooles , and than either were
so folish that they wolde , or so mad to thinke that they shoulde , so
fewe rule so many fooles , and had not so much witt as to considre ,
that there are none so vnruly as they that lacke witte and are foles ,
than were these wyse men starke foles before the rayne came .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.73

How_be_it doughter Roper , whome my Lorde taketh here for the wyse men
and whome he meaneth to be fooles , I can@ @not very well geaste ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.74

I can not well reade such riddles . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.75

For as Dauus saith in Terence <paren> Non sum Oedipus <$$paren> I may
say you wot well <paren> Non sum Oedipus , sed Morus <$$paren> which
name of mine what it signifieth in Greke , I nede not tel you .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.76

But I trust my Lorde rekeneth me amonge the foles ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.77

and so reken I my selfe , as my name is in Greke .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.78

And I finde , I thanke God , causes not a fewe , wherfore I so shoulde
in very dede . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.79

But surely amonge those that longe to be rulers , God and mine owne
conscience clerely knoweth , that no man may truely noumber and recken
me . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.80

And I wene ech other mans conscience can tell hym selfe the same , sins
it is so well knowen , that of the Kynges great goodnes , I was one of
the greatest rulers in this noble realme and that at mine owne great
labour by his great goodnes discharged . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,519.81

But whome soeuer my Lorde meaneth for the wyse men , and whomsoeuer his
Lordeship take for the fooles , and whosoeuer {SIC:whomsoeuer} longe for
the rule , and who_so_euer longe for none , I besech our Lorde make vs
all so wyse as that we may euery man here so wiselie rule our selfe in
this time of teares , this vale of mysery , this simple wretched worlde
<paren> in which as Boece saith , one man to be prowde that he beareth
rule ouer other men , is much lyke as one mouce wolde be prowde to beare
a rule ouer other myce <P_520> in a barne <$$paren> God , I say , geue
vs the grace so wisely to rule our self here , that when we shall hence
in hast to mete the great Spouse , we be not taken sleapers and for
lacke of light in our lampes , shit {COM:sic} out of heauen amonge the
v. folish vyrgins . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.82

The second fable , Marget , semeth not to be Esopes .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.83

For by that the matter goeth all vpon confession , it semeth to be
fayned since Christendome began . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.84

For in Grece before Christes daies they vsed not confession , no more
the men than , than the beastes nowe . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.85

And Esope was a Greke , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.86

and died longe ere Christ was borne . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.87

But what ? MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.88

who made it , maketh litle matter . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.89

Nor I enuy not that Esope hath the name . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.90

But surely it is somwhat to subtil for me . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.91

For wham hys Lordship vnderstandeth by the lyon and the wolfe , which
both twaine confessed them selfe , of rauin and deuowringe of all that
came to their handes , and the tone enlarged his conscience at his
pleasure in the construction of his penaunce , nor whom by the good
discrete confessor that enioyned the tone a litle penaunce , and the t@
@other none at all , and sent the pore asse to the bishoppe , of all
these thinges can I nothinge tell . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.92

But by the folish scrupelous asse , that had so sore a conscience , for
the taking of a strawe for hungar out of his maisters shoo , my Lordes
other wordes of my scruple declare , that his Lordship meryly meant that
by me : signifieng <paren> as it semeth by that similitude <$$paren>
that of ouersight and folye , my scrupulous conscience taketh for a
great perilous thing towarde my soule , if I shoulde swere this othe ,
which thinge as his Lordship thinketh , wer in dede but a trifle .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.93

And I suppose well , Margarett , as you tolde me right now , that so
thinketh many moo beside , as well spirituall as temporall ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.94

and that euen of those , that for their learning and their vertue my
self not a lytle esteme . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.95

And yet all_be_it that I suppose this to be true , yet beleue I not euen
very surely , that euery man so thinketh that so saieth .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.96

But though they did , Daughter , that wolde not make much to me , not
though I shoulde see my Lorde of Rochester say the same , and swere the
oth hymselfe before me too . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.97

For where as you tolde me right now , that such as loue me , wolde not
aduise me , that against all other men , I shoulde lene vnto his mind
alone , veryly , Daughter , no more I doe . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,520.98

For albeit , that of very trouth , I haue hym in that reuerent
estimacion , that I reken in this realme no one man , in wisdome ,
learning and long approued vertue together , mete to be matched and
compared with hym , yet that in this matter I was not led by hym , very
well and <P_521> plainly appereth , both in that I refused the othe
before it was offered him , and in that also that his Lordship was
content to haue sworne of that othe <paren> as I perceyued since by you
when you moued me to the same <$$paren> either somwhat more , or in some
other maner than euer I minded to doe . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.99

Verely , Daughter , I neuer entend <paren> God being my good lorde
<$$paren> to pynne my soule at a nother mans backe , not euen the best
man that I know this day liuing ; MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.100

for I knowe not whither he may happe to cary it .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.101

Ther is no man liuing , of whom while he liueth , I may make myself sure
. MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.102

Some may do for fauour , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.103

and some may doe for feare , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.104

and so might they carye my soule a wronge way .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.105

And some might hap to frame him self a conscience and thinke that while
he did it for feare God wolde forgeue it . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.106

And some may peraduenture thinke that they will repent , and be shryuen
therof , and that so God shall remitt it them .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.107

And some may be peraduenture of that minde , that if they say one thing
and thinke the while the contrary , God more regardeth their harte than
their tonge , and that therfore their othe goeth vpon that they thinke ,
and not vpon that they say , as a woman resoned once , I trow , Daughter
, you wer by . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.108

But in good faith , Marget , I can vse no such waies in so great a
matter : MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.109

but like as if mine owne conscience serued me , I wolde not lett to doe
it , though other men refused , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.110

so though other refuse it not , I dare not do it , mine owne conscience
standing against it . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.111

If I had <paren> as I tolde you <$$paren> looked but lightly for the
matter , I shoulde haue cause to feare . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.112

But nowe haue I so loked for it and so longe , that I purpose at the
lestwyse to haue no lesse regarde vnto my soule , than had once a poore
honest man of the countrey that was called Company . '
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.113

And with this , he tolde me a tale , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.114

I wene I can skant tell it you againe , because it hangeth vpon some
tearmes and ceremonies of the law . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.115

But as farre as I can call to mynde my fathers tale was this , that ther
is a court belonginge of course vnto euery faire , to doe iustice in
such thinges as happen within the same . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.116

This court hath a pretie fond name , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.117

but I can@ @not happen vpon it , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.118

but it beginneth with a pye , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.119

and the remenaunt goeth much lyke the name of a knight that I haue
knowen , I wis , <paren> and I trowe you to , for he hath ben at my
fathers ofte or this , at such tyme as you wer there , <$$paren> a
metely tall blacke man , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.120

his name was Sir William Pounder . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.121

But , tut , let the name of the courte go for this once ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.122

or call it if ye will a court of pye Sir William Pounder .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,521.123

But this was the matter <P_522> loe , that vpon a tyme at such a court
holden at Bartilmewe fayre , there was an eschetour of London that had
arested a man that was owtelawed , and had seased his goodes that he had
browte in to the fayre , tollinge hym out of the fayre by a traine .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.124

The man that was arested and his goodes seased was a northern man ,
which by his frendes made th@ @eschetour within the fayre to be arested
vpon an action , I woot nere what , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.125

and so was he brought before the iudge of the court of pye Sir William
Pounder , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.126

and at the last the matter came to a certaine ceremonye to be tryed by a
quest of xii men , a iury as I remembre they call it , or elles a
periury . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.127

Now had the clothman by frendshipp of the offycers , founden the means
to haue all the quest almost , made of the northern men , such as had
their boothes there standing in the fayre . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.128

Now was it come to the last daye in the after_none ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.129

and the xii men had hard both the parties , and their counsell tell
their tales at the barre , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.130

and were fro the barre had in to a place , to talke and common , and
agre vpon their sentence . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.131

Nay let me speke better in my termes yet , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.132

I trow the iudge geueth the sentence and the quests tale is called a
verdit . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.133

They wer skant come in together , but the northern men wer agreed , and
in effect all the other too , to cast our London eschetour .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.134

They thought they neded no more to proue that he did wronge , than euen
the name of his bare office alone . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.135

But than was ther then as the deuyll wolde , this honest man of a nother
quarter , that was called Cumpany . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.136

And because the felowe semed but a foule and sate still and said
nothinge , they made no rekeninge of hym , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.137

but said , we be agreed now , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.138

come let vs goo geue our verdit . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.139

Than whan the pore felowe saw that they made such hast , and his minde
nothing gaue hym that way that theirs did , <paren> if their mindes gaue
them that way that they sayde <$$paren> he prayde them to tary and talke
vpon the matter and tell hym such reason therin , that he might thinke
as they did : MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.140

and when he so shoulde do , he wolde be glad to say with them ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.141

or els he said they must pardone hym . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.142

For sith he had a soule of his owne to kepe as they had , he must say as
he thought for his , as they must for theirs .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.143

Whan they herd this , they wer half angry with hym .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,522.144

' What good felowe ' <P_523> <paren> quod one of the northern men
<$$paren> ' where wonnes thou ? MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.145

Be not we aleuen here and you but ene la alene , and all we agreed ?
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.146

Wherto shouldest you sticke ? MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.147

What is thy name gude felow ? ' MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.148

' Maisters ' <paren> quod he <$$paren> ' my name is called Cumpany . '
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.149

' Cumpany , ' quod they , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.150

' now by thy trouth good felow , playe than the gude companion ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.151

come theron furth with vs MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.152

and passe euen for gude cumpany . ' MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.153

' Wold God , good maisters , ' quod the man againe , ' that ther lay no
more weight therby . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.154

But now when we shall hence and come before God , and that he shall
sende you to heauen for doing according to your conscience , and me to
the deuill for doing against mine , in passing at your request here for
good cumpany nowe , by God , Maister Dykonson , <paren> that was one of
the northern mens name <$$paren> if I shall then say to all you again ,
maisters , I went once for good cumpany with you , which is the cause
that I go now to hell , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.155

playe you the good felowes now again with me , MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.156

as I went than for good cumpany with you , so some of you go now for
good cumpany with me . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.157

Wolde ye go , Maister Dikonson ? MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.158

Nay naye by our Lady , nor neuer one of you all .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.159

And therfore must ye pardon me from passinge as you passe ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.160

but if I thought in the matter as you doe , I dare not in such a matter
passe for good cumpany . MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.161

For the passage of my pore soule passeth all good cumpany .
MROPER-1534-E1-P1,523.162

