<BEGIN_mtudor-1515-e1-p1>

<P_1.1,115>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_XXXIX_MARY_QUEEN_OF_FRANCE_TO_KING_HENRY_THE_EIGHTH>

<P_1.1,116>

My good Brother as hertly as I can I recomaund me unto youre Grace ,
mervelynge moch that I never heard from you syns ...re depertynge , so
often as I have sent and wrytten to you . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,116.5

And now am I left post_a_lone in effect ; MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,116.6

for on the morn next after ...e maryage my chambirlayn with all other
men servants wer dischargd and in lyke wyse my mother Guldeford with
other my women and maydyns , except such as never had experiens nor
knowlech how to advertyse or gyfe me counsell yn any time of nede ,
which is to be fered more schortly then your Grace thought at the tyme
of my departynge , as my mother Guldeford can more playnly schew your
Grace then I cann wryt ; to whom I beseche you to gyve credens .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,116.7

And yf hit may be by eny meane possible , I humbly requyr you to cause
my seyd mother Guldeford to repayr hither <P_1.1,117> once agayn .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,117.8

For ells yf any chauns happe other then weale I schall not knowe wher
nor of whom to aske any good counsell to your pleasur , nor yet to myn
own proffit . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,117.9

I merveill moche that my Lord of Northfolke wold at all tymes so lyghtly
grant every thynge at ther reqwests here . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,117.10

I am weale assured that when ze know the trouth of every thyng as my
mother Guldeford can schew you , ze wold full lyttyll have thowght I
schold have ben thus intreated : that wold God my Lord of Zorke had come
with me yn the rome of Northfolke : MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,117.11

for then am I sure I schuld have bene left moch more at my herti ...
then I am now . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,117.12

And thus I byd your Grace fare_weale with ... as ever had Prince ; and
more hertis ease then I have now . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,117.13

From Abvile MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,117.14

the xij.=th= daye of October . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,117.15

... gef gredens to my mowder Geldeford . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,117.16

Be your lowyng syster Mary Quene of France .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,117.17

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_XL_MARY_QUEEN_OF_FRANCE_TO_THOMAS_WOLSEY,_THEN_ARCHBISHOP_OF_YORK>

... I recomaund me un to you as hertly as I can , and as schoth ...
intreated as the kynge and you <P_1.1,118> thought I schuld have ben ,
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,118.19

for ... the morn next after the maryage , all my servants , both men
and women , were {COM:preceding_word_"were"_emended} dyscharged .
Insomoch that my mother Guldeford was also dischargyd , whom as ze knowe
the kynge and zou willed me in eny wyse to be cowncelled .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,118.20

But for eny thynge I myght do , yn no wyse myght I have any graunt for
her abode here , which I assure you my lord is moch to my discomffort ;
besyd meny other discomffortis that ze wold full lyttyll have thought .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,118.21

I have not zet seen yn Fraunce eny lady or jentill woman so necessary
for me as sche ys nor zet so mete to do the kynge my brother service as
sche ys . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,118.22

And for my part my lord , as ze love the kynge my broder and me , fynd
the meanes that sche may yn all hast com hither agayn ,
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,118.23

for I had as lefe lose the wynninge I schall have yn France as to lose
her counsell when I schall lacke it , which is not like long to be
required , as I am sure the nobill men and jentillmen can shewe you more
then becometh me to wryte yn this matter . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,118.24

I pray you my Lord gyf credens forther to my moder Guldeford yn every
thyng concernynge thys matter . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,118.25

And albehit my Lord of Northfollke hath nethyr deled best with me nor
zet with her at thys tyme : zet I pray you allwayes to be good lord un
to her . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,118.26

And wold to God my ... had ben so good to have had zou with me hither
when I had {COM:preceding_word_"had"_emended} my
{COM:preceding_word_"my"_emended} lord
{COM:preceding_word_"lord"_emended} of Northfolke .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,118.27

And thus fare ze weale <P_1.1,119> My Lord .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,119.28

Wrytten {COM:preceding_word_"Wrytten"_emended} from
{COM:preceding_word_"from"_emended} Abbeville
{COM:preceding_word_"Abbeville"_emended} the xij.=the= daye of Octobr .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,119.29

My Lord I pray you gyve credens to my ... ord yn my sorows she have
delyve ... MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,119.30

Yowr on while I lefe Mary MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,119.31

To my lovynge frend Th'@ @archebischop of Zorke .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,119.32

<P_1.1,119>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_XLI_MARY_QUEEN_OF_FRANCE_TO_WOLSEY,_AFTER_THE_DEATH_OF_LOUIS_THE_TWELFTH>

<P_1.1,120>

My nanne good Lord , I recomend me to yow MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,120.36

and thankyng yow for yo=r= kynde and lovyng Letter , dyssyryng yow of
yo=r= good contenevans and good lessones that yow hathe gyffen to me ;
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,120.37

my lord , I pray yow as my trust ys in yow , for to remember me to the
Kyng my brother , for sowche causses and bessynes as I have for to do ;
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,120.38

for as now I have no nother to put my trust in but the Kyng my brother
and yow . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,120.39

<P_1.1,121>

And as yt shall ples the Kyng my brother and hys Counsell I wol@ @be
hordered . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.41

And so I pray yow , my lord , to show hys Grace , seyng that the Kyng my
howsbande ys departed to God , of whos sole God pardon .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.42

And wher as yow a_vyse me that I shulde macke no promas , My Lord , I
trust the Kyng my brother and yow wole not reken in me sovche chyldhode
. MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.43

I trust I have so horderd my selffe so sens that I came hether , that I
trust yt hathe ben to the honar of the Kyng my brother and me , sense I
come hether , MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.44

and so I trust to contenew . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.45

Yff ther be any thynge that I may do for yow I wold be glade for to do
yt in thys partes . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.46

I shal@ @be glade to do yt for yow . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.47

No more to you at thys tyme MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.48

but Jh~s preserve yow . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.49

Wretten at Pares the x. day of January 1515 .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.50

By yowr lowyng frende Mary Quene of France .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.51

To my Lord of Yorke . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P1,1.1,121.52

