<BEGIN_nferrar-1629-e2-p1>

<P_244>

{COM:postscript_to_letter_V}

I beseech y=u= remember my deare loue to my sister farrar
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,244.4

and tell her though I could not speake w=th= m=rs= Goddard being abroade
yett I lefte her messadge w=th= the head man of the shop whoe promised
to tell her - and to satisfy her as well as if I had com~ agayne
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,244.5

I now send down a stone botle of white Wyne for my Cosen mary praying
her to attend the perfect recouery of her health by all the good meanes
prescribed and advysed unto her . y=t= being well she may w=th= her
owne and her freinds comfort better performe the dutys belonging to her
selfe & others which god grant NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,244.6

<heading:edcomment:VI_N.F._TO_HIS_MOTHER>

My most deare Mother After the remembraunce
{COM:preceding_word_"remembraunce"_emended} of my most bounden duty to
y=r= self and best loue to all my dearest freinds humbly thanking god
for your owne and others health & amendement thees are only to signify
to y=u= what you shall receiue by Gymber whoe hath promised mee to
deliuer them before saterday noone w=ch= perhapps may bee sooner then
myne owne comming NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,244.8

the things are thees NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,244.9

{COM:list_omitted}

<P_245>

For the weight I leaue it to you hauing noe opportunity to doe it heer
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,245.12

{COM:signature_missing}

<P_259>

<heading:edcomment:XVIII_N.F._TO_THE_FAMILY>

{COM:beginning_of_letter_omitted}

<P_260>

Insteade of Statute Lace I sende you downe silke
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,260.18

and more there is diing black NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,260.19

It coms to litle more then the statute - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,260.20

But being likely to last much Longer I suppose it much better
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,260.21

and though because it is not in fashion the mercer partes w=th= it at
halfe the price yett w=th= you I suppose it will bee in that regard
nothing at all the worse Wherefore both for Petticoats and sleeues you
shall haue more - and enough - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,260.22

<P_261>

For Ioyce I am loth to lay out mony on a new Coate
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,261.24

her mothers petticoate will perhapps fitt her for the present .
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,261.25

And the boys may bee suplied out of Annas and Peggs petticoates
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,261.26

yf you can make things serue for the present it will bee best
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,261.27

and hereafter wee shal shuite {GLOSS:suit} all things to all manner of
Conveniency and decency - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,261.28

You shall doe well to make Nathaiell ply his worke and sett forward
things as much as may bee as heertofore y=u= haue used to doe taking
advantadg both of the present necessity and of Nathaniells comm~g to
London NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,261.29

I haue sent downe 9 Artichokes to my dearest mother praying her to
accept and eate of them NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,261.30

And soe humbly crauing her blessing and all y=r= prayers I rest N.F.
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,261.31

xvij June 1631 NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,261.32

I haue noe leasure to peruse my letter NFERRAR-1629-E2-P1,261.33

