<BEGIN_nhadd-1706-e3-p1>

<P_49>

<heading:edcomment:NICHOLAS_HADDOCK_TO_HIS_FATHER_SIR_RICHARD_HADDOCK>

St George in Barcelona Road , NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.4

this lst of May , 1706 , O. S. NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.5

Hon=d= S=r= , This comes to you by the Faulcon pink , which is sent home
express w=th= the good news of our releiving Barcelona in the greatest
extremity . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.6

The French had made preparations fur a generall assault that very day we
came ; NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.7

and it must have been infallibly taken , had we not had the luckiest
passage imaginable <paren> being but five days from Lisbon to Cape
Martin , where we joynd S=r= Jno. Leake <$$paren> .
NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.8

Saturday last in the morning , when were about 5 leagues to the w=t=ward
of Barcelona , my Lord Peterborow came of to the fleet w=th=
twleve_hund=d= soldiers embarqued in felucas and boats ,
NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.9

and in the afternoon got in NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.10

and landed them , w=th= all the soldiers out of the transports and most
of the marines of the fleet . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.11

We have now about nine_thousand soldiers in the towne .
NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.12

The French army consisted at first of twenty_thousand ; four of w=ch= ,
horse under the command of the Duke of Anjou . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.13

Their loss during this seige is computed to be five_thousand
{COM:preceding_word_"thousand"_emended} including a_thousand sick and
wounded they have left behind , when they raised the seige , w=ch= was
at twelve aclock last night . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.14

They have left 50 peices of brass cannon mounted and 15 mortars ,
NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.15

and are now bound to Roussilion . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.16

They will find great difficultys on their march .
NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.17

The Miquelets , being very numerous and all in arms , will destroy a
great many of 'em before they get out of Catalonia , it being a close
country . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.18

The French squadron before this place consisted of 26 saile ,
line_of_battle_ships . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.19

They sailed the night before we came , having intelligence of us by
their scouts . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.20

They were all the supply the army had for provisions ,
NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.21

for the Catalans have not given them the least ; NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.22

nor could a man of 'em stirr from his tent a musquet shot out of the
Camp but they killed him . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,49.23

We are now sending four ships with <P_50> 6_hundred soldiers for Girone
, to reinforce that garrison , lest the French should make any attempt
on it , it lying in their way . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,50.24

I hear there is an express come to Barcelona from my Lord Gallaway ,
giving an account of his being got to Toledo and on his march for Madrid
. NHADD-1706-E3-P1,50.25

The lucky turn Providence has given to our affairs in these parts I
suppose will be joyfull news in England ; NHADD-1706-E3-P1,50.26

and this being the first certain acc=t= you@ @'l have , this long letter
wo@ @nt seem tedious . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,50.27

I can expect no letters from you till S=r= Clowdsly joyne us ,
NHADD-1706-E3-P1,50.28

and then do hope shall hear of your welfare and some good news in return
of all this , which , with my duty to y=r= self and mother and love to
all friends , is from , Hon=d= Sir , Y=r= dutifull Son , N=s= Haddock .
NHADD-1706-E3-P1,50.29

P.S. - We have had an eclipse of the sun to-day ;
NHADD-1706-E3-P1,50.30

lasted above two hours , NHADD-1706-E3-P1,50.31

and for a quarter 't@ @was total and as dark as night .
NHADD-1706-E3-P1,50.32

W=t= it may portend , I leave to the learned . NHADD-1706-E3-P1,50.33

Our fleet consists of 50 saile in the line : 13 of w=ch= , Dutch .
NHADD-1706-E3-P1,50.34

