<BEGIN_osborne-1676-e3-p1>

<P_12>

<heading:edcomment:VIII_THE_EARL_OF_DANBY_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

May 11 , 1675 OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,12.4

I have not yett time to unfold att large all those transactions wch are
necessary for yr Excellency to know , and wch I intend to write in a
particular narrative for yr information <paren> I mean those things wch
relate to Ireland singly <$$paren> OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,12.5

but I resolved to take this first minute of leasure to give itt you
under my hand , that if anything may have been represented to yr
Excellency concerning those instructions of 29th July :74: as
Instructions that I received from yr Excellency ; itt is utterly false
that I ever made any such pretence , either in Councell or elsewhere ,
OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,12.6

but I did owne in Councell , that both by divers letters from yr
Excellency , and severall complaints from my Ld Ranelagh , I had been
informed of ye great prejudice to his Ma=tie= both in ye giving away
money and Quitt_rents by Letters obtained without due examination , and
that yr Excellency had severall times desired that some course might be
taken for preventing of itt . OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,12.7

I did further say that I had received from yr Excellency a letter
acknowledging ye receipt of those Instructions wch yr Excellency did
approve as very conducing to hinder those many irregular grants wch are
not otherwise to bee resisted ; OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,12.8

and for the Instructions themselves , my Lord Ranelagh doth owne ye
drawing of them , OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,12.9

and by ye coppy of those former instructions to ye Lds Lieutenants wch
were brought over by my Lord Conway , they appeare to bee agreable to
those ancient formes , OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,12.10

and by what appears of defalcacons due to my Lord Ranelagh upon letters
obtained before those Instructions , itt will bee found that they have
been of vast advantage in saving the King's treasure .
OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,12.11

I am sorry I have not time to inlarge more upon this subject ,
OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,12.12

but I hope this may arme yr Excellency ag=st= the practices of yr
Enemies as well as mine in this matter who would first divide us and
then destroy both ; and having done their worst to mee , would now wound
yr Excellency if they could by making you privy and <P_13> instrumentall
to ye recruiting the forces in France : OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,13.13

As I doubt not but all this will vanish so I assure yr Excellency I am
not less firme either in my owne services to yr Excellency or in ye
representing yr enemies as well as my owne to his Ma=tie= ;
OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,13.14

and within a Post or two yr Excellency shall find I have done itt with
considerable effect to yr securing of ye power where you are ; I meane
by prevailing with his Mat=ie= to make those about you depend more
immediately upon yr Excellency than yett they doe .
OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,13.15

I hope yr Excellency will pardon this abrupt letter wch is so merely for
want of time , wch will only give mee leave to subscribe myselfe , &c.
OSBORNE-1676-E3-P1,13.16

