<BEGIN_penny-1686-e3-p1>

<P_24>

<heading>

<font> KING HENRY THE VIII AND A COBLER . <$$font>
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.4

CHAP. I . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.5

HOW KING HENRY THE 8TH. USED TO VISIT THE WATCHES IN THE CITY , AND HOW
HE CAME ACQUAINTED WITH A MERRY AND A JOVIAL COBLER .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.6

<$$heading>

It was the Custome of King Henry the 8th. to Walk late in the Night
into the City Disguised , to take notice how the Constables and Watch
performed their Duty ; not onely in carefully Guarding the City Gates ,
but also in diligent Watching the inward parts of the said City , that
so they might prevent those Disturbances and Casualties which often
happens in great and Populous Cities in the Night .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.8

This he did oftentimes , without the least discovery who he was ;
returning home to White-hall early in the Morning .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.9

Now in his return home through the Strand , he took notice of a certain
Cobler , who was constantly up and at work , Whistling and Singing every
morning ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.10

he therefore resolved to see him , and be acquainted with him ; in order
to which he immediately knocks off the Heel of his Shooe , by hitting it
against the Stones : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.11

having so done , he bounced at the Coblers Stall ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.12

who@ @'s there ? cries the Cobler . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.13

Here is one , said the King . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.14

With that the Cobler opened his Stall door , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.15

and the King asked him , if he could set on his Heel again ?
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.16

Yes that I can , says the Cobler . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.17

Come in Honest Fellow , and sit thee down by me , and I will do it for
you strait ; the Cobler scraping his Awls and Old Shooes to one side ,
to make room for the King to sit by him . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.18

The King being hardly able to forbear Laughing at the kindness of the
Cobler , asked him if there was not a House hard by which sold a Cup of
Ale , where the People were up ? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.19

Yea , <paren> said the Cobler <$$paren> there is an Inn over the way ,
where I believe the folk of the house are up ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,24.20

for the Carriers <P_25> go from thence very early in a Morning .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.21

With that the King borrowed an old Shooe of the Cobler ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.22

and went over to the Inn , desiring the Cobler to bring his Shooe to him
thither , so soon as he had put the Heel on again ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.23

the Cobler promised he would . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.24

So making what haste he could to put the Heel on , he carried it over to
the King , saying ; Honest Blade , here is thy Shooe again ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.25

I@ @'le warrant it will not come off in haste . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.26

Very well , said the King , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.27

What must you have for your pains ? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.28

A couple of Pence <paren> answered the Cobler . <$$paren>
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.29

Well said the King , because thou art an honest merry Fellow , here is a
Tester for thee . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.30

Come sit thee down by me , I will drink to thee a whole Pot ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.31

here@ @'s a good Health to the King : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.32

with all my heart , said the Cobler , I will pledge thee were it Water .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.33

So the Cobler sat himself down by the King , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.34

and was very merry , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.35

and drank off his Liquor very freely . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.36

He also Sung some of his Merry Songs and Catches , whereat the King
Laughed heartily , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.37

and was very Pleasant and jocund with the Cobler ; telling him withal ,
that his Name was Harry Tudor , and that he belonged to the Court , and
if he would come and see him there , he would make him very welcome ,
because he was such pleasant merry Company , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.38

and charged him to be there , and not to forget his Name , but to ask
any one for him about the Court , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.39

and they will bring you to him : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.40

For <paren> said the King <$$paren> I am very well known at the Court .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.41

Now the Cobler little dream'd that it was the King which spoke to him ,
much less that the Kings Name was Harry Tudor : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.42

Therefore with a great deal of confidence , he stands up
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.43

and pulls off his Hat , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.44

and makes two or three fine scrapes with his Leg ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.45

gives the King many thanks , withal telling him , that he was one of the
honestest Fellows he ever met withal in his Life-time . And <paren>
though he had never been at Court <$$paren> yet it should not be long
before he would make a Holiday to come and see him .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.46

Hereupon the King discharging the House for what he had drank , would
have taken his leave of the Cobler : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.47

But the Cobler taking him by the hand , said ; By my faith , you must
not go yet , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.48

you shall first go and see my poor Habitation ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.49

I have there a Tub of good Nappy Ale was never Tapt yet ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.50

you must needs go and taste of it ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,25.51

for you are the honestest Merriest <P_26> Blade that I ever met withal ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.52

and I love an honest merry Companion with all my heart ...
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.53

<heading>

CHAP. IV . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.55

THE COBLERS RECEPTION AT COURT , WITH THE MANNER OF HIS BEHAVIOUR BEFORE
THE KING . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.56

<$$heading>

The Cobler being thus set forth , strutted through the Streets like a
Crow in a Gutter , thinking himself as fine as the best of them all .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.58

In this manner he came to Court , staring on this body , and that body ,
as he walkt up and down , and not knowing who to ask for Harry Tudor ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.59

at last he espyed one as he thought , in the Habit of a Serving-man ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.60

to him he makes his Address , saying , Dost thou hear honest Fellow ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.61

do you know one Harry Tudor , which belongs to the Court ?
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.62

Yes , said the Man , follow me and I will bring you to him :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.63

with that he had him presently up into the Guard-Chamber , telling one
of the Yeoman {COM:sic} of the Guard , there was one that enquired for
Harry Tudor . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.64

Replyed the Yeoman , I know him very well , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.65

if you will please to go along with me , I will bring you to him
immediately . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.66

So the Cobler followed the Yeoman , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.67

much admiring the Finery of the Rooms he went through , he thought
within himself , that the Yeoman was mistaken in the person whom he
enquired after : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.68

he therefore pulled him back by the Coat , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.69

and told him , that he did believe he was mistaken in the Person whom he
enquired after . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.70

For <paren> said he <$$paren> him who I look for , is a plain merry
honest Fellow , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.71

his Name is Harry Tudor : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.72

We drank two Pots together not long since , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.73

I suppose he may belong to some Lord or other about the Court .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.74

I tell you Friend , replyed the Yeoman , I know him very well ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.75

do but follow me , and I shall bring you to him strait .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.76

So going forward , he came at last to the Room where the King was ,
accompanied with several of his Nobles who attended him .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,26.77

As soon as the Yeoman had put by the Arras , he spoke aloud , saying ;
May it please your Majesty , here is one that enquires for <P_27> Harry
Tudor . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.78

The Cobler hearing this , thought he had committed no less than Treason
, PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.79

therefore he up with his Heels PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.80

and run for it . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.81

But not being acquainted with the several turnings and Rooms through
which he came , he was soon overtaken , and brought before the King ,
whom the Cobler little thought to be the Person he enquired after :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.82

Therefore in a trembling condition , he fell down upon his knees ,
saying ; May it please your Grace , may it Please your Highness , I am a
poor Cobler ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.83

and enquired for one Harry Tudor , who is a very honest Fellow ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.84

I mended the Heel of his Shooe not long since , for which he paid me
nobly , and gave me two or three Pots to boot : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.85

And I had him over afterwards to my Celler , where we drank part of a
Tub of nappy Ale , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.86

and was very Merry , until my Wife Joan began to Grumble , which put an
end to our Merriment for that time . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.87

But I told him , I would come to the Court and see him as soon as
conveniently I could . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.88

Well , said the King , be not troubled ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.89

do you know this honest Fellow again if you see him ?
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.90

Yea , that I do from a_thousand <paren> replyed the Cobler . <$$paren>
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.91

Then said the King , stand up PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.92

and be not afraid , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.93

but look well about you , peradventure you may find this honest Fellow
amongst this Company . Whereupon the Cobler arose and looked wishfully
upon the King , and the rest of his Nobles , but to little or no purpose
. PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.94

For though he saw something in the Kings face which he thought he had
seen before , yet he could not imagine him to be Harry Tudor ...
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.95

<heading>

CHAP. V . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.97

THE COBLERS ENTERTAINMENT IN THE KING'S CELLER ; AND HOW HE MET WITH HIS
NEW FRIEND HARRY TUDOR , AND HOW HE COME TO KNOW HIM TO BE THE KING .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.98

<$$heading>

The Cobler had not been long in the King's Celler , before the King came
to him in the same Habit which he had on when the Cobler mended his
Shooe ; whereupon the Cobler knew him , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.100

and run PENNY-1686-E3-P1,27.101

and embraced him , saying , Honest Harry , I have made a <P_28> Holiday
on purpose to come and see you ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.102

but I had much ado to get leave of my wife Joan , who was loath I should
loose so much time from my work ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.103

but I was resolved to see you , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.104

I therefor made my self as fine as I could . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.105

But <paren> i@ @'le tell you Harry <$$paren> when I came to the Court I
was in a peck of troubles how to find you out ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.106

but at last I met with a man who told me he knew you very well and that
he would bring me to you ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.107

but instead of doing so , he brought me before the King , which had
almost frightned me out of my seven senses . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.108

But in good faith <paren> added the Cobler <$$paren> I am resolved to be
merry with you , since I have the good fortune to meet with you at last
. PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.109

I that you shall , replyed the King , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.110

we will be as merry as Princes . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.111

With that he call'd for a large Glass of Wine , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.112

and drank to the Cobler the King's good Health .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.113

God-a-mercy , said the Cobler , honest Harry , I will pledge thee with
all my heart . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.114

Now after the Cobler had drank about four or five good Healths , he
began to be merry , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.115

and fell a singing his old Songs and Catches , which pleased the King
very much , and made him laugh heartily . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.116

When of a sudden several of the Nobles came into the Celler ,
extraordinary rich in apparel , who all stood bare to Harry Tudor ,
which put the Cobler into a great amazement at first ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.117

but recovering himself , he lookt more wishfully upon Harry Tudor :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.118

when presently he knew him to be the King , which he saw in the Presence
Chamber , tho' in other Habit , he immediately fell down upon his knees
, saying ; May it please your Grace , may it please your Highness , I am
honest poor Cobler , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.119

and mean no harm : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.120

No , no , said the King , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.121

nor shall receive none here ... PENNY-1686-E3-P1,28.122

<P_29>

{COM:illustration_omitted}

<P_30>

<heading>

HENRY VIII & THE ABBOT OF READING . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.127

CHAP. I . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.128

HOW KING HENRY THE EIGHTH RODE A HUNTING IN WINDSOR FORREST , AND HOW HE
LOST HIS COMPANY , AND DINED WITH THE ABBOT OF READING .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.129

<$$heading>

The Table being spread with variety of dishes , the King sat down to his
Meat , Eating very heartily of a Loin of Beef , commonly called a
Sir-Loin of Beef ; insomuch that the Abbot took great notice of him , to
see how he laid about him , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.131

first cutting a good Sizeable piece , then calling for a Glass of his
Clarret drank it off , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.132

and then fell to his Beef a fresh continuing eating until he had made a
prety handsome hole in the Sirloyn of Beef ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.133

said the Abbot , much good may it do you Sir , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.134

I perceive you have a good Stomach to your meat ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.135

I would give a_hundred pounds with all my heart , I had so good a
stomach as you have ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.136

you see of all this variety of Meats here is , I can hardly eat any
thing , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.137

a pestle of a Lark is as much as I have eaten ...
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.138

<heading>

CHAP. II . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.140

HOW THE KING SENT A MESSENGER FOR THE LORD ABBOT , AND SENT THE ABBOT
PRISONER TO THE TOWER . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.141

CHAP. III . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.142

HOW THE LIEUTENANT OF THE TOWER WENT TO THE KING IN BEHALF OF THE ABBOT
. PENNY-1686-E3-P1,30.143

<$$heading>

<P_31>

<heading>

CHAP. IV . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.147

HOW THE ABBOT DINED IN THE TOWER , AND HOW THE KING DEMANDED HIS HUNDRED
POUND , FOR BRINGING THE ABBOT TO HIS STOMACH . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.148

<$$heading>

Now when the Lieutenant of the Tower came to the King , he told him how
hungry the Abbot was , and that he was ready to eat his own Flesh :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.150

Well , said the King , to_morrow let him have a Loyn of Beef to Dinner ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.151

and let him have a Bottle or two of Clarret , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.152

but be you not known that you have Orders from me , but that you do it
upon your own account , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.153

and let there be a Hole made out of the Abbots Room that I may come
privately and see him eat ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.154

The Lieutenant told the King that all things should be done according to
his Order . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.155

He therefore went home again to the Tower PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.156

and told the Abbot that the King was much enraged against him , insomuch
that he could not prevail with him in the least to have any other Diet
but Bread and Water ; but that he so much pittyed him , and was troubled
at his Condition , that he would venture his Place and Life to serve him
: and that to_morrow he should have a Dinner , and he would come and
Dine with him himself ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.157

the Abbott was not a little pleased with this News , telling him he
would not be Ungrateful to him for this great kindness , if ever he came
for to have his Liberty ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.158

Now the Abbot was so overjoyed with the hopes of a Dinner the next Day ,
that he Slept Quieter that Night then he had done ever since he came
into the Tower ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.159

the next day about twelve a Clock , the King came privately to the Tower
, where he was conveyed secretly into a room adjoyning to the Lord
Abbots , and a hole made so cunningly that he might see the Lord Abbot
and he not see him again ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.160

it was not long before the Cloath was laid , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.161

and a proper tall Fellow brought in a lusty Loyn of Beef , and another
two or three Bottles of Clarret , at which sight the Lord Abbot could
forbear laughing : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.162

Then came in the Lieutenant of the Tower , saying you see my Lord , I
venture my Life to come and Dine with you , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,31.163

but no more <P_32> words of that ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,32.164

but let us fall to as fast as we can , and be merry ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,32.165

so after the Abbot had said a short Grace he fell aboard on the Beef ,
cutting a swinging piece which he soon devoured PENNY-1686-E3-P1,32.166

then he calls for a Glass of Clarret , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,32.167

drinks it off , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,32.168

and then falls to his Beef again , insomuch that the King had much ado
to forbear Laughing , to see how the Abbot had laid about him , seeing
plainly the Abbot had gotten as good a stomach as he had ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,32.169

now when the Abbot had pretty well Dined , the King sent one of his
Servants into the Room , saying aloud , the King : at which news the
Lieutenant fell on his knees , and the Abbot was like to have fallen
into a sound , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,32.170

but the King entring the Room , said , my Lord , be not dismayed ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,32.171

I come but to demand the Hundred Pound you owe me ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,32.172

pay me that , and you shall have your Liberty when you will ...
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,32.173

<P_33>

<heading>

THE PLEASANT HISTORY OF THOMAS HIC-KA-THRIFT . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.176

HIS BIRTH AND PARENTAGE , AND THE TRUE MANNER OF HIS PERFORMING MANY
MANY ACTS , AND HOW HE KILLED A GYANT . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.177

<$$heading>

Young man , here thou mayest behold what Honour Tom came unto .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.179

{COM:verse_omitted}

In the Reign before William the Conqueror , I have read in ancient
Histories , that there dwelt a Man in the Marsh of the Isle of Ely , in
the County of Cambridge whose Name was Thomas Hic-ka-thrift , a poor Man
, and day labourer , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.181

yet he was a very stout Man , and able to perform two days works instead
of one , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.182

he having one Son , and no more Children in the world , he called him by
his own Name Thomas Hickathrift ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.183

this old Man put his Son to good Learning , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.184

but he would take none , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.185

for he was , as we call them now in this Age , none of the wisest sort ,
but something soft , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.186

and had no docity at all in him : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.187

God calling this Old Man his Father out of the world , his Mother being
tender of him , and maintained him by her hand labour as well as she
could : he being sloathful and not willing to work to get a penny for
his living , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.188

but all his delight was to be in the Chimney corner ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.189

and would eat as much at one time as might very well serve four or five
ordinary men , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.190

for he was in length when he was but Ten years of age , about eight foot
, and in Thickness five foot , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.191

and his Hand was like unto a shoulder of Mutton ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.192

and in all parts from top to toe , he was like a Monster
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.193

and yet his great Strength was not known . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,33.194

<P_34>

<heading>

HOW TOM HIC-KA-THRIFT'S STRENGTH CAME TO BE KNOWN ; THE WHICH IF YOU
PLEASE BUT TO READ , WILL GIVE YOU FULL SATISFACTION .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.197

<$$heading>

The first time that his Strength was known , was by his Mothers going to
a Rich Farmers House , <paren> she being but a poor Woman <$$paren> to
desire a Bottle of Straw to shift her self and her Son Thomas :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.199

the Farmer being an honest Charitable Man , bid her take what she would
: PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.200

she going home to her Son Tom , said , I pray thee go {SIC:to} to such a
place PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.201

and fetch me a Bottle of Straw , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.202

I have asked him leave : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.203

he swore a great Oath he would not go ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.204

nay , pri@ @thee Tom go , said his old Mother , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.205

he swore again he would not go , unless she would borrow him a Cart-rope
, PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.206

she being willing to please him , because she would have some Straw ,
went PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.207

and borrowed him a Cart-rope to his desire , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.208

he taking went his way ; so coming to the Farmers House ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.209

the Master was in the Barn , and two men a Thrashing :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.210

said Tom , I am come for a Bottle of Straw : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.211

Tom , said the Master , take as much as thou canst carry ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.212

he laid down his Cart-rope , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.213

and began to make his Bottle ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.214

but , said they , Tom , thy rope is too short , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.215

and jeer'd poor Tom , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.216

but he fitted the man well for it , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.217

for he made his bottle , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.218

and when he had made it , there was supposed to be a Load of Straw in it
of two_thousand weight ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.219

but , said they , what a great fool art thou ? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.220

thou canst not carry the Tith on@ @'t ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.221

but Tom took the Bottle PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.222

and flung it on his shoulder , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.223

and made no more of it then we do of an hundred_weight , to the great
admiration of Master and Men . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.224

Tom Hic-ka-thrift's strength being known in the Town , then they would
not let him any longer lye basking by the fire in the Chimney-corner ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.225

every one would be hiring him to work , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.226

they seeing him to have so much strength , told him that it was a shame
for him to live such a lazy course of life , and to lye idle day after
day as he did . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.227

So Tom seeing them bait at him in such a manner as they did , he went
first to one work , then to another , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.228

but at length came a Man to Tom , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.229

and desired him to go with him unto the Wood , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.230

for he had a Tree to bring home , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.231

and he would content him . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.232

So Tom went with him , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.233

and he took with him four Men beside ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.234

but when they came to the Wood , they set the Cart by the Tree
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,34.235

and began <P_35> to draw it up with Pullies , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.236

but Tom seeing them not able to lift it up , said Stand away you Fools ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.237

and takes the Tree PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.238

and sets it on one end , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.239

and lays it in the Cart , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.240

now says he , see what a Man can do ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.241

Marry , it is true , said they : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.242

so when they had done , coming through the Wood they met the Woodman ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.243

Tom asked him for a stick to make his Mother a fire with ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.244

I , said the Woodman , take one what thou canst carry :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.245

so Tom espyed a Tree bigger then was in the Cart ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.246

and lays it on his Shoulder , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.247

and goes home with it as fast as the Cart went and six Horses could draw
it : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.248

This was the second time that Toms Strength was known :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.249

so when Tom began to know that he had more strength then twenty Men had
, he then began to be Merry with Men , and very tractable ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.250

and would Run , or Go , or Jump ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.251

and took great delight to be amongst Company , and to go to Fairs and
Meetings , and to see Sports and Pastime : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.252

So going to a Feast , the Young Men were all met , some to Cudgels ,
some to Wrastling , some throwing the Hammer , and the like ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.253

So Tom stood a little to see their Sport , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.254

and at last goes to them that were a throwing the Hammer ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.255

and standing a little by to behold their Man-like Sport , at last he
takes the Hammer in his hand , to feel the weight of it ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.256

and bid them stand out of the way , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.257

for he would throw it as far as he could : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.258

I , said the Smith , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.259

and jeer'd poor Tom , you@ @'l throw it a great way i@ @'le warrant you
: PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.260

but Tom took the Hammer PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.261

and flung it , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.262

and there was a River about five or six furlungs off ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.263

and flung it into that : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.264

so when he had done he bid the Smith go fetch his Hammer again ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.265

and laught the Smith to scorn ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.266

but when Tom had done that , he would go to Wrastling , though he had no
more skill than an Ass had , but what he did by Strength ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.267

yet he flung all that came , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.268

for if once he laid hold they were gone : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.269

some he would throw over his head , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.270

some he would lay down slyly and how he pleased :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.271

he would not lock nor strike at their Heels , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.272

but flung them two or three Yards from him , ready to break their Necks
asunder : so that none at last durst go into the Ring to wrastle with
him , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.273

for they took him to be some Devil that was come amongst them ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.274

so Tom's fame was spread more in the Country ...
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,35.275

<P_50>

<heading>

LONG MEG . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.278

THE LIFE AND PRANKS OF LONG MEG OF WESTMINSTER PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.279

CHAP. I . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.280

CONTAINING WHERE SHE WAS BORN , HOW SHE CAME TO LONDON , AND HOW SHE
BEAT THE CARRYER . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.281

<$$heading>

In the time of Henry the Eight , there was born in Lancashire a Maid
<paren> for her excess in height <$$paren> called Long Meg ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.283

at 18 years of age she would needs come to London , to get a Service .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.284

Father Willis the Carrier being her Neighbour , was the Man she made
choice of to bring her up , being accompanied with three or four Lasses
more . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.285

After a long travel , being come at last within the sight of the much
desired City , she observed her fellow Travellers to wax sad ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.286

she demanded the cause of their heaviness ? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.287

one of them made answer , because the Carryer being a hard Man ,
demanded more Money then they had in their Purses , for leting them ride
a little on his Pack-Saddle . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.288

Meg replyed , If that be all , fear not , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.289

I will either speak him fair , or fall upon him so fouly , that I will
deal well enough with him for that . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.290

This put them in some comfort , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.291

and as they were in this discourse , entring into Saint-John-Street from
Islington , Father Willis came to them , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.292

and demanded Money for Riding . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.293

What will you have , quoth Meg ? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.294

Marry , said he , ten shillings a piece . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.295

What , quoth she , 't@ @is more Money than we have in our purses ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.296

you are a merry Man indeed ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.297

we will give you a Gallon of Wine , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.298

and make you amends hereafter when we are more able ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,50.299

in the mean time , as the earnest of it , you shall have of every one of
us a Kiss . At which the Carrier stormed , and Meg smiled , which so
incensed <P_51> him , that he swore if they would not pay him , he would
cudgel ten Shillings out of their bones . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.300

Marry content , quoth Meg , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.301

and taking a staff into her hand , she did so belabour him and his Man
that he desired her for Gods sake to hold her hands :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.302

Not I , quoth she , unless you first bestow an Angel on each of us for a
handsel for {TEXT:missing_"for"} our good luck , and swear e're you
depart London , to place us all three with Mistrisses .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.303

The Carrier having felt the weight of her Arm thought it better to give
three Angels , then to receive so many blows as she should bestow on him
, PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.304

and therefore not only gave them the Money but swore not to remove from
London till he had seen them all three plac'd . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.305

<heading>

CHAP. VI . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.307

CONTAINING A MERRY JEST , HOW SHE MET WITH A NOBLEMAN , AND HOW SHE USED
BOTH HIM AND THE WATCH . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.308

<$$heading>

It chanced one Evening , that Meg in a frolick humour did put on a Suit
of Mans Apparel , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.310

and with her Sword and Buckler walked the Streets ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.311

the same night it fell out , that a young Nobleman being disposed to be
merry , would needs go abroad with his Man to see Fashions ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.312

and coming down the Strand , he espyed Meg , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.313

and seeing such a tall Fellow swinging up and down , thought to have a
cast at him ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.314

and coming to him , How now Fellow <paren> quoth he <$$paren> whither
walkest thou ? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.315

Marry <paren> quoth Meg <$$paren> to Saint Nicholas Shambles to buy
Calves Heads . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.316

How much Money <paren> quoth the Nobleman <$$paren> hast thou in thy
purse ? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.317

In Faith <paren> quoth Meg <$$paren> little enough ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.318

wilt lend me any ? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.319

I marry <paren> quoth the Nobleman <$$paren> PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.320

and putting his Thumb to Megs mouth , said , there@ @'s a Tester .
Whereupon Meg up with her fist , and took him a good Box on the Ear and
said , There <paren> Sir Knave <$$paren> there@ @'s a Groat again ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,51.321

and now I owe you but two pence : whereupon the Noble <P_52> drew , and
his Man too . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.322

And Meg was as active as they , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.323

and together they go , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.324

but Meg drave them before her , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.325

and Housed them in a Chandlers shop , insomuch that the Constable came
in to part the fray , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.326

and having asked what they were the Nobleman told his name , whereat
they all put off their Caps . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.327

And what is your name quoth the Constable to Meg ?
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.328

Mine , quoth she , is Cutbeart Curry Knave ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.329

Upon this the Constable commanded to lay hold on her and carry her to
the Counter . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.330

Meg out with her Sword , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.331

and did set upon the Watch , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.332

and behaved her self very resolutely : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.333

but the Constable called for Clubs , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.334

and then Meg was fain to cry out , Masters , hold your hands ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.335

I am Long Meg of Westminster . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.336

With that they all stayed , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.337

and the Nobleman would needs have her , the Constable , and all the rest
, to the Tavern , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.338

and concluded the Fray in a Cup of Wine . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.339

<heading>

CHAP. XII PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.341

CONTAINING A PLEASANT JEST , HOW SHE USED THE ANGRY MILLER OF EPPING ,
IN ESSEX . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.342

<$$heading>

Meg going on foot one day with Sundry of her Neighbours , it being a
great frost , & none with them but a young stripling of fourteen years
of age , it chanced that they went by Epping Mill , where the Miller
looked out PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.344

<paren> for the wind blew fair , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.345

and the Sails went merrily <$$paren> PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.346

the little Boy , that was a Wag , thought to have been merry with the
Miller , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.347

and therefore called to him , put out , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.348

put out Miller , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.349

put out : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.350

What shall I put out Boy , quoth the Miller ? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.351

Marry , quoth the Boy , a Thieves head , and Thieves pair of ears ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.352

put out Miller , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.353

put out . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.354

At this the Miller in a great rage , came down PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.355

and beat the Boy . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.356

Meg stepped to him , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.357

and would have staid his hand , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.358

and the Miller lent her three or four good bangs over the Shoulders ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,52.359

Meg <P_53> felt it smart , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,53.360

and getting in within the Miller , did wring the stick out of his hands
, with which she cudgell'd him to some tune ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,53.361

and when she had done , she sent the Boy up the Millers stairs for an
empty Sack , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,53.362

and put the Miller in it , all but the Head , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,53.363

and fastning him to the Rope , wherewith he pulled up the Sacks , she
haled him half way , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,53.364

and there let him hang . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,53.365

The poor Miller cryed out for help , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,53.366

and if by Fortune his Wife had not been coming , he had been almost
killed ; and the Mill <paren> for want of Corn <$$paren> set on Fire .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,53.367

Thus Meg plagued the saucy Miller of Epping . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,53.368

<P_78>

<heading>

MOTHER SHIPTON . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.371

CHAP. I . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.372

OF MOTHER SHIPTONS STRANGE PARENTAGE , AND THE PLACE OF HER BIRTH .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.373

<$$heading>

Mother Shipton <paren> as all Histories agree <$$paren> was a Yorkshire
woman ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.375

but the particular place is very much disputed , because several Towns
have pretended to the honour of her Birth ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.376

But the most credible and received opinion ascribes it to Nascborough ,
near the dropping Well , in the County aforesaid :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.377

concerning her Pedigree or Parentage there is likewise very various
Report . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.378

Some say , that her Father was a Necromancer and that skill in the Black
Art thereby became intail'd upon her by inheritance ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.379

but the common Story <paren> which therefore I shall follow , yet
without forcing the Reader to believe it whether he will or no <$$paren>
is , That she never had any Father of humane Race , or mortal wight ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.380

but was begot <paren> as the great Welsh Prophet Merlin was of old
<$$paren> by the Phantasm of Apollo , or some wanton Airial Daemon , in
the manner following . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.381

Her Mother <paren> whom some Records call Agatha , and others Emmatha
<$$paren> being left an Orphan about the age of sixteen , very poor ,
and much troubled with that grievous , but common disease , called by
some Idleness , and by others Sloth ; as she was once upon a time
sitting , bemoning her self on a shady bank by the Highway side , this
spirit appear'd to her in the shape of a very handsom young man ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.382

& smiling on her , Pretty maid , quoth he , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.383

why dost thou sit so sad ? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.384

Thou art not old enough to have thy Head pestered with the cares of the
World ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.385

pri@ @thee tell me the business , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.386

and doubt not but I will help thee out of all thy troubles .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,78.387

The Maid <paren> for Maids there were in those days at her age <$$paren>
casting up her eyes , and not suspecting a devil in so comely a
countenance , related to him her wants , and that she knew not <P_79>
how to live ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.388

pish ! said he , that@ @'s nothing , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.389

but be ruled by me and thou shalt never lack ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.390

she hearing him promise so fairly , told him she would ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.391

and thereupon to draw her in by degrees to destruction he first tempted
her to Fornication , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.392

and prevailed so far as to gain her , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.393

but his Touch as she afterwards confessed to the Midwife were cold as
Ice or Snow . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.394

From this time forward she was commonly once a day visited by her
Hellish Gallant , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.395

and never wanted money , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.396

for still as she swept the House , she should find some odd pieces , as
Ninepence Quarters of thirteen-@ @pence-@ @half-pennys , and the like ,
sufficient to supply all her occasions . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.397

<heading>

CHAP. 2 . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.399

HOW MOTHER SHIPTONS MOTHER PROVED WITH CHILD ; HOW SHE FITTED THE SEVERE
JUSTICE , AND WHAT HAPNED AT HER DELIVERY . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.400

<$$heading>

The Neighbors observing Agatha without any Employ to live so handsomly ,
wondred exceedingly how she came by it , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.402

but were more surprized shortly afterward , when they perceiv'd her to
be with child , which she could not long hide , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.403

for before her delivery , she was as big as if she had gone with
half_a_dozen children at once ; whereupon she was carried before a
Justice , who chid & threatened her for her incontinency ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.404

but he was soon silenced , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.405

for his Wife and all his Family being present , Agatha said to him aloud
, Mr. Justice , gravely you talk now , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.406

and yet the truth is , your Worship is not altogether free ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,79.407

for here stands Two of your Servant wenches , that are both at this time
with Child by you ; pointing to them severally with her finger : at
which both himself and the two Girls were so blank , that his wife
plainly saw what she said was true , and therefore fell upon the
{TEXT:missing_"the"} two poor Harlots like a fury , so all Mr. Justice
and the Constable <P_80> could do was not enough to keep the peace ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.408

and the whole family was in such confusion , that Agatha for that time
was dismist , and soon after was brought to bed in the Month of July ,
in the 4. year of the Reign of K. Henry the 7th . which was in the
year of our Lord , 1488 . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.409

Her Travel was very grievous , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.410

and a most terrible Clap of thunder hapned just as she was delivered of
this strange birth , which afterward was so famous by the name of Mother
Shipton . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.411

Nor could the Tempest affright the women more than the prodigious
Physiognomy of the Child ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.412

the body was long , but very big-boned , great gogling eyes , very sharp
and fiery , a Nose of unproportionable length , having in it many crooks
and turnings , adorned with great pimples , which like vapours of
brimstone gave such a lustre in the night , that her Nurse needed no
other Candle to dress her by ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.413

and besides this uncouth shape , it was observ'd , that as soon as she
was born , she fell a laughing and grinning after a jeering manner , and
immediately the Tempest ceased . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.414

<heading>

CHAP. 3 . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.416

BY WHAT NAME MOTHER SHIPTON WAS CHRISTENED AND HOW HER MOTHER WENT INTO
A MONASTERY . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.417

<$$heading>

The Child being thus brought into the World , under such strange
circumstances was <paren> though not without some opposition <$$paren>
ordered at last by the Abbot of Beverly to be christened , which was
performed by the name Ursula Soothtell : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.419

for the later was her mothers , and consequently her Maiden Sirname ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.420

and as for Shipton , it was the name of her husband , whom she
afterwards married ... PENNY-1686-E3-P1,80.421

<P_81>

<heading>

CHAP. 4 . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.424

SEVERAL OTHER MERRY PRANKS PLAID BY MOTHER SHIPTON , IN REVENGE TO SUCH
AS ABUSED HER . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.425

<$$heading>

As our Ursula grew up to riper years , she was often affronted , by
reason of her deformity , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.427

but she never fail'd to be revenged on those that did it :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.428

As one day all the chief of the Parish being together at a merry meeting
, she coming thither occasionally on an Errand , some of them abused her
by calling her , The Devils Bastard , and Hag-face , and the like ;
whereupon she went away grumbling , but so ordered affairs , that when
they was set down to Dinner , one of the principal Yeomen , that thought
himself spruce and fine , had in an instant his Ruff <paren> which in
those days they wore <$$paren> pull'd off , and the Seat of an House of
Office clapt in its place ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.429

he that sate next him bursting out into a laughter at the sight hereof ,
was served little better , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.430

for his Hat was invisibly convey'd away , and the Pan of a Close-stool
which stood in the next Room , put on instead thereof .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.431

Besides this , a modest young Gentlewoman that sate at the Table at the
same time , looking at these two worthy Spectacles of mirth endeavour'd
all she could to Refrain laughing , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.432

but cou'd not , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.433

and withal continued breaking of wind backward for above a quarter of an
hour together , like so many broad-sides in a Sea-fight , which made all
the company laugh so extremely , that the Master of the house <paren>
being the chief Inn in the town <$$paren> was alarm'd below therewith ,
and desirous to share with his Guests in their mirth , came running up
Stairs as fast as his legs would carry him , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.434

but being about to enter the door , he could not ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.435

and no wonder , since the oldest Man living never saw a larger pair of
Horns than he had on his Head . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,81.436

But whilst they were gazing on one another , as more than half
distracted , they were all reduc'd to the same condition they were in at
first , after which followed a noise , as if <P_82> more than a_hundred
persons were laughing together , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.437

but nothing was seen . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.438

<heading>

CHAP. 6 . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.440

HER PROPHECY AGAINST CARDINAL WOOLSEY . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.441

<$$heading>

By these and several the like exploits , Mother Shipton had got a name
far and near for a cunning woman , or a woman of the foresight , so that
her words began to be counted Oracles , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.443

nor did she meddle only with private persons , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.444

but was advised with concerned people of the greatest Quality ; among
which number at that time was Cardinal Woolsey , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.445

when it was reported , that he intended to live at York , she publickly
said , He should never come thither ; which coming to his ear , and
being much offended , he caused three Lords to go to her , who came
disguised to Ring-house near York , where leaving their men , they took
a Guide and came to Mother Shipton's , where knocking at her door , she
cryed out within , Come in Mr. Beasly <paren> their Guide <$$paren> and
those Noble Lords with you . Which much surprized them that she should
know them , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.446

for when they came in , she called each of them by name
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.447

and treated them with Ale and Cakes , whereupon said one of the Lords ,
If you knew our Errand , you would not make so much of us ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.448

you said the Cardinal should never see York . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.449

No , said she , I said he might see York , but never come at it ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.450

Well saies the Lord , when he does come thou shalt be burnt .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.451

Then taking off her Linnen Kerchief from her head , saies she , If this
burn , then I may burn ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.452

and immediately flung it into the fire before them ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.453

but it would not burn , so that after it had lain in the flames a
quarter of an hour , she took it out again not so much as singed .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.454

Hereupon one of the Lords askt her what she thought of him ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.455

My Lord , said she , the time is coming when your Grace will be as low
as I am , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,82.456

and that is a <P_83> low one indeed . Which proved true ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,83.457

for shortly after he was beheaded . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,83.458

Nor was her speech of the Cardinal less verified ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,83.459

for he coming to Cawood , went to the top of the Tower ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,83.460

& askt where York was , which being shewn him , he enquired how far it
was thither , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,83.461

For <paren> qd. he <$$paren> there was a Witch said , I should never
see York . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,83.462

Nay , says one present , your Eminence is misinformed ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,83.463

she said you should see it , but not come at it .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,83.464

Then he vow'd to burn her when he came there , which was but eight miles
distant , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,83.465

but behold , immediately he was sent for back by the King ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,83.466

and dyed of a violent Loosness at Leicester . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,83.467

<P_123>

<heading>

SIMON AND CISLEY . BY J.P. PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.470

THE MERRY CONCEITS AND PASSAGES OF SIMON AND CISLEY . TWO LANCASHIRE
LOVERS . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.471

HOW SIMPLE SIMON CAME TO FALL IN LOVE WITH SIMPERING CISLEY AT A WEDDING
. PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.472

<$$heading>

Simon & Cisley had formerly seen one another , but never had the fortune
to be acquainted , until accidentally there happened to be a Wedding at
the same Town where Simon lived , to which Cisley was invited <paren>
she living but a mile off with her Father , who was a Widower , and had
no more Children . <$$paren> PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.474

Being thus met at the Wedding , the Bride came to distribute her Favours
amongst her friends , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.475

so Simon and Cisley had each of them one . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.476

Cisley pinn'd hers upon her sleeve , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.477

and Simon seeing her do so , was about to pinn his upon his sleeve too :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.478

But Cisley smiling at his mistake , told him it was the fashion for men
to wear them in their Hatbands , and if he pleased she would tye it for
him . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.479

Says the Clerk of the Church , <paren> who saw her tying it <$$paren> in
truth Neighbour Simon , that Courtesie deserves a kiss ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.480

say you so , quoth Simon , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.481

marry then i@ @'le be sure to give her one , and a good one too ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.482

so he clapt his Arms about her neck , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.483

and gave her a great smacking kiss , after his own Country fashion .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.484

But after Simon had once tasted the pleasure of Cisleys sweet lips , he
was so over head and ears in love , that he could scarce eat any Dinner
at all : which the Clerk observed and askt him <paren> after Dinner
<$$paren> if he were in love , because he forsook his Victuals ?
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.485

A shame take you , quoth Simon , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.486

you made me kiss Cisley for nothing , but that you might get money for
another Wedding . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,123.487

<P_124>

<heading>

HOW SIMON CONDUCTED CISLEY HOME , AND HE WOOED HER FATHER , THAT HE
MIGHT HAVE HER FOR HIS WIFE . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.490

<$$heading>

After much mirth and dancing past at the Wedding , when it was time to
part , Simon told Cisley , that he had a great desire to see her home ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.492

and she thought it no wisdom to refuse his courtesie , in regard it was
almost night , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.493

and she wanted company : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.494

so they took their leaves PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.495

and went together . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.496

The first Style they came to , Simon made a stand ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.497

why do you stay , quoth Cisley ? <paren> thinking he staid to kiss her
<$$paren> PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.498

pray go over ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.499

nay truly , quoth Simon , you go oftener this way ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.500

and know it better than I do , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.501

pray go you over first : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.502

she argued the case with him a good while , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.503

but for all she could say , she was glad to go first over every Style
they came to , a fair opportunity for him to see her lusty leg , which
made him more in love with her than ever he was before .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.504

After they had gone a prety way farther Simon began to discover his
affection to her in such a manner , as would have done a wise Woman good
to have heard him . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.505

Cisley thankt him for his Love , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.506

and told him she could not dispose of her self whilst her Father was
living , without his consent . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.507

Simon told her he did not fear that at all ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.508

so they trudg'd on till they came to her Father , whom they found
sitting at the door , waiting for her coming home .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.509

As soon as Cisley was gone in , Simon being a little elevated with the
wedding Ale , began to wooe her Father more earnestly than ever he did
her : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.510

& for a good while would take no denial , until at last the old man
perswaded him to get his Daughters consent , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.511

and then he would tell him more . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.512

When Simon had told Cisley what her father had said , she promised to
meet him the next Market-day and there to conclude the bargain at the
Tavern : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.513

and so after a parting kiss , Simon went whistling hom jovially , to
tell his mother the good news , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.514

<paren> for his father was dead <$$paren> . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.515

<heading>

HOW SIMON PUT A TRICK UPON THE MILLER THAT THOUGHT TO DECEIVE HIM OF HIS
SWEETHEART . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.517

<$$heading>

In the same Town where Simon lived , there dwelt a miller which had a
months mind to Cisley and resolved if he could possibly to deceive Simon
of his Beloved : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.519

so it happened that the same night that Simon promised to be at her
Fathers , the miller chanced to ride thither , upon this black mare ,
which he used to carry Sacks on : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.520

he had been there several times before , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.521

but never found Cisley so Coy as she was now grown , since she made a
Promise to Simon . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.522

Whilst they were together , Simon chanced to take Old Roan ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.523

and away came he ambling in the dark to Visit his dear Duck :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.524

but when he came to put his Horse into the Stable , he found the Millers
mare there before him : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.525

he knew the Millers business well enough PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.526

and therefore he resolved to fit him for coming there a Wooing again :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.527

so he would not put his horse into the stable PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.528

but tyed him under a Hedge , <paren> intending to go to Cisley as soon
as the miller was gone <$$paren> PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.529

and takes out the millers mare into the Yard , where he found an old
Wheel-barrow , which he tyed fast to the mares tail ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.530

and when she was in her way home , he gave her three or four good jearks
, PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.531

and set her a running ding dong : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.532

but when the Mare felt the wheel-barrow ratling at her arse , she ran as
if the Devil had been upon her back , so that she frighted all the
people that ever came in her way , and set all the Town where the Miller
lived , in a great uproar , every one concluding it was the Devil ,
because she made such a noise in the night , and was black .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.533

Well , when the Miller took his leave of Cisley , and went to bring out
his Mare , he could not tell what to think , when he found her not in
the Stable : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.534

but hoping she was broke loose , and run home , he made all the haste
that ever he could after her . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.535

When the Miller was gone , Simon went to his sweet-heart ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,124.536

& <P_126> told her what he had done , which made her laugh heartily ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.537

but the poor Miller quite out of breath when he came to the Town , he
found all his Neighbours up in arms : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.538

he askt the reason , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.539

they told him , the devil was in their town , and had almost frighted
them out of their wits . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.540

Then he told them he had lost his Mare , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.541

and desired them to go with him , and see if she were at home :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.542

when they came there , they found the black she-Devil in a dropping
sweat , with an old Wheelbarrow at her Arse , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.543

and had almost run her self to death . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.544

The Miller suspecting that Simon had done it , went to see if he were at
home : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.545

but finding he was not , he resolv'd to be quit with him before it was
long , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.546

and so it fell out accordingly . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.547

There lived a Conjurer within two miles of them , that was very notable
in that Art ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.548

but the miller suspecting such a thing , had been with him before , and
told him the whole jest , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.549

and had given him a share of the money ; so that when Simon came to him
and desired to know who got his money , the man seemed to be very
diligent to pleasure him , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.550

and fell to his study for a matter of half an hour ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.551

and then told him , that if they were men that rob'd him , the chief
Actor among them , was one that got his living by the wind :
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.552

and if he knew any man of such a profession , it might be easie to find
out them that robbed him , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.553

otherwise he could do no more by his Art . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.554

Simon satisfied him for his pains , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.555

and went home to consult with his friends , who this person should be ,
that got his Living by the wind ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.556

but when they came to consider if it , they never thought of the Miller
, who was their Neighbour , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.557

but gave the money for lost , concluding it must be either a Seaman or a
Trumpeter , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.558

& therefore never likely to be recovered again .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,126.559

<P_127>

<heading>

HOW THE PARSON WITH MUCH ADO GOT SIMON AND CISLEY MARRIED AFTER A MAD
FASHION . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.562

<$$heading>

The former invited guests came upon the Holiday appointed , according to
promise , against which time Simon had once more got all things in
readiness ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.564

and to make sure that he should not be serv'd as he was before , he had
both laid a broader Bridge , and bought Cisley a pair of lower-heel'd
Shooes : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.565

So now they were fixt , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.566

and away they went to the Church ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.567

but when they came there , the Parson fell to work to marry them ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.568

but when he came to ask Simon , wilt thou have Cisley to thy wedded Wife
? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.569

Yes sir <paren> qd. Simon <$$paren> if she be as willing as I ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.570

or else I would not have her for all the World .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.571

The Parson then askt Cisley , wilt thou have Simon to thy wedded Husband
? PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.572

yes sir quoth Cisley , <paren> making a low courtesie <$$paren> if you
please ; which made the company smile : PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.573

but the Parson seeing their ignorance , was glad to direct them ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.574

and so with much ado he got them married after a mad fashion ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.575

and home they went with great joy , where they had a dinner of Simons
mothers own dressing who was very glad that her only Son was so well
married , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.576

and so was Cisleys old Father too for his Daughter .
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.577

After dinner they had a Cup of good Ale of their own brewing , and the
lame Fidler to make them merry , with which they past on the time till
Supper , and from that time , until they had gotten the Bride to Bed ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.578

but they had much ado to get Simon to go to bed to her whilst they were
there ; PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.579

but at length he was perswaded to venture upon it ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.580

and then the Company left them , PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.581

and wisht them a good night . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.582

Finis . PENNY-1686-E3-P1,127.583

