<BEGIN_pepys-1667-e3-p1>

<P_7,402>

9 . <font> Lords <$$font> day . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.3

Up , not to church but to my chamber , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.4

and there begun to enter into this book my Journall
{COM:preceding_word_"Journall"_emended} of September , which in the Fire
time I could not enter here , but in loose papers .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.5

At noon dined , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.6

and then to my chamber all the afternoon and night , looking over and
tearing and burning all the unnecessary letters which I have had upon my
File for four or five years backward - which I entend to do quite
through all my papers , that I may have nothing by me but what is worth
keeping , and fit to be seen if I should miscarry .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.7

At this work till midnight , and then to supper and to bed .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.8

10 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.9

Up , and at my office all the morning , and several people with me ; Sir
W. Warren , who I do every day more and more admire for a miracle of
cunning and Forecast in his business - and then Captain Cocke , with
whom I walked in the garden . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.10

And he tells me how angry the Court is at the late proviso brought in by
the House . How still my Lord Chancellor is , not daring to do or say
anything to displease the Parliament . That the Parliament is in a very
ill humour , and grows every day more and more so . And that the
unskilfulness of the Court and their difference among one another is the
occasion of all , not agreeing in what they would have ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.11

and so give leisure and occasion to the other part to run away with what
the Court would not have . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.12

Then comes Mr. Gawden , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.13

and he and I in my chamber discoursing about his business
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.14

and to pay him some Tanger orders , which he delayed to receive till I
have money instead of tallies . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.15

But doth promise me consideration for my Victualling business for this
year , and also as Treasurer for Tanger , which I am glad of ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.16

but would have been gladder to have just now received it .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.17

He gone , I alone to dinner at home , my wife and her people being gone
down the River today for pleasure , though a cold day , and dark night
to come up . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.18

In the afternoon , I to the Excize Office to enter my tallies ; which I
did , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.19

and came presently back again . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.20

And then to the office PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.21

and did much business ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,402.22

and then home to supper , my <P_7,403> wife and people being come well
and hungry home from Erith . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.23

Then I to begin the setting of a Base to <font> It is Decreed <$$font> ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.24

and so to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.25

11 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.26

Up , and to the office , where we sat ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.27

and at noon home to dinner , a small dinner because of a good supper .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.28

After dinner my wife and I by coach to St. Clements church , to Mrs.
Turner's lodgings hard by to take our leaves of her .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.29

She is returning into the North to her child , where I perceive her
husband hath clearly got the mastery of her , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.30

and she is likely to spend her days there
{COM:preceding_word_"there"_emended} ; which for her sake I am a little
sorry for , though for his , it is but fit she should live where he hath
a mind . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.31

Here were several people come to see and take leave of her , she going
tomorrow . Among others , my Lady Mordant , which was Betty Turner , a
most homely widow , but young and pretty rich and good-natured .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.32

Thence , having promised to write every month to her - we home ; and I
to my office , while my wife to get things together for supper .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.33

Despatched my business at the office . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.34

Anon comes our guests : old Mr. Batelier and his son and daughter -
Mercer - which was all our company . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.35

We had a good venison pasty and other good cheer ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.36

and as merry as in so good , innocent , and understanding
{COM:preceding_word_"understanding"_emended} company I could be .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.37

He is much troubled that wines laden by him in France before the late
proclamation was out , can@ @not now be brought into England , which is
much to his and other merchants' loss . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.38

We sat long at supper , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.39

and then to talk , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.40

and so late parted - PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.41

and so to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.42

This day the Pole bill was to be passed , and great endeavours used to
take away the Proviso . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.43

12 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.44

Up , and to the office , where some accounts of Mr. Gawdens were
examined . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.45

But I home most of the morning to even some accounts with Sir H.
Cholmly - Mr. Moone - and others , one after another .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,403.46

Sir H. Cholmly did with grief tell <P_7,404> me how the Parliament hath
been told plainly that the King hath been heard to say that he would
dissolve them rather then pass this Bill with the Proviso .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.47

But tells me that the Proviso is removed , and now carried that it shall
be done by a Bill by itself . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.48

He tells me how the King hath lately paid above 30000 <font> l <$$font>
to clear debts of my Lady Castlemayne@ @s - and that she and her husband
are parted for ever , upon good terms , never to trouble one another
more . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.49

He says that he hears that above 400000 <font> l <$$font> hath gone into
the Privy-purse since this Warr , and that that hath consumed so much of
our money and makes the King and Court so mad to be brought to discover
it . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.50

He gone , and after him the rest - I to the office ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.51

and at noon to the Change , where the very good newes is just come of
our four ships from Smyrna come safe without convoy even into the Downes
, without seeing any enemy - which is the best , and endeed only
considerable good news to our Exchange since the burning of the City ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.52

and it is strange to see how it doth cheer up men's hearts .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.53

Here I saw shops now come to be in this Exchange .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.54

And met little Batelier - who sits here , but at 3 <font> l <$$font>
per_annum , whereas he sat at the other at 100 <font> l <$$font> - which
he says he believes will prove of as good account to him now , as the
other did at that rent . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.55

From the Change to Captain Cockes , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.56

and there by agreement dined . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.57

And there was Charles Porter - Temple - Fenn - De Busty <paren> whose
bad English and pleasant discourses was exceeding good entertainment
<$$paren> , Matt Wren - Major Cooper , and myself .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.58

Mighty merry , and pretty discourse . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,404.59

They talked for certain that now the King doth fallow Mrs. Steward
wholly - and my Lady Castlemayne not above once a week . That the Duke
of York doth not haunt my Lady Denham so much . That she troubles him
with matters of state , being of <P_7,405> my Lord Bristoll@ @'s faction
, and that he avoids . That she is ill still .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.60

After dinner I away to the office , where we sat late upon Mr. Gaudens
accounts - Sir J. Mennes being gone home sick .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.61

I late at the office , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.62

and then home to supper and to bed , being mightily troubled with a pain
in the small of my back , through cold , or <paren> which I think most
true <$$paren> by straining last night to get open my plate=chest .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.63

In such pain all night , I could not turn myself in my bed .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.64

News this day from Brampton of Mr. Ensum , my sister's sweetheart ,
being dead - a clowne . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.65

13 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.66

Up , and to the office , where we sat . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.67

At noon to the Change , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.68

and there met Captain Cocke PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.69

and had a second time his direction to bespeak 100 <font> l <$$font> of
plate , which I did at Sir R Viner's - being twelve plates more - and
something else I have to choose . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.70

Thence home to dinner ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.71

and there W. Hewer dined with me , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.72

and showed me a Gazett in Aprill last <paren> which I wonder should
never be remembered by anybody <$$paren> which tells how several persons
were then tried for their lives , and were found guilty of a design of
killing the King and destroying the government ; and as a means to it ,
to burn the City ; and that the day emended for the plot was the 3rd of
last September . And that fire did endeed break out on the 2nd of
September - which is very strange me@ @thinks -
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.73

and I shall remember it . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.74

At the office all the afternoon - late ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.75

and then home to even my accounts in my Tanger book , which I did to
great content in all respects , and joy to my heart ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.76

and so to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,405.77

<P_7,406>

This afternoon Sir W. Warren and Mr Moore , one after another , walked
with me in the garden ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.79

and they both tell me that my Lord Sandwich is called home . And that
he doth grow more and more in esteem everywhere , and is better spoken
of - which I am mighty glad - though I know well enough his deserving
the same before , and did foresee that it will come to it .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.80

In mighty great pain in my back still . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.81

But I perceive it changes its place - PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.82

and doth not trouble me at all in making of water ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.83

and that is my joy , so that I believe it is nothing but a strain .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.84

And for these three or four days I perceive my overworking of my eyes by
Candle light doth hurt them , as it did the last winter .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.85

That by day I am well and do get them right - PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.86

but then after candle-light they begin to be sore and run - so that I
entend to get some green spectacles . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.87

14 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.88

Up , and very well again of my pain in my back , it having been nothing
but cold . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.89

By coach to White-hall , seeing many smokes of the Fire by the way yet .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.90

And took up into the coach with me a country gentleman , who asked me
room to go with me , it being dirty - one come out of the North to see
his son after the burning his house - a merchant .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.91

Here endeavoured to wait on the Duke of York , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.92

but he would not stay from the Parliament . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.93

So I to Westminster-hall - PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.94

and there met my good friend Mr. Eveling PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.95

and walked with him a good while - lamenting our condition , for want of
good counsel and the King's minding of his business and servants .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.96

I out to the Bell Taverne ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.97

and thither comes Doll to me PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.98

and yo did tocar la cosa of her as I pleased ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.99

and after an hour's stay away , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.100

and stayed in Westminster-hall till the rising of the House , having
told Mr. Eveling , and he several others , of my Gazette which I had
about me , that mentioned in April last a plot for which several were
condemned of treason at the Old bayly for many things ; and among others
, for a design of burning the City on the 3rd of September .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.101

The House sat till 3 a-clock ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.102

and then up , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.103

and I home with Sir St. Fox to his house to dinner ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.104

and the Cofferer with us . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.105

There I find his lady , a fine woman , and seven the prettiest children
of theirs that ever I knew almost . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,406.106

A very gent dinner , and in <P_7,407> great state and fashion , and
excellent discourse - and nothing like an old experienced man and a
Courtier , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,407.107

and such is the Cofferer Ashburnham . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,407.108

The House hath been mighty hot today against the Paper bill - showing
all manner of averseness to give the King money ; which these Courtiers
do take mighty notice of , and look upon the others as
{TEXT:missing_first_"as"} as bad rebells as ever the last were .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,407.109

But the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} Courtiers
{COM:preceding_word_"Courtiers"_emended} did carry it against those men
, upon a division of the House , a great many , that it should be
committed ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,407.110

and so it was - which they reckon good news .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,407.111

After dinner we three to the Excise Office , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,407.112

and there had long discourse about our monies , but nothing to
satisfaction ; that is , to show any way of shortening the time which
our tallies take up before they become payable - which is now full two
years - which is 20 per_cent of all the King's money for interest - and
the great disservice of his Majesty otherwise .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,407.113

Thence in the evening round by coach home , where I find Founds's his
present of a fair pair of Candlestickes
{COM:preceding_word_"Candlestickes"_emended} and half a dozen of plates
come ; which costs him full 50 <font> l <$$font> and is a very good
present . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,407.114

And here I met with , sealed up , from Sir H. Cholmly , the Lampoone or
the Mocke=advice to a Paynter , abusing the Duke of York and my Lord
Sandwich , Pen , and everybody , and the King himself , in all the
matters of the Navy and Warr . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,407.115

<P_7,408>

I am sorry for my Lord Sandwich having so great a part in it .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.117

Then to supper and Musique , and to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.118

15 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.119

Up , and to the office , where my Lord Brouncker <paren> newly come to
town from his being at Chatham and Harwich to spy enormities <$$paren> ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.120

and at noon I with him and his Lady Williams to Captain Cocke's , where
a good dinner and very merry . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.121

Good news today upon the Exchange : that our Hamburgh fleet is got home
- PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.122

and good hopes that we may soon have the like of our Gottenburgh ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.123

and then we shall be well for this winter . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.124

Very merry at dinner . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.125

And by and by comes in Matt Wrenn from the Parliament-house ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.126

and tells us that he and all his party of the House , which is the
Court-party , are fools , and have been made so this day by the wise men
of the other side - PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.127

for after the Court-party had carried it yesterday so powerfully for the
Paper Bill , yet now it is laid aside wholly , and to be supplied by a
land-Tax - which , it is true , will do well and will be the sooner
finished , which was the great argument for the doing of it -
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.128

but then it shows them fools , that they would not permit this to have
been done six weeks ago , which they might have had .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.129

And next , they have parted with the Paper Bill ; which , when once
begun , might have proved a very good flower in the Crowne as any there
. PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.130

So doth really say that they are truly outwitted by the other side .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,408.131

<P_7,409>

Thence away to Sir Robt. Viners PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,409.133

and there chose some plate , besides twelve plates , which I purpose to
have with Captain Cocke's gift of 100 <font> l <$$font> .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,409.134

And so home PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,409.135

and there busy late , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,409.136

and then home and to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,409.137

<P_7,417>

21 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.139

Lay long ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.140

and when up , find Mrs. Clerke of Greenwich and her daughter Daniel .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.141

Their business , among other things , was a request her daughter was to
make ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.142

so I took her into my chamber , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.143

and there it was to help her husband to the command of a little new
pleasure-boat building - which I promised to assist in .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.144

And here I had opportunity para besar elle and tocar sus mamelles , so
as to make mi mismo espender with great pleasure .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.145

Then to the office PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.146

and there did a little business ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.147

and then to the Change PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.148

and did the like ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.149

so home to dinner , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.150

and spent all the afternoon in putting some things , pictures especially
, in order , and pasting my Lady Castlemayne@ @s print on a frame ,
which I have made handsome and is a fine piece .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.151

So to the office in the evening to marshall my papers of accounts
presented to the Parliament , against any future occasion to recur to
them - which I did do to my great content . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.152

So home PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.153

and did some Tanger work , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.154

and so to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,417.155

<P_7,418>

22 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.157

At the office all the morning , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.158

and there came news from Hogg that our Shipp hath brought in a Lubecker
to Portsmouth , likely to prove prize - of deals - which joys us .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.159

At noon home to dinner , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.160

and then Sir W. Penn , Sir R. Ford , and I met at Sir W. Batten to
examine our papers , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.161

and have great hopes to prove her prize . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.162

And Sir R. Ford I find a mighty yare man in this business , making
exceeding good observations from the papers on our behalf .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.163

Hereupon concluded what to write to Hogg and Middleton , which I did .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.164

And also with Mr. Oviatt <paren> Sir R. Ford's son , who is to be our
solicitor <$$paren> to fee some counsel in the Admiralty ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.165

but none in town ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.166

so home again , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.167

and after writing letters by the post - I with all my clerks , and
Carcasse and Whitfield , to the ticket-office , there to be informed in
the method and disorder of that office , which I find infinite great -
of infinite concernment to be mended ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.168

and did spend till 12 at night , to my great satisfaction , it being a
point of our office I was wholly unacquainted in .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.169

So with great content home {COM:preceding_word_"home"_emended} and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.170

23 . <font> Lords day <$$font> . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.171

Up , and alone to church ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.172

and meeting Nan Wright at the gate , had opportunity to take two or
three besados , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.173

and so to church - where a vain fellow with a periwig preached ,
Chaplain <paren> as by his prayer appeared <$$paren> to the Earl of
Carlisle . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.174

Home , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.175

and there dined with us Betty Michell and her husband .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.176

After dinner , I to White-hall by coach , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.177

and took them with me ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.178

and in the way I would have taken su mano as I did the last time ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.179

but she did in a manner withhold it . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.180

So set them down at White-hall , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.181

and I to the Chapel to find Dr. Gibbons ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.182

and from him to the Harp and Ball to transcribe the Treble which I would
have him to set a bass to . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.183

But this took me so much time , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.184

and it growing night , I was fearful of missing a coach ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.185

and therefore took a coach , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.186

and to rights to call Michell and his wife at their father Howlett@ @s ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,418.187

and so home , it being cold and the ground <P_7,419> all snow , but the
moon shining . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.188

In the way , I did prender su mano with some little violence ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.189

and so in every motion she seemed para hazer contra su will ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.190

but yet did hazer whatever I would . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.191

I did by degrees poner mi cosa en su mano nudo ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.192

and did hazerla tenerle et fregarle et tocar mi thigh ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.193

and so all the way home , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.194

and then did doner ella su gans para put on encore she making many
little endeavours para oter su mano , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.195

but yielded still . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.196

We came home , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.197

and there she did seem a little ill , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.198

but I did take several opportunities afterward para besar la ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.199

and so goodnight . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.200

They gone , I to my chamber , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.201

and with my brother and wife did Number all my books in my closet
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.202

and took a list of their names ; which pleases me mightily , and is a
jobb I wanted much to have done . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.203

Then to supper and to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.204

24 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.205

Up and to the office , where Lord Brouncker , J. Mennes , W. Penn ,
and myself met ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.206

and there I did use my notes I took on Saturday night about tickets ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.207

and did come to a good settlement in that business of that office , if
it be kept to - this morning being a meeting on purpose .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.208

At noon , to prevent my Lord Brouncker@ @'s dining here , I walked as if
upon business with him <paren> it being frost and dry <$$paren> as far
as Paul's , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.209

and so back again through the City by Yildhall , observing the ruines
thereabouts , till I did truly lose myself ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.210

and so home to dinner . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.211

I do truly find that I have overwrought my eyes , so that now they are
become weak and apt to be tired , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.212

and all excess of light makes them sore , so that now , to the
candlelight I am forced to sit by , adding the Snow upon the ground all
day , my eyes are very bad , and will be worse if not helped ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.213

so my Lord Brouncker doth advise me , as a certain cure , to use Greene
Spectacles , which I will do . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.214

So to dinner , where Mercer with us , and very merry .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.215

After dinner , she goes PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,419.216

and fetches a little son of Mr. Buckeworths , the whitest-haired and of
the most spirit that ever I saw in my life - for discourse <P_7,420> of
all kind , and so ready and to the purpose , not above four year old .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.217

Thence to Sir Robt. Viners PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.218

and there paid for the plate I have bought , to the value of 94 <font> l
<$$font> , with the 100 <font> l <$$font> Captain Cocke did give me to
that purpose , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.219

and received the rest in money . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.220

I this evening did buy me a pair of green spectacles , to see whether
they will help my eyes or no . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.221

So to the Change , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.222

and went to the Upper Change , which is almost as good as the old one ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.223

only , shops are but on one side . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.224

Then home to the office PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.225

and did business till my eyes begun to be bad ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.226

and so home to supper <paren> my people busy making mince-pies <$$paren>
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.227

and so to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.228

No news yet of our Gottenburgh fleet ; which makes me
{COM:preceding_word_"me"_emended} have some fears , it being of mighty
concernment to have our supply of masts safe .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.229

I met with Mr. Cade tonight , my stationer , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.230

and he tells me that he hears for certain that the Queene-Mother is
about and hath near finished a peace with France ; which , as a
Presbyterian , he doth not like , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.231

but seems to fear it will be a means to introduce Popery .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.232

25 . <font> Christmas day <$$font> . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.233

Lay pretty long in bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.234

And then rise , leaving my wife desirous to sleep , having sat up till
4. this morning seeing her maids make mince-pies .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.235

I to church , where our parson Mills made a good sermon .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.236

Then home , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.237

and dined well on some good ribbs of beef roasted and mince pies ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.238

only my wife , brother , and Barker , and plenty of good wine of my own
; and my heart full of true joy and thanks to God Almighty for the
goodness of my condition at this day . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.239

After dinner I begun to teach my wife and Barker my song , <font> It is
decreed <$$font> - which pleases me mightily , as now I have Mr.
Hinxton's bass . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.240

Then out , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.241

and walked alone on foot to Temple , it being a fine frost , thinking to
have seen a play all alone ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,420.242

but there missing of any <P_7,421> Bills , concluded there was none ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.243

and so back home , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.244

and there with my brother , reducing the names of all my books to an
Alphabet , which kept us till 7 or 8 at night ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.245

and then to supper , W. Hewer with us , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.246

and pretty merry ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.247

and then to my chamber to enter this day's journal only ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.248

and then to bed - my head a little thoughtful how to
{COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} behave myself in the business of the
victualling , which I think will be prudence to offer my service in
doing something in passing the pursers' accounts - thereby to serve the
King - get honour to myself , and confirm me in my place in the
victualling , which at present hath not work enough to deserve my wages
. PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.249

26 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.250

Up , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.251

and walked all the way <paren> it being a most fine frost <$$paren> to
White-hall to Sir W. Coventry's chamber ; and thence with him up to the
Duke of York ; where , among other things at our meeting , I did offer
my assistance to Sir J. Mennes to do the business of his office
relating to the pursers' accounts - which was well accepted by the Duke
of York , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.252

and I think I have and shall do myself good in it - if it be taken ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.253

for it will confirm me in the business of my victualling office - which
I do now very little for . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.254

Thence home , carrying home a barrel of oysters with me .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.255

Anon comes Mr. John Andrews and his wife by invitation from Bow to dine
with me , and young Batelier and his wife , with her great belly , which
hath spoiled her looks mightily already . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.256

Here was also Mercer {COM:preceding_word_"Mercer"_emended} <paren> and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} Creed , whom I met coming home - who
tells me of a most bitter Lampoone now out against the Court and the
management of State from head to foot , mighty witty and mighty severe
<$$paren> . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.257

By and by to dinner - a very good one - and merry .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.258

After dinner I put the women into coach , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.259

and they to the Duke's house to a play which was acted , <font> The
<$$font> {COM:blank_in_text} . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.260

It was indifferently done , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,421.261

but was <P_7,422> not pleased with the song , Gosnell not singing it ,
but a new wench that sings naughtily . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.262

Thence home , all by coach . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.263

And there Mr. Andrews to the vyall , who plays most excellently on it -
which I did not know before . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.264

Then to dance , here being Pendleton sent <paren> by my wife's direction
<$$paren> , and a fiddler ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.265

and we got also the elder Batelier tonight , and Nan Wright -
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.266

and mighty merry we were , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.267

and I danced ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.268

and so till 12 at night , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.269

and to supper , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.270

and then to cross-purposes , mighty merry ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.271

and then to bed - my eyes being sore . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.272

Creed lay here in Barker's bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.273

27 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.274

Up , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.275

and called up by the King's Trumpets , which cost me 10 <font> s
<$$font> PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.276

So to the office , where we sat all the morning .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.277

At noon , by invitation , my wife <paren> who had not been there these
ten months I think <$$paren> and I to meet , all our families , at Sir
W. Batten's at dinner ; where neither a great dinner for so much
company , nor anything good or handsome . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.278

In middle of dinner I rose , and my wife , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.279

and by coach to the King's playhouse ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.280

and meeting Creed , took him up , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.281

and there saw <font> The Scornfull Lady <$$font> well acted , Doll
Common doing Abigail most excellently , and Knipp the Widow very well
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.282

<paren> and will be an excellent actor I think <$$paren> ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.283

in other parts , the play not so well done as used to be by the old
actors . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.284

Anon to White-hall by coach , thinking to have seen a play there tonight
- PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.285

but found it a mistake ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.286

so back again , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.287

and missed our coach , who was gone , thinking to come time enough three
hours hence ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.288

and we could not blame him . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.289

So forced to get another coach , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.290

and all three home to my house ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.291

and there to Sir W. Batten's PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.292

and eat a bit of cold chine of beef , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,422.293

and then stayed and <P_7,423> talked ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.294

and then home , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.295

and sat and talked a little by the fire's side with wife and Creed ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.296

and so to bed , my left eye being very sore .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.297

No business , public nor private , minded all these two days .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.298

This day a house or two was blown up with powder in the Minorys , and
several people spoiled , and many dug out from under the rubbish .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.299

28 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.300

Up , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.301

and Creed and I walked <paren> a very fine walk in the frost <$$paren>
to my Lord Bellasses ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.302

but missing him , did find him at White-hall ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.303

and there spoke with him about some Tanger business .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.304

That done , we to Creeds lodgings , which are very pretty ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.305

but he is going from them . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.306

So we to Lincolnes Inne-fields , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.307

he to Ned Pickerings <paren> who it seems lives there , keeping a good
house <$$paren> PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.308

and I to my Lord Crew@ @s , where I dined and hear the news how my
Lord's brother , Mr. Nath. Crew , hath an estate of 6 or 700 <font> l
<$$font> per_annum left him by the death of an old acquaintance of his ,
but not akinned to him at all . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.309

And this man is dead without will , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.310

but had , above ten years since , made over his estate to this Mr. Crew
, to him and his heirs for ever , and given Mr. Crew the keeping of the
deeds in his own hand all this time - by which , if he would , he might
have taken present possession of the estate PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.311

for he knew what they were . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.312

This is as great an act of confident friendship as this latter age , I
believe , can show . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.313

From hence to the Duke's house , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.314

and there saw <font> Mackbeth <$$font> most excellently acted , and a
most excellent play for variety . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.315

I had sent for my wife to meet me there , who did come .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.316

And after the play done , I out so soon to meet her at the other door ,
that I left my cloak in the playhouse ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.317

and while I returned to get it , she was gone out
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.318

and missed me , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.319

and with W. Hewer away home . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.320

I , not sorry for it much , did go to White-hall
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.321

and got my Lord Bellasses to get me into the playhouse ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,423.322

and there , after all <P_7,424> staying above an hour for the players
<paren> the King and all waiting , which was absurd <$$paren> , saw
<font> Henry the 5th <$$font> - PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.323

well done by the Dukes people , and in most excellent habit , all new
vests , being put on but this night . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.324

But I sat so high and far off , that I missed most of the words ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.325

and sat with a wind coming into my back and neck , which did much
trouble me . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.326

The play continued till 12 at night ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.327

and then up , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.328

and a most horrid cold night it was , and frosty - and moonshine .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.329

But the worst is , I had left my cloak at Sir G. Carteret's ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.330

and they being abed , I was forced to go home without it .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.331

So by chance got a coach , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.332

and to the Golden Lion tavern in the Strand PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.333

and there drank some mulled sack ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.334

and so home - where find my poor wife staying for me .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.335

And then to bed - mighty cold . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.336

29 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.337

Up , called up with news from Sir W. Batten that Hogg hath brought in
two prizes more ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.338

and so I thither PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.339

and hear the perticulars , which are good - one of them , if prize ,
being worth 4000 <font> l <$$font> - for which God be thanked .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.340

Then to the office , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.341

and have the news brought us of Captain Robinsons coming with his fleet
from Gottenburgh - dispersed , though , by foul weather .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.342

But he hath light of five Dutch men-of-war and taken three , whereof one
is sunk - which is very good news to close up the year with ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.343

and most of our merchantmen already heard of to be safely come home -
though after long lookings-for ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.344

and now to several ports , as they could make them .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.345

At noon home to dinner , where Balty is , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.346

and now well recovered . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.347

Then to the office to do business ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.348

and at night , it being very cold , home to my chamber
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.349

and there late , writing . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.350

But my left eye still very sore - PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,424.351

I write by <P_7,425> spectacles all this night .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.352

Then to supper and to bed - this day's good news making me very lively ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.353

only , the arrears of much business upon my hands , and my accounts to
be settled for the whole year past , do lie as a weight on my mind .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.354

30 . <font> Lords day <$$font> . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.355

Lay long ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.356

however , up and to church , where Mills made a good sermon .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.357

Here was a collection for the Sexton . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.358

But it came into my head , why we should be more bold in making the
collection while the psalm is singing then in the sermon or prayer .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.359

Home , and without any strangers to dinner ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.360

and then all the afternoon and evening in my chamber preparing all my
accounts in good condition against tomorrow , to state them for the
whole year past - to which God give me a good issue when I come to close
them . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.361

So to supper and to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.362

31 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.363

Rising this day with a full design to mind nothing else but to make up
my accounts for the year past , I did take money and walk forth to
several places in the town , as far as the New Exchange , to pay all my
debts , it being still a very great frost and good walking .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.364

I stayed at the Fleece tavern in Covent-garden , while my boy Tom went
to W. Joyces to pay what I owed for candles there .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.365

Thence to the New Exchange to clear my wife's score ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.366

and so going back again , I met Doll Lane <paren> Mrs. Martin's sister
<$$paren> with another young woman of the Hall , one Scott ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.367

and took them to the Half-Moon tavern PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.368

and there drank some burned wine with them , without more pleasure ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.369

and so away home by coach , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.370

and there to dinner PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.371

and then to my accounts , wherein at last I find them clear and right ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.372

but to my great discontent , do find that my gettings this year have
been 573 <font> l <$$font> less then my last - it being this year all ,
but 2986 <font> l <$$font> ; whereas the last I got 3560 <font> l
<$$font> . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,425.373

And then again , my spendings this year have exceeded my spendings the
last , by 644 - my whole spendings last year being but 509 <font> l
<$$font> ; whereas this year it appears I have spent 1154 <font> l
<$$font> - which is a sum not fit to be said that ever I should spend in
one year , before I am maister of a better estate <P_7,426> then I am .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.374

Yet , blessed be God , and I pray God make me thankful for it , I do
find myself worth in money , all good , above 6200 <font> l <$$font> ;
which is above 1800 <font> l <$$font> more then I was the last year .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.375

This , I trust in God , will make me thankful for what I have , and
careful to make up by care next year what by my negligence and
prodigality I have lost and spent this year .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.376

The doing of this and entering it fair , with the sorting of all my
expenses to see how and in what points I have exceeded , did make it
late work , till my eyes became very sore and ill ; and then did give
over , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.377

and supper PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.378

and to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.379

Thus ends this year of public wonder and mischief to this nation - and
therefore generally wished by all people to have an end .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.380

Myself and family well , having four maids and one clerk , Tom , in my
house ; and my brother now with me , to spend time in order to his
preferment . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.381

Our healths all well ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.382

only , my eyes , with overworking them , are sore as soon as candlelight
comes to them ; and not else . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.383

Public matters in a most sad condition . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.384

Seamen discouraged for want of pay , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.385

and are become not to be governed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.386

Nor , as matters are now , can any fleet go out next year .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.387

Our enemies , French and Duch , great , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.388

and grow more , by our poverty . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.389

The Parliament backward in raising , because jealous of the spending of
the money . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.390

The City less and less likely to be built again , everybody settling
elsewhere , and nobody encouraged to trade . PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.391

A sad , vicious , negligent Court , PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.392

and all sober men there fearful of the ruin of the whole Kingdom this
next year - from which , good God deliver us .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.393

One thing I reckon remarkable in my own condition is that I am come to
abound in good plate , so as at all entertainments to be served wholly
with silver plates , having two_dozen_and_a_half .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P1,7,426.394

