<BEGIN_perrott-1598-e2-p1>

<P_44>

When Queen <font> Mary <$$font> had run out the Race of Mortality , her
Sister , our Sovereigne of happie Memory now levinge , succeeding her ,
most Men <paren> as the manner of the World is <$$paren> came to present
their Service to the new Princesse ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,44.3

for it is true , that more do reverence the Sunne rysinge then
{COM:do_reverence} the Sun declyninge ; amongst whom Sir <font> John
Perrott <$$font> , not soe much to follow a Multitude , or to hunt after
Favor , as to offer the Oblation of that Zeale , which he <P_45> had
formerly professed unto hir in the time of Affliction , came now as
rejoycinge at the times Felicitie and the Princes Prosperitie , unto
Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> 's Court before hir Coronation , who did
gratiously accept of his Service , so that by the Princes Favor , his
own Worthiness , and the Comliness of his Personage , he was appoynted
for one of the fower <paren> as the Chronickles make mention <$$paren>
to carry the Canopy of Estate over the Queene at hir Coronation . From
which time he lived conformable to the Courses prescrib'd by the Queene
, hir Counsell , and Lawes ; and shewed hymselfe forwards in all
Services for his Prince and Countrie . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,45.4

But before we come to describe his managinge of weightier Affayers ; for
hitherto youthfull Delightes , Court Intertaynments , and sometimes the
Cariage of private Quarrells with Noblemen and others had possessed hym
, and the Expence of a great part of his Time ; therefore in the
closinge up of his youthfull Conditions , we shall declare one Pageant ,
which he played in the Presence of the Queen , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,45.5

and it was thus . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,45.6

There was in the first year of Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> 's Reign
an Embassador <P_46> from <font> Francis <$$font> IId Kinge of <font>
Fraunce <$$font> , at {SIC:as} whose being in <font> England <$$font>
the King his Master was slayn at Tylte , by the rising up of his Beaver
, and the running of a Launce thorow the same into the Kinge's Head ;
whereof Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> had speedy Advertisement by hir
Leidger in <font> Fraunce <$$font> , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,46.7

and she proposing either to comfort the Leidger for the Death of the
Kinge his Master ; or else to conceal the same from him as long as she
might , whereof he then seemed ignorant , and made no outward Show of
Sorow ; Hir Majestie then tooke the late slayne <font> French <$$font>
Kinge's Leidger with hir into the Parke at <font> Grenwich <$$font> ,
where Tentes were set up , and a Banquet provided .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,46.8

As she passed through the Parke Gate , a Page presented a Speech unto
hir , signifyinge that there were certayne Knights come from a farre
Contrie , whoe had dedicated theyr Services unto theyr severall
Mistresses , being Ladies for Beautie , Virtue , and other Excellencies
<paren> as they deemed <$$paren> incomparable ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,46.9

and , therefore , they had vowed to advance theyr Fame thorow the World
, and to adventure Combate with such that should <P_47> be soe hardie as
to affirm , that there were any Ladies so excellent as the Saints which
they served . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,47.10

And hearing greate Fame of a Lady which kept hir Court thereabouts ,
both for hir own Excellencie and {TEXT:missing_"and"} for the Worthiness
of many renowed Knights which she kept , they were come thither to trie
whether any of her Knights would incounter them for the Defence of their
Mistresses Honor . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,47.11

When this Speech was ended , the Queene told the Page , " Sir Dwarfe ,
you give me very shorte Warninge , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,47.12

but I hope your Knightes shall be answered : " PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,47.13

And then looking about , she asked the Lord Chamberlayne , Shall we be
out-bragged by a Dwarfe ? PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,47.14

No , and it lyke your Majestie , answered he , Let but a Trumpett be
sounded , and it shall be seene that you keepe Men at Armes inough to
answer any proud Challenges . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,47.15

Then was the Trumpett sounded , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,47.16

and ymmediately there yssued out of the East Lane at <font> Grenwich
<$$font> divers Pentioners gallantly armed , and mounted .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,47.17

The Challengers were the Erle of <font> Ormond <$$font> , the Lord
<font> North <$$font> , and Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,47.18

presently upon their coming forth , the Challengers <P_48> prepar'd
themselves to run certayne Courses in the Fielde agaynste all Commers ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,48.19

amongst the rest of the Defendants , there was one Mr. <font>
Cornwallys <$$font> , a tall Gentleman and a good Man at Armes , to
whose turne it fell at length to runne agaynste Sir <font> John Perrott
<$$font> . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,48.20

As they both incountered , Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> <paren>
thorough the Unsteadines of his Horse , and the Uncertayntie of Courses
in the Field <$$paren> chanced to run Mr. <font> Cornwallys <$$font>
thorow the Hose scarringe his Thigh , and sumwhat hurting his Horse ;
wherewith he being offended , and Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font>
discontented , as they were both cholericke , they fell into a Challenge
to run with sharpe Launces without Armour in the Presence of the Queene
, which her Majestie hearing of , would not suffer it ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,48.21

but with good Persuasions pacified them : PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,48.22

So they were reconciled , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,48.23

and the Combat ended after certayne Courses performed on both Sydes by
the Challengers and Defendants . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,48.24

And , after the finishing of these Field Exercises , hir Majesty did
invite the <font> French <$$font> Leidger to the Banquett provided in a
Pavilion <P_49> in the Parke ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,49.25

but he belyke having receved then Advertisement of the King , his
Majestie@ @s Death , prayed Pardon of her Majestie for refusinge to be
Partaker of any pleasant Banquett at that Time , when all Shewes and
Intertaynmentes sounded nothing but Sorow into his Eares and Senses ,
for the Death of his master and Soverayne the Kinge of <font> Fraunce
<$$font> . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,49.26

Afterwards Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> did continew by
interchangable Courses , sometimes at the Court , sometimes in the
Contrie , and at all Times in the Service of his Prince , wherein he was
very forward , whether Abroad or at Home , untill the Year 1572 : at
which Time it pleased the Prince and State to imploy him in Foreyne
Affayers , and to make hym the first Lord President of <font> Monster
<$$font> in <font> Ierland <$$font> , being then a Province much
disordered and desolate , wasted by means of the Erle of <font> Desmond
<$$font> 's Warres and Rebelion , and thorow the continual Spoyles ,
Burnings and Destroying of the Queenes good Subjects by the Rebells
there ; and especially by the merciles , blody Deedes of <font> James
Fitz-Moris <$$font> , the Erles Seneshall or Lifetenant , and the <P_50>
chief Actor in all those crewel Devastations . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,50.27

He was a Man very valiant , politicke and learned as any Rebell hath byn
of that Nation for many Yeres . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,50.28

Against hym , with the rest of his Accomplices , was Sir <font> John
Perrott <$$font> sent to be President of <font> Monster <$$font> ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,50.29

and he landed at <font> Waterford <$$font> the first of <font> March
<$$font> 1572 , being St. <font> David's <$$font> Day .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,50.30

And within three Dayes of his landing , the Rebell <font> James
Fitz-Moris <$$font> burned the Town of <font> Kyllmalog <$$font> ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,50.31

hanged the Soveraigne of that Town , and others of the Townsmen <paren>
as many as he could take <$$paren> at the high Cross in the Market-Place
, PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,50.32

and caried all the Plate and Wealth of the Towne with hym ; with which
Intertaynment Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> , the new President , was
much discontented , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,50.33

and therefore hasted unto <font> Dublyn <$$font> , to take his Oath of
the Lord Deputie , Sir <font> Henry Sidney <$$font> , with Porpose to
present the Rebells with sharpe and speedy Warre , at his Return from
<font> Dublyn <$$font> to <font> Coorke <$$font> , which was about the
10th of <font> April <$$font> following . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,50.34

He firste gathered and lodged his own Companies there , havinge with hym
two <P_51> Companies of Foote , under the Command of Captayne <font>
Bowler <$$font> , and Captayne <font> Furse <$$font> , besyds 200 <font>
Irish <$$font> Soldiers of <font> Kerne <$$font> and <font> Galleglasses
<$$font> ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,51.35

also he had with him his owne Troupe of Horse , which were of the
Queenes Intertaynment , and of his owne Servants 100 Horse ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,51.36

and Captayne <font> Abslow <$$font> commanded under hym as many .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,51.37

With these he went to <font> Kyllmalog <$$font> , the late wasted Towne
, where he lodged hymselfe in a Howse half burned , and about a Seveneth
, PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,51.38

and he made a Proclamation , That as many of the Townesmen as fled , and
were livinge after the said Slaughter , should returne Home ; which they
did perform accordingly , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,51.39

and began to buyld their Gates , to repayre the Towne-Walles , and to
re-edifie their Howses as well as they might in so short a Time after so
greate a Spoyle . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,51.40

Before the Lord President's Departure from <font> Kyllmalog <$$font> ,
one Night the Crie of the Countrie was up , That the Rebells had beset
the Lord <font> Roch <$$font> his Castell , burnt his Baurne , slayne
some of his People , and taken away a great many of his Cattell .
<P_52> Which Alarom being given , the Lord President suddaynly aroase ,
armed hymselfe , took with hym his own Troupe of Horse , and Captayne
<font> Abslow <$$font> 's , leaving the Foot-Bands behynd to guard the
Towne , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,52.41

and soe he pursued the Rebells , being in Number 200 , whom he overtooke
at a Place called <font> Knocklonga <$$font> , within three Myles of
<font> Arlange <$$font> Wood ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,52.42

there the Rebells fell to the Bogges , as their best Fastnes ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,52.43

and left theyr Preie . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,52.44

The Lord President caused his Men to light from theyr Horses , to ryppe
off their Bootes , and to leppe into the Bogges , taking with them theyr
Petronels and Light-Horsemens Staves insteede of Pykes , with which they
charged the Enemie in the Bogges , overthrew them , and cut off fifty of
their Heads , which they carried Home with them unto <font> Kyllmalog
<$$font> , and put the Heads round about the Crosse , which were knowen
by the Townesmen that the President sent for from <font> Lymbricke
<$$font> , who had lately lost theyr Goods , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,52.45

and then he restored unto the Lord <font> Roch <$$font> all his Cattell
. PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,52.46

<P_53>

Then the Lord President , after he had comforted and strengthened the
Townsmen of <font> Kyllmalog <$$font> , he departed towards <font>
Lymbricke <$$font> , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,53.48

and on the Way came to a Castell of <font> Fybott Burk <$$font> , who
had byn in Action with <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,53.49

but afterward they slew one another ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,53.50

there the President demaunded the Keyes of the Castell , and that he
might enter . Which they not only denied , but shutt the President's
People out of the Castell , they having about forty Soldiers in it .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,53.51

The President thereupon caused the Castell to be undermyned , which was
within three Hours shaken on the one Side , that Part of the Wall fell
to the Ground , which slew some of the Rebells within : Whereupon the
Wife of <font> Fybott Burk <$$font> did yeild hir self , with her Sonne
, and the Castell , into the Hands of the President , who lefte there
thirty <font> Englishmen <$$font> to guard the Castell ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,53.52

and he departed to <font> Lymbrick <$$font> , to receve the Lords that
came unto hym , as the Earl of <font> Tomond , O'Hones , Desmond
<$$font> , and others , as also to settle that Part of the Contrie .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,53.53

<P_54>

From <font> Lymbrick <$$font> the Lord President went to <font> Cashill
<$$font> , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,54.55

and on the Way there was a Castell held by the Rebells , which he caused
to be set on Fier , by shooting of Fier up into the Topp , which was
covered with Thach , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,54.56

he commaunded his Men to light from theyr Horses to do the Execution ,
who lefte their Horses with their Footeboys hard by to feed ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,54.57

but the Noyse of the Castell at the Fall thereof , and the Sight of the
Fier , did so fright the Horses , that they broke loose from the Boys
which helde them , and ranne into the Woods , where they were taken and
caried away by the Rebells which lay in the Woods ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,54.58

but shortly after the President recovered most of his Horses agayne .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,54.59

When he came to <font> Cashill <$$font> , there he hanged seven of the
Grasy Marchants , being such as bring Bread and Aquavita , and other
Provisions unto the Rebells ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,54.60

the Soverayne of the Towne hardly escaped that Punishment .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,54.61

From <font> Cashill <$$font> the Lord President went to <font> Fether
<$$font> and <font> Clomell <$$font> , and to Sir <font> Edward Butler
<$$font> 's Contrie , where he took his chiefe Castell , it being
yielded , and also Pledges for his <P_55> Fidelitie ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,55.62

also he took in other Holds , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,55.63

and so went up to <font> Carick <$$font> , the Erle of <font> Ormond@
@'s Howse , whom he appoynted <paren> after some abode there <$$paren>
to meet hym at <font> Cork <$$font> . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,55.64

When the President came to <font> Corke <$$font> , <bracket> <font>
ultimo Maii <$$font> <$$bracket> he assembled there the chief Lords of
the Province , which came unto hym , as the Erle of <font> Ormond ,
Clyncarty <$$font> and <font> Tomond <$$font> ; the Lord <font> Bury
<$$font> , the Lord <font> Roch <$$font> , the Lord <font> Corsey ,
Mackcarty , Reuch , Gormond Mack-Teage <$$font> , and almost all the
Lords , save such as were out in Rebellion ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,55.65

he appoynted them to gather theyr Forces , and to meet him within a
Moneth after , meaning to follow the Rebells wheresoever they went ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,55.66

and soe they did . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,55.67

For first the Lord President drew all his Forces into the <font> white
Knight's <$$font> Contrie , takinge two of his Castells ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,55.68

burnt many of his Howses , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,55.69

and drave hym into the Woods . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,55.70

From thence he march'd with his Power unto <font> Arlaugh <$$font> Woods
, being the Rebells chiefe Place of Strength , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,55.71

and following them there for a while , he <P_56> returned unto <font>
Corke <$$font> to refresh his Men , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,56.72

and so went into <font> Mac Swine's <$$font> Contrie ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,56.73

there he slew many of the Rebells , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,56.74

and hanged as many as he might take , whom the Marshiall executed always
as he went along ; so that they took a great Prie , spoyled all the
Enimies Contrie , and with continual Travell wore out all their
Provision , having noe Corn in the Contrie left to make them Bread ,
which the President hymselfe wanted for divers Dayes ; their chief
Sustenance being the Mylke of those Kine which they had taken ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,56.75

and so they brought 2500 Kine with them to <font> Cork <$$font> , after
two Months Travell , pursuing the Rebells from Place to Place .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,56.76

<font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> finding his Forces weakened , and that
beinge soe followed without Intermission , he could not continew longe ,
except he were supplied with some Forayne Ayde , did therefore draw over
into <font> Monster <$$font> , 500 <font> Scottish , Irish <$$font> , or
Redshanks , out of the Islands , with whom he thought hymselfe able to
make Resistance against the President's Power , having 3000 Followers of
his owne . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,56.77

The President <P_57> hearing of his Power , did lykewise prepare to
incounter with hym , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,57.78

and sent for the Lords of that Contrie , as the Lord <font> Roch
<$$font> , the Lord <font> Bury <$$font> , Sir <font> Gormond Mack-Teag
<$$font> , and others , with whom he went agaynst the Rebells ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,57.79

and met them in the Woods , within the County of <font> Limbrick
<$$font> , where they had as it were intrenched themselves upon the
Skyrte of a Wood ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,57.80

the Lord President viewing the Campe , sent them Word , That he was come
to give them Battayle , and would stay for them in the Playne , if they
would come forth to fight with hym ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,57.81

but they being not willing soe to doe , answered , That there they
stayed for hym , and from thence they would not goe . Which he
perceving , prepared his People to Battayle , and charge them .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,57.82

Soe he placed the <font> Irish <$$font> Lords , and others of the better
Sort , within the Body of the mayne Battayle , telling them , That he
was not willinge to expose them to the uttermost Danger , which he did
out of this Politicke Consideration , knowing that thereby the Lords
<paren> if any of them were ill_mynded or fearfull <$$paren> should be
kept in from running away , and <P_58> that theyr Followers would stick
to it the better , seeing theyr Lords ingaged . Which the President had
the more Reason to doe , because of Eleven_Hundred then in his Company ,
three Partes at the least were <font> Irish <$$font> :
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,58.83

So with this good Order and Resolution he set on the Rebells , who were
about 1500 strong , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,58.84

and brake them , killing eleven Score of the Rebells and their Ayders ;
whereupon they made their Retrayte towards the Northe ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,58.85

and so <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> grew weake agayne .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,58.86

From thenceforwards the President followed his good Fortunes and his
Foes , with such Earnestness , that seldom would they come to fight with
hym , except it were light Skyrmezes , and that upon greate Advantage .
Which he percevinge , pursued them night and Day in Person , even in the
Winter , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,58.87

and lay out many Nights in the Field both in Froste and Snow , enduring
such Hardnes , that I have heard two of his Followers , yet living ,
report that of hym , as were they not Men of good Credit , it would
hardly be beleved , the one of them being present when following <P_59>
of <font> Kerne <$$font> thorow the Woods , where they could not ride .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,59.88

The Lord President hymself took such Paynes in marching , that with the
Earnestnes of pursuing , and the Deepness of the foule Ways in the
midest of Winter , he lost one of his Shoes , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,59.89

and so went on a pretty Way without his Shoe , or without feelinge the
Losse of it , till at length it beganne to payne him so much , that he
rested on this Gentleman's Shoulder , and told hym there was somewhat
which greved his Foote , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,59.90

so lifting up his Legge , the Gentleman told hym , My Lord , you have
lost your Shoe . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,59.91

T@ @is noe matter , quoth he , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,59.92

as long as the Leggs laste we will find Shoes , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,59.93

and soe calling for another Payer , he marched on still .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,59.94

At another Time , being abroad in Service , they incamped neere a Wood ,
where the President lay in his Tent , having for his <font> Guide
<$$font> some of his Servants , and certayne <font> Gallyglasses
<$$font> . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,59.95

The <font> Galliglasses <$$font> had gotten a Hogge , which they roasted
after their Manner by a great Fier neere the President ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,59.96

and when they had halfe roasted it <paren> with halfe the Hayer about it
<$$paren> they began to make Partition therof , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,59.97

<P_60>

and one of them in great Kindness , did reach a Peece to one of the
President's Servants , being a Gentleman of good Sorte <paren> and a
Justice of the Peace in his Contrie , yet livinge <$$paren>
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,60.99

the President percevinge it , told him , <font> James <$$font> <paren>
quoth he <$$paren> this was good Meate in such a Place , meaninge his
Dwelling . To whom the Gentleman answered , And it please you , it is
good Meat here amongst these Men ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,60.100

but if it were at Home , I would scarce give it to my Doggs .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,60.101

This and the lyke Paynes , Danger and Travell , did the Lord President
putt hymselfe and his People unto for a long Time , belyke following the
Counsell of the Poet , which sayeth , <font> Perfer & obdura , dolor hic
tibi proderit olim ; Saepe tulit fessis succus amarus opem . <$$font>
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,60.102

And by this Meanes did the Lord President so infeeble <font> James
Fitz-Moris <$$font> , with all his Adherents , that they durst not show
themselves in open hostile Manner , as they were wont to do ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,60.103

but now they began to betake themselves to Slightes , and to play least
in Sight , and to seeke all Meanes of <P_61> protracting the Lord
President's invading them . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,61.104

As for Example , <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> <paren> who in all
these Feates was his Craftes-master <$$paren> knowing , that the Lord
President did desier nothing more than the finishing of those Warres ,
and the subduinge of those Rebells , made shew that he also was willing
to finish the same with Combate or single Fight ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,61.105

and did send the Lord President Word thereof , as believing that the
President's longinge for a speedie Yssue , and his Expectation thereof
would keepe hym for a Time from farther Action , and proceeding agaynst
the Rebells ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,61.106

and soe indeede it tooke the same Effect , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,61.107

for <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> did first offer to fight with
fiftie of his Horsemen , agaynst the Lord President , and fiftie of his
, which the Lord President willingly accepted , and made Choyse of soe
many , whereof most were his owne Servants ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,61.108

but when the Time of Performance came , <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font>
made Excuse , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,61.109

and sent Word that he would willingly fight with the Lord President in
single Combate , Hand to Hand . To which Message the Lord President
sent Answer , That although <P_62> he knew there was a Difference
betwixt theyr Persons and theyr Places , yet he would willingly accept
his Challenge for the finishing of the Warres .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,62.110

Then the Time , Place , and Manner of his Combate was concluded on , the
Place appoynted at <font> Amely <$$font> , an old Towne , six Miles from
<font> Kyllmallock <$$font> . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,62.111

The Weapons that were assigned to fight withall , was by <font> James
Fitz-Moris <$$font> appoyntment , Sword and Targett ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,62.112

and they should be both clad in <font> Irish <$$font> Trousses , which
the President did provide of Scarlett , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,62.113

and was redie according to appoyntment , saying , " That although he
knew <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> to be his Inferior in all Respects
, yet he would reckon it a Life well adventured , to bereve such a
Rebell of his Life . " PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,62.114

Thither came the Lord President , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,62.115

and thither came most of the Nobilitie and Gentlemen of that Province ,
to see this Combatt performed . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,62.116

When the Time of Performance came , <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font>
came not , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,62.117

but sent a cunning and subtle Excuse , by one <font> Cono Roe Oharnan
<$$font> , beinge an <font> Irish <$$font> Poet , saying , That he would
<P_63> not fight with the Lord President at all , not soe much for feare
of his Life , but because on his Life did depend the Safetie of all such
as were of his Party . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,63.118

For said he , if I should kyll Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> , the
Queene of <font> England <$$font> can send another President into this
Province , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,63.119

but if he do kyll me , there is none other to succeede me , or to
command as I doe , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,63.120

therefore I will not willingly fight with hym ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,63.121

and so tell hym from me . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,63.122

When the Lord President herd this , he was much discontented , that he
had suffered hymself to be thus abused , and that he had lost so much
Time and Opportunitie , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,63.123

therefore he vowed , without Delay , to <font> hunt the Foxe out of his
Hoole <$$font> <paren> as he sayd <$$paren> . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,63.124

And besyds his own Diligence , he did earnestly incorage and charge all
the Noblemen of the Contrie to use their best Meanes for the subduing of
that subtle and perilous Rebell . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,63.125

Amongst the rest , he wrote unto the Erle of <font> Ormond <$$font> ,
whom he loved well , a most earnest and reprehensive letter , as it
followeth : PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,63.126

<P_64>

<font> My very good Lord , <$$font> " Havinge soe convenient a Messinger
, I may not but trouble your Lordship with these few Lines ; wherein I
must impart unto you , that six Days past having Conference with some
one your good Frende , about Causes of <font> Ierland <$$font> , among
other Speeches your Lordshipes Service against the Erle of <font>
Desmond <$$font> was comuned of , wherein , as you were greatly
commended for your honorable Service agaynst hym at the first entery
into the same ; so there passed some Speaches , that now of late you did
not so earnestly prosecute the Rebells as it was thought you might have
done , considering the Number of <font> Englishmen <$$font> that remayne
now in <font> Ierland <$$font> , your own Forces , and the Weaknes of
the Rebells . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,64.128

And , my Lord , as I have ever loved and honored you , so it can@ @not
but grieve me , if any Way you should be imputed slack , or to use any
Kind of Policie in so good a Cause . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,64.129

And if your Lordship should not doe all your Endeavor , and take the
Advantage , <P_65> while you have convenient Time agaynst your auncient
Enimies ; perhapes , hereafter <paren> when they shall grow stronge
<$$paren> you will repent the same ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,65.130

You are among the generall here , accoumpted to be most ablest and
trewest unto her Majestie ; wherefore , <paren> except the want of
Victualls be your Lott <$$paren> doe presently some notable Service to
the increasinge of your Honor , and to your continual Fame .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,65.131

Otherwise I shall be most sorie , considering your Lordship knoweth , I
well understand in how short Time , and with how small Difficulty you
may drive the Erle and his either out of <font> Mounster <$$font> , or
have theyr Heades ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,65.132

for deviding your Bands into fower Partes , and causing the Lordes to
keepe theyr Countries , you may drive him out of <font> Arloe ,
Domfrynen , Conilogh , Kylhogy <$$font> and <font> Glanfleske <$$font> .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,65.133

This done , he can@ @not stand in the Playne tenne Days before you , you
having more Force of Horsemen than he hath ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,65.134

And although I know you know this very well , yet I will not leave to
remember you , as bound thereto ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,65.135

and so wishing to your <P_66> Lordshipp as to my self , I committ you to
God . " PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,66.136

Subscribed , <font> Your Lordshipps , whom you may assuredly command ,
<$$font> John Perrott . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,66.137

By this Letter it appereth how carefull the Lord President was to have
the Rebells thorowly prosecuted , and how jealous he was of the Erle of
<font> Ormond@ @'s <$$font> Honor and Reputation , whom tho' he loved
most deerely <paren> for they had been sworne Brothers ever synce the
Coronation of Kinge <font> Edward <$$font> <$$paren> yet the Lord
President preferred the Love to his Countrie , and the Service of his
Prince , before any particular Love to any Person , tho' never so noble
or honorable , which made hym write so playnly and boldely as few would
have done the Lyke , unto the Erle of <font> Ormond <$$font> , who was
in high Estimation in the Contrie , and was in greate Favor with his
Prince PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,66.138

For he might well conceve that it would much offend the Erle to be
touched with any Suspicion in such Sorte , he having <P_67> ever carried
hymself so honorably in the Eies of the World , and in the Opinion of
the <font> English <$$font> State , that none of his Nation had that
general good Estimation . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,67.139

And therefore , whether the want of Victuells , or some other special
Impediment , did stay the Erle from that speedie and effectuall
prosecuting of the Rebells , as the President did then expect , I may
not undertake to determyne : PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,67.140

Only this we may with Reason conclude , That the Lord President seemed
too playne in this Exhortation , as his Manner was in all other his
Dealinges , which in the End was the Cause of his Confusion .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,67.141

Now as the President was earnest to put forwards others in the Queenes
Service , to suppresse these Rebells and their Confederates : So was he
nothing backwards hymself to see the same executed in his owne Person ,
which he did desire to be assisted by others ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,67.142

for presently he sought after , and at the length found out the
Ringeleader of the Rebells , <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> , whom he
overtooke not farre from a Bridge , but not in that Sort as he fought ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,67.143

for it fell out thus , that <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> , <P_68>
who now drew his Breath by Shiftes and Slightes , suffered a false Spie
to come unto the Lord President , with Protestation and Oathes , That he
knew where <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> was lodged , with less then
xxx Persons in his Company , and that if the President would come with
Expedition , he might be suer to take the Rebell in that Manner this
Night , without Danger ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,68.144

and for Confirmation whereof he offer'd not Words aloane , but the
Adventure of his Life to goe with them ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,68.145

and if it were not soe , let hym be the first Man that should die for it
. With which desperate Pawne of Life <paren> {COM:sic} the President ,
with others who were neerest him , were persuaded to take that
Opportunity for the apprehending of soe notorious a Rebell .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,68.146

This being after Supper , the President caused some xxx of his People to
arme themselves , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,68.147

and he with them took Horse , not staying for any more Company , least
they should loose so good an Opportunitie as they then hoped for ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,68.148

some fower others followed after them as soon as they could make redie :
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,68.149

As they thus posted on to the Place where it was sayd <P_69> that this
Traytor should be so slenderly guarded , they came up to the Place
towards the Dawninge of the Day , where <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font>
lay in Ambush under a Hill , with fower or five_Hundred Foot , and above
some Fourscore Horse , whom the President nor his People could not espie
, <paren> it beinge but the Dawninge of the Day , and they lying under
the Covert of a Hyll <$$paren> untill two or three of his Horsemen were
within the Reach of the Rebells , who charged them ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,69.150

and there the President's Secretary , called <font> Trewbrigg <$$font> ,
being one of the foremost , was slayne , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,69.151

and about a_Hundred Pounds of his Master's Money , which he caried with
hym , was taken from hym . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,69.152

The President perceving how he was intrapped , when others would have
retired , and would have hym returne , saying it was his best Safetie ,
considering his small Number , and the Multitude of the Rebells ; he
answered , That he would not do soe , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,69.153

for he had rather die fighting than runninge away ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,69.154

and therefore he bid them to charge Home with hym ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,69.155

and he was one of the foremost hymself <paren> as they say who were
<P_70> there , and are yet livinge <$$paren> so that he encountred with
one of the Rebells , and run hym with his Launce thro' a Skirt of Male ,
wherewith he unhorsed his Enemy , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,70.156

and stood over hym , redie to strike hym agayne as he arose .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,70.157

In the meane Time , there came in another Horseman of the Rebells Side
behynd hym , thincking to have run hym thorow behynd <paren> having
forced his Horse to lepe upon a Banke or Ledge to reach this Rebell ,
whom he unhorsed <$$paren> the other behynd being redie to punch the
President with his Staff overhand , as the Maner of the <font> Irish
<$$font> Charge is ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,70.158

but one <font> George Greame <$$font> , a valiant Gentleman , now a
Knight , and a Captain yet livinge in <font> Ierland <$$font> , came in
to rescew the President , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,70.159

and run the Rebell thorow before he could give the President that deadly
Blow which he purposed . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,70.160

With that they charged others afresh , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,70.161

and were surcharg'd themselves with Multitudes , havinge theyre Handes
full ; so that the President's Horse was almost spent ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,70.162

and yet he would not give over . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,70.163

But by the Report of some now livinge <paren> who were present , and
whose Estates and Condition <P_71> of Life deserve goode Creditt
<$$paren> The Lord President was left three Times that Morninge one of
the last in the Fielde , still encouraging his Men to come up and charge
anew , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,71.164

for he was once near taken , and hardly rescued , so that surely he had
been slayn or taken , if an extraordinary Accident <paren> or rather ,
as we may truly say , a Divine Appoyntment <$$paren> had not preserved
him . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,71.165

For at the last , one Captayne <font> Bowler <$$font> , with fower more
that made themselves redie as soon as they might , came after .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,71.166

And they appering upon the Toppe of the Hyll , <font> James Fitz-Moris
<$$font> supposed it had been Captain <font> Bowler <$$font> , with hys
Company , and the rest of the <font> English <$$font> Forces that were
coming with a Supplie . Whereupon <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> ,
ymmediatly made his Soldiers to retire , so that the President was
delivered from a very greate Danger , whereto he fell , by giving
Credite to a wandring Spiall , which made him more circumspect , and
less credulous of any such Reports or false Intelligence ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,71.167

and yet he ceased not to follow after the Rebells with his Forces , in
such Sorte , that shortly after he overtooke <P_72> <font> James
Fitz-Moris <$$font> , with his Companies of <font> Kerne <$$font> , near
a Bridge , and not far from a Wood Syde , where the Rebell finding
himself to closely pursued , that he could hardly escape without some
Slight , did present devise to send towards the President one , as it
were a Herald , with a white Cloth on the Top of a Spear , in token of
Parley ; which being perceved , the President imagining that he would
bring some Newes , stayed his Companies from marching forward , to know
what Message this strange Herald brought with hym , who to delay Time
offered certayn Conditions of Submission , but not such as the Lord
President expected , or would accept of . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,72.168

In the mean Time , the subtle Rebbell , <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font>
, closely conveyed his <font> Kerne <$$font> over the Bridge into the
Wood , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,72.169

and so escaped for that Time . Whereat the Lord President was
wonderfully displeased ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,72.170

yet nevertheles , this Devise did but a very little protract Time , and
exasperate the President with more Desier and Industrie to follow hym ,
and to finish the Warres , which were now almost at an Ende .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,72.171

For within small Time , <P_73> the President givinge the Rebells no rest
, or leaving them any Means of Mayntenance , did disperse the Power of
<font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> , PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,73.172

and made hym glad to separate his small Numbers , and to hide his Head ,
without any Strength or Number of Men to accompany hym . So that he was
forced to seek and sue for Pardon , offering to submit hymself to the
Queene's Mercy . Which at length the Lord President did consent unto ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,73.173

and <font> James Fitz-Moris <$$font> came to <font> Killmallock <$$font>
, where in the Church the Lord President caused hym to lie prostrate ,
taking the Poynt of the Lord President's Sword next to his Heart , in
Token that he had receved his Life at the Queene's Hands , by submitting
hymself unto her Mercy . PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,73.174

And soe he tooke a solemn Oath to be and continew a trew Subject unto
the Queene and Crowne of <font> England <$$font> , whereby the Province
of <font> Mounster <$$font> was much quieted , and maynteyned in as good
Peace as any Part of <font> Ierland <$$font> ; which the Lord
President's owne Letters , written to the Erle of <font> Warwick
<$$font> , and other his honorable Frends doth testifie ; the Copies
whereof are as followeth : PERROTT-1598-E2-P1,73.175

