<BEGIN_pettit-1625-e2-p1>

<P_21>

<heading:edcomment:XIV_VALENTINE_PETTIT_TO_RICHARD_OXINDEN>

Cosin Oxenden , With the remembraunce of my love I hartily salute you .
PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,21.4

I have nowe sent my Daughter Pettit a fewe smale Lopsteres taken
yesterday , PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,21.5

and my Desire was to have had more store of this morninges takeinge to
have sent them alive , that they might have the longer beene kept good ,
PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,21.6

but this northerly winde hath frustrateed my expectation therein .
PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,21.7

My Desire is that these may bee accepted as a Signe of my Love ,
PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,21.8

and so prayeing you to remember us to my Ladye , my Cozine your wife ,
my Daughter and the rest of our freinds , I commende you to God
PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,21.9

and rest , Your loveing kinsman Val. Pettit PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,21.10

Daundelion PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,21.11

this 25th of Aprill 1625 PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,21.12

At my last beeing at Denton it was desired that I should write to my son
Val. to provide and sende downe to Sandwich a Grave Stone for his
brother's Grave , with an Inscription according to that then geiven mee
in writeing , and that his Coate_Armes should bee likewise ingraven one
the same , which directions I gave him at his goeing from hence .
PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,21.13

He asked mee if the Spracklinge Coat should be joyned therwith <P_22> or
not , which I could not then resolve him of , PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,22.14

but promised to write to you to know your minde therein , which I thinke
were needelesse , unlesse some mention were made in the Inscription of
his match with one of that house PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,22.15

and then a pictchere of the Sprakling Armes wil@ @be needefull to bee
sent upp to him . PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,22.16

To his verie loveing cosin Mr. Richard Oxenden at his house neere
Denton geve these . PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,22.17

<heading:edcomment:XV_VALENTINE_PETTIT_TO_RICHARD_OXINDEN>

Cosin Oxenden , With the rememberance of my Love I hartely salute you
and the rest of our freindes with you . PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,22.19

God bee thanked <P_23> for my daughter's safe deliveraunce
PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,23.20

and God blesse that Little one PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,23.21

and make him his Servant , PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,23.22

and God sende us and all other his freindes much Joy and Comfort of him
. PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,23.23

I purpose <paren> God willing <$$paren> to bee with you one Sonday next
to perfourme my Daughter's Desire . PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,23.24

And so comendeing you to God I rest Your Loveing Freinde Val. Pettit
PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,23.25

Daundelion PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,23.26

this 9th of September 1625 PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,23.27

<P_24>

<heading:edcomment:XVIII_VALENTINE_PETTIT_TO_RICHARD_OXINDEN>

Cosin Oxenden , With the rememberaunce of my love I doe hartily salute
you PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,24.30

and I have now heerewith sent you a smale Roulett of <P_25> Northdowne
Ale which I praye you accept as a Signe of my Love and Token of my
thankfulnes for manie Curtesies received from you ;
PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,25.31

if it bee good I have my Desire , PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,25.32

but if it prove not well , I pray you blame the Brewer and not mee .
PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,25.33

And so prayeing you to remember me to my Ladye , my Cosin your Wife , my
Daughter Pettit and the rest of our Freindes , I commende you to God
PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,25.34

and rest Your Loveing Freinde Val. Pettit PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,25.35

Daundelion PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,25.36

the 5th of March 1625 PETTIT-1625-E2-P1,25.37

