<BEGIN_phenry-1685-e3-p1>

<P_336>

<heading:edcomment:4_MR._HENRY'S_FIRST_LETTER_TO_HIS_SON_ON_GOING_TO_GRAY'S_INN>

For Mr. Matthew Henry to bee left with Mr. Darrck at the Golden
Trumpet within Aldersgate . London . PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,336.4

Son Matthew , I received both your letters , the one on Friday , the
other yesterday , rejoycing to understand thereby the great <P_337>
goodness of God to you in your journey , & particularly that your
Company prov'd no worse , than it seemes it did , which wee were much
afrayd of . PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.5

I hope you wil now in the first place {COM:greek_omitted} make a
business of fixing somewhere , so as may best conduct to your great end
in going , wherein wee beg direction for you from Heaven , which
appoints the bounds of our Habitation ; PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.6

forget not the rules given you , PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.7

consult health & wholesomness , conveniency & honesty ,
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.8

your next I trust wil tel us you are so fitted .
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.9

The Omens you mention doe little affect mee , supposing them all true ,
which I much question , but perhaps they doe others ;
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.10

I would be now glad of a fuller account of the Substantials , as far as
they are yet or may bee known . PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.11

Wee remayn as yet , thankes bee to God , in the same circumstances of
Mercy in which you left us , wishing you some of our sweet aire , which
is now more then {it_is_perfumed} at other times of the year perfum'd ,
instead of your offensive town-smels , against which you have need to
arm your self , especially at first till you are us'd to them .
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.12

Your loving Father , P. H. PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.13

May 4. .85. PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.14

6. cl PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.15

<heading:edcomment:7>

Son Math. My jealousy over you was the effect of my dear love to you
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.17

and the account you give mee of your company comforts mee ,
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.18

for I apprehended & doe so stil , that your Danger in London wil lye
much that way , PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.19

theref. stil keep up your watch PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.20

& bee strong in the grace of J. X=t= . PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.21

for when you trust to sf. you are gone . PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.22

I like it wel that you spent last Tuesday as you did , only supposing
Dr. T.'s lecture to bee in the Aftern . PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.23

I understand not where you din=d= ; PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.24

if with Dr. Humph. it was not wel , PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.25

for fasting & esp. going so into Assemblyes may bee very prejudicial to
your health ere you are aware , PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.26

theref. by no means use it not . PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.27

I shal long to hear from your Aunt Ann , how you p~formed in that
journey , & what shee thinkes as to her coming hither ;
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,337.28

might you not cast to come down together , either in Coach or on
horseback , either from London <paren> you coming back from Oxf.
thither to have her company <$$paren> or from Oxf. I sending a double
Horse & <P_338> shee coming by Coach thither , or how else y=u= can
contrive it between y=u= , PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.29

for the truth is , I much desire to see her . PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.30

Our good God , that orders all , orders it for good to them according
{COM:preceding_word_"according"_emended} to his wil .
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.31

last night was bury'd in Whitch. Mr. Ralph Tushingham , who broke his
neck by a fal from his Horse , no body with him , betw. Wrenb. mil &
Bromhal Green , coming from an Ale house at Wrenb. where Mr. Star .
Mr. Widden & hee had drunk hard ; PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.32

there is talk that many are like to lose much by him ;
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.33

Mr. Corb=t= sends to mee to write to you to hearken them out a min=r=.
for Cockshute either at London or Oxf. PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.34

you know their circumstances & what a one wil please them .
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.35

Wee did not goe to Rhuabon on Wednesd. in regard of the discomposures
that were in the Neighborhood , which are now allay'd , upon occas. of
the D. of M@ @=s= invasion & the proclaming of him Trayt=r= which the
Post before brought tidings of ; PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.36

I keep home , PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.37

hear little , PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.38

& say less ; PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.39

'T@ @is our unhappiness , to bee suspected p.sons without cause & to be
expos'd accordingly , though quiet in the land ,
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.40

but God is righteous & wise & good , PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.41

& knowes how to bring glory to hims. & good to the remnant out of all
events whatsoever , even out of the eater meat , & out of y=e= strong
sweetness , & out of the lyon's carkass , honey .
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.42

This night wee expect to see Cos. Th. Bowker & his new Bride .
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.43

Have you not taken a turn at Whitehal yet , to see the nest in the
Ortyard , whence your poor Father came ? PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.44

your uncles either of them or your Aunts , would accompany you .
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.45

Commend us all to them ; PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.46

I write not , because by you they hear of us . PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.47

Wee hear that Chester Fayr is forbidden which is a disappointm=t= to
many landoners & others . PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.48

Your Mother gives you her Blessing , your Sisters their kind love .
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.49

I suppose by this time , you are in the Hal again in commons , where you
must bee careful to behave yours. with all soberness ,
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.50

for many eyes are upon you ; PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.51

you want your Supper-companion , your individuus comes there , to whom
we desire to bee remembered , beseeching the lord to direct your way in
everything & to keep you humble , & serious , & in his fear alwayes ,
which is the daily prayer of Yr. Affec. lov. Fa=r= P. H.
PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.52

Jun. 20 , 85 PHENRY-1685-E3-P1,338.53

