<BEGIN_proud-1636-e2-p1>

<P_120>

<heading:edcomment:102_MRS._MARY_PROUD_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Neve Oxinden , I being welleng to fullfell all your desires to perswaid
your brothar Rechard Oxienden to go oufer , because hee should not be
trubbelsom to you nor my sester , PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.4

but past my word to my Cosson Pettet for 5 pounds to send hem oufer and
let hem be weth me when hee plesed , PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.5

and for all my good well I find hee dus not euse me like a Gentelman and
well not pai my cosson pettet , all thought {COM:sic} hee said hee had
the monny : PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.6

but I ded not thenke I should haufe ben so unkindly delt weth_all by hem
, nor you , PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.7

for you wret to my Cosson Pettet to let hem haufe such monnys as hee ded
want PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.8

and you wret to me to get hem oufar so sone as I cold , be_fore his
monny was spent , which I ded : PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.9

it well make me haufe care heareaftar how I do cortesis for my frends ,
PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.10

for what I ded was for good well , PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.11

it may@ @be there may some haufe a_casion heare aftar ,
PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.12

but I haufe cond my leson . PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.13

I heare you haufe yet some monnys of hes in your hands and that hee hath
sent for it ; PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.14

if you well please to send that monny to my Cosson Pettet hee can pai
hemselfe : PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.15

for my on part if my Cosson Petet demand his monny of me I will put it
over to my landelord ho sweares hee well a_rest hem for it , for hes ell
eueseng {GLOSS:using} of hem , PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.16

and when hee is in preson and all hes monny spent hes frends well wesh
it had ben paid . PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.17

I do not care for 5 pounds had it ben to do hem good
PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.18

but to be cheted in thes mannar I well not if heare be right in London .
PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.19

I prai god bles hem and geufe hem gras to take some onnest cores that
hee be no shame to hes frends : PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.20

when hes monny is spent you should do well to kep some of hes monny in
your hand PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.21

for when hee comes to want I know no frend hee has to fly to but to you
. PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.22

my loufe to my Nese weth my best respect to yourself .
PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.23

I desir your kind ansar . PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.24

Good nevey do me so mych favor as when you ar at lesure to veufe
{GLOSS:view} my woods at wolleg and send me word what you thenke they
are worth a_n@ @akar ; PROUD-1636-E2-P1,120.25

if you well do me thes favor I <P_121> well be redy to do the like
cortesey for you and yours ; and to help me to a Chapman for them ,
PROUD-1636-E2-P1,121.26

for I purpos to cut som down the wenttar PROUD-1636-E2-P1,121.27

and you dewelleng so ny may do me a gret favor .
PROUD-1636-E2-P1,121.28

{COM:1636}

To my loving Nevey Master Hendry Oxienden at his hous in Wolleg parres
{GLOSS:parish} thes PROUD-1636-E2-P1,121.30

