<BEGIN_rcecil-1596-e2-p1>

<P_176>

<heading:edcomment:LXXV>

M=r= Edmondes : my L: being sicke , I haue imparted yo=r= letter of the
xiiij=th= of this moneth to her ma=tie= who well alloweth of yo=r= last
manner of dealing w=th= the king , both concerning the deliuerie of
Morlaix into her ma=tes= handes for a Retraict , according to y=e=
Contracte , as also the expostulating the kinges slownesse in all his
promises to be performed to vs ; wherin yo=w= may perceave her ma=tes=
scope , by the Copie of this her letter , in w=ch= Course , the Quene
still would haue yo=w= runne . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,176.4

Her may=tie= hathe also written vnto the king , a very ernest letter
concerning Maritime spoiles daylie Commytted , one vppon y=e= necke of
an other w=th=out ever the restitucion of any thing w=ch= is demaunded ;
RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,176.5

and therfore her may=tie= Commaundes yo=w= in any wise , <paren>
according to perticulers nowe sent yo=w= <$$paren> to deale w=th= the
king , and especiallie for y=e= greate Iniuries done to a good merchant
{SIC:merchans} of great credytt , and a good mayntainer of Sea services
, named M=r= Wattes . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,176.6

The rest of other profes <paren> if now you receaue them not <$$paren>
shall not <P_177> be Longe from yo=w= , wherbe yo=w= being well
instructed , may y=e= better drawe some perfecte Resolucon from him for
satisfaccon both of her may=tie= and her Subiectes .
RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,177.7

More I haue not at this tyme to write vnto yo=w= RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,177.8

but do wish yo=w= well , RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,177.9

and to my power will ever be ready to doe yo=w= any pleasure I can
{COM:do_you} . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,177.10

ffrom the Court RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,177.11

this xxvj=th= of September 1594 RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,177.12

Yo=r= very loving friende Ro: Cecyll . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,177.13

Yo=w= maie perceaue somewhat by the letter of her ma=tes= purpose ;
RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,177.14

Surely if the kinges fforces for Breste come not , her may=tie= will not
leaue a man behind in the Contrie . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,177.15

M=r= Edmondes RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,177.16

{COM:Addressed} To my very loving freind M=r= Thomas Edmondes her
Ma=tes= Agent w=th= the ffrenche kinge . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,177.17

<P_219>

<heading:edcomment:XCII>

M=r= Edmondes . The reason whie yo=w= haue not receaued anie letters
from hence , hath ben in regarde that yo=w= might be fullie aduertised
of all thinges passed vppon the departure of the ffr. Embassadour whose
staie hath been occasioned partly by his owne Indisposicon of health ,
as also <paren> and that especiallie <$$paren> to the intent he might
receaue aunswere to diuerse Proposicions made by him on the kinges
behalfe . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,219.20

Yo=w= shall therfore vnderstande that after the king by his letters vnto
him , <P_220> had required him to communicat his purpose of proclaming
warre against the king of Spaine <paren> Wherin he desired to knowe her
ma=tes= lyking <$$paren> even whiles shee was in consultacon of aunswere
to be made him , there came hether in y=e= instant , an other letter
w=th= y=e= publicacon in print . Whervppon yo=w= maie perceaue by y=e=
memoriall herew=th= sent yo=w= , in what sort y=e= Queene hath deliuered
her resolution , <paren> w=th= w=ch= even as it is there sett downe ,
and so deliuered to the Embassad=rs= hand for his Memoriall <$$paren>
y=e= Embassadour doth depart , w=th= her ma=tes= good fauour , as one
whose carriage here , hath wonne himselfe reputacon , both for zeale to
the king his master@ @s seruice , and honest desire to conserue all good
Intelligence betwene t=e= two Princes , so as he shall no sooner returne
then be welcome . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,220.21

Yo=w= shall perceaue also by ye manner of his declaracon , w=th=in what
boundes her may=tie= containeth herself , as a prince whose magnanimitie
is constant both to offend the king of Spaine , and defend her
Neighbours and Allies , as heretofore shee hath done , in greater
proportion then any Prince in Europe : RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,220.22

and yet when shee considereth some what of her owne estate , her
may=tie= intendeth not vppon the soddaine by anie direct promyse in
particuler to giue aduantage to anie to ingage her further then y=e=
reasone of her owne affaires will permytt . So as in yo=wr= deliuerie
yo=w= shall do well to obserue the generall scope of her ma=tes=
aunswere for w=ch= yo=w= are now prouided , if y=e= Ambassad=rs= Report
should vary from her ma=ties= {COM:preceding_word_"ma=ties="_emended}
meaning , who notw=th=standing that shee will not at this soddaine more
particulerlie promyse the ffrench king newe ayd ; yet is her care of him
to great , <paren> for want of support <$$paren> to suffer him at any
tyme to receaue the least preiudice RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,220.23

yo=w= shall also receaue herew=th= , certaine complaintes sent hether to
the Embassdo=rs= from y=t= Mar=all Daumont , against S=r=. Jo: Norreis
, whose returne from Brittaigne being dailie expected her may=tie= was
very desirous that in the ffr. Emb=r=. heareing he might be charged ,
as one , whose former seruices , assured her maytie to well of him , to
condemne him of any of theise imputations , RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,220.24

and yet such is her manner of respect of the king her brother , or any
of his , as in the hearing of iiij=or= of her Privie counsell <paren>
the Embassadour himselfe being present <$$paren> theise complaintes were
redde and vrged against him by me , and his Replycacon~s particulerly
heard to every article , the substance whereof I do heare send yo=w= ,
the originall vnder his hande remaining w=th= myselfe .
RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,220.25

What his aunsweres be , yo=w= will perceaue , RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,220.26

but for avoyding further Contestaco~n <P_221> except yo=w= heare any
reporte made , of partiallitie vsed by the Queene towardes her seruant ,
because she condemned him not , yo=w= shall not need to present in
writing this particularitie ; RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.27

ffor to tel yo=w= true , so much hath S=r= John Norreis conceaved
himselfe to be iniured , as he hath ben hardly contained from
Replycacons , w=th= as much bytternes as he hath ben charged ,
RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.28

and in his Originall w=ch= I haue heare , he hath giuen almost y=e=
flatt worde of a lye . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.29

But this I wryte to yo=w= but in pryvate , RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.30

and haue corrected in y=e= Aunswere sent to yo=w= .
RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.31

By yo=wr= last letters of the first of ffebruarie by M=r= Gorges man ,
her may=tie= perceaued the desastre hapned vnto him , wherof her
may=tie= hath had the lesse care , for that shee perceaued by the kinges
owne letter to his Embassadour , that he would not suffer him to remaine
vnrecouered , especiallie being sent only vnto him , and it being knowen
howe many waies in theise tymes of Composico~ns w=ch= he maketh w=th=
diuerse Leaguers , and by so many exchanges of Prisoners taken daylie on
other syde , he may w=th= small difficultye , free a gent , being
neither in seruice against y=m= nor able of himselfe to pay ij=e=
crownes Randsome ; Althoughe it is true that he is a younger brother of
a very good and honorable Race . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.32

So as for that matter her may=tie= requireth yo=w= to imploy yo=wr=selfe
most carefullie to procure from the king some present Remedye :
RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.33

and lykewise her may=tie= would haue yo=w= to deuise to send w=th= some
Trumpett somebody to see in what state he is , to learne vppon what
termes they stande and to comfort the gent : and yet w=th=out any such
thing in writing as <paren> falling into their handes may not make y=m=
set his Randsome higher . ffor w=ch cause I pray yo=w= let him knowe ,
that thoughe I forbeare to aunswere his letter , by another w=ch=
happely might fall into their handes : yet that he doe assure himself
both of the care her may=tie= taketh , and that among y=e= rest of his
friendes he hath none that shall more carefully imploy himselfe for his
Redemption then I will ; Wherin yo=w= may comfort him , that thoughe
this accydent hath ben in y=e= beginning infortunate , yet it may be
hereafter no smal motyve for her may=tie= to relieue him , and grace him
. RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.34

Yo=w= may let him knowe that y=e= Queene w=th= her owne hand , hath also
written to y=e= ffr. king for him . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.35

It is reported that y=e= Gouuerno=r= of Soyssons is a gent. of good
reputaco~n , RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.36

and therefore it is not to be doupted that any man that comes from yo=w=
may speake w=th= him , RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.37

for humanitie in theise cases never prohibittes it , when thinges fal
out by fortune of warres . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,221.38

I am <P_222> of opinion that ether this bearer or some other of y=e=
Postes there , of best discreco~n may be y=e= most fyt messenger in this
matter ; all w=ch= I leave to yo=wr= discreco~n .
RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,222.39

And so I Committ yo=w= to God . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,222.40

ffrom y=e= Corte at Lambethe RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,222.41

y=e= 22=th= of ffeb. 1594 . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,222.42

Yo=wr= loving friend Ro: Cecyll RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,222.43

yow may let him know y=t= his Man shall come to him when we heare from
yow of any Newes from him RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,222.44

{COM:endorsed} 20=th= ffebruarie 1594. RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,222.45

ffrom S=r= Robert Cecyll . RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,222.46

To my verie louing friend M=r= Thomas Edmondes remaining w=t= the
ffrench king for her {TEXT:missing_"her"} Ma=tes= Affaires
RCECIL-1596-E2-P1,222.47

