<BEGIN_record-1551-e1-p1>

<P_1,A1R>

<heading>

THE DEFINITIONS OF THE PRINCIPLES OF GEOMETRY .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1R.4

<$$heading>

Geometry teacheth the drawyng , Measuring and proporcion of figures ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1R.6

but in_as_muche as no figure can be drawen , but it muste haue certayne
bou~des and inclosures of lines : and euery lyne also is begon and ended
at some certaine prycke , fyrst it shall be meete to know these smaller
partes of euery figure , that therby the whole figures may the better
bee iudged , and distincte in sonder . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1R.7

<font> A Poynt or a Prycke , <$$font> is named of Geometricans that
small and vnsensible shape , which hath in it no partes , that is to say
: nother length , breadth nor depth . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1R.8

But as this exactnes of definition is more meeter for onlye Theorike
speculacion , then for practise and outwarde worke <paren> consideringe
that myne intente is to applye all these whole principles to woork
<$$paren> I thynke meeter for this purpose , to call <font> a poynt or
prycke , <$$font> that small printe of penne , pencyle , or other
instrumente , which is not moued , nor drawen from his fyrst touche ,
and therfore hath no notable length nor bredthe : as this example doeth
declare . {COM:three_points_omitted} Where I haue set .iij. prickes ,
eche of them hauyng both le~gth and bredth , thogh it be but smal , and
therfore not notable RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1R.9

Nowe of a great numbre of these prickes , is made <font> a Lyne ,
<$$font> as you may perceiue by this forme ensuyng .
{COM:series_of_points_omitted} where as I haue set a number of prickes ,
so if you with your pen will set in more other prickes betweene euerye
two of these , then wil it be a lyne , as here you may see
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1R.10

{COM:line_omitted}

and this <font> lyne , <$$font> is called of Geometricians , <font>
Lengthe withoute breadth . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1R.12

But as they in theyr theorikes <paren> which ar only mind workes
<$$paren> <P_1,A1V> do precisely vnderstand these definitions , so it
shal be sufficient for those men , whiche seke the vse of the same
thinges , as sense may duely iudge them , and applye to handy workes if
they vnderstand them so to be true , that outwarde sense canne fynde
none erroure therin . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1V.13

Of lynes there bee two principall kyndes . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1V.14

The one is called a right or straight lyne , and the other a croked lyne
. RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1V.15

<font> A straight lyne , <$$font> is the shortest that maye be drawenne
betweene two prickes . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1V.16

And all other lines , that go not right forth from prick to prick , but
boweth any waye , such are called <font> Croke lynes <$$font> as in
these examples folowyng ye may se , where I haue set but one forme of a
straight lyne , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1V.17

for more formes there be not , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1V.18

but of crooked lynes there bee innumerable diuersities , whereof for
examples sum I haue sette here . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1V.19

A right lyne . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1V.20

<font> Croked lines . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1V.21

{COM:figures_omitted}

So now you must vnderstand , that <font> euery lyne is drawen betwene
twoo prickes , <$$font> wherof the one is at the beginning , and the
other at the ende . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A1V.23

Therfore when soeuer you do see any formes of lynes to touche at one
notable pricke , as in this example , then shall you <P_1,A2R> not call
it one croked lyne , but rather twoo lynes : in_as_muche as there is a
notable and sensible angle by .A. whiche euermore is made by the
meetyng of two seuerall lynes . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2R.24

And likewayes shall you iudge of this figure , which is made of two
lines , and not of one onely . So that whan so euer any suche meetyng
of lines doth happen , the place of their metyng is called an <font>
Angle or corner . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2R.25

Of angles there be three generall kindes : a sharpe angle , a square
angle , and a blunte angle . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2R.26

<font> The square angle , <$$font> whiche is commonly named <font> a
right corner , <$$font> is made of twoo lynes meetyng together in fourme
of a squire , which two lines , if they be drawen forth in length , will
cross one an other : as in the examples folowyng you maie see .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2R.27

<font> A sharpe angle <$$font> is so called , because it is lesser than
is a square angle , and the lines that make it , do not open so wide in
their departynge as in a square corner , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2R.28

and if thei be drawen crosse , all fower corners will not be equall .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2R.29

<font> A blunt or brode corner , <$$font> is greater then is a square
angle , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2R.30

and his lines do parte more in sonder then in a right angle , of which
all take these examples . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2R.31

<font> Right angles . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2R.32

Sharpe angles . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2R.33

{COM:figures_omitted}

And these angles <paren> as you see <$$paren> are made partly of streght
lynes , partly of croked lines , and partly of both together .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2R.35

Howbeit in right angles I haue put none example of croked lines ,
because it would <P_1,A2V> muche trouble a lerner to iudge them :
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.36

for their true iudgement doth appertaine to arte perspectiue , and as I
may say , rather to reason then to sense . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.37

<font> Blunte or brode angles . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.38

{COM:figures_omitted}

But now as of many prickes there is made one line , so <font> of diuerse
lines are there made sundry formes , figures , and shapes , <$$font>
which all yet be called by one propre name , <font> Platte formes ,
<$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.40

and thei haue bothe <font> length and bredth , but yet no depenesse .
<$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.41

And <font> the boundes <$$font> of euerie platte forme are lines : as by
the examples you maie perceiue . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.42

Of platte formes some be plain , and some be croked , and some partly
plaine , and partlie croked . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.43

<font> A plaine platte <$$font> is that , which is made al equall in
height , so that the middle partes nother bulke vp , nother shrink down
more then the both endes . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.44

For whan the one parte is higher then the other , then is it named a
<font> Croked platte <$$font> . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.45

And if it be partlie plaine , and partlie crooked , then is it called a
<font> Myxte platte , <$$font> of all whiche , these are exaumples .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.46

<font> A plaine platte . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.47

A croked platte . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.48

A myxte platte . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.49

And as of many prickes is made a line , and of diuerse lines one platte
forme , so of manie plattes is made <font> a bodie <$$font> which
conteighneth <font> Lengthe , bredth , and depenesse . <$$font>
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.50

By <font> Depenesse <$$font> I vnderstand , not as the common sort doth
, the holownesse of anything , as of a well , a diche , a potte , and
suche like , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A2V.51

but I meane the massie thickness <P_1,A3R> of any bodie , as in exaumple
of a potte : the depenesse is after the common name , the space from his
brimme to his bottome . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.52

But as I take it here , the depenesse of his bodie is his thicknesse in
the sides , which is an other thyng cleane different from the depenesse
of his holownes , that the common people meaneth .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.53

Now all bodies haue platte formes for their boundes ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.54

so in a dye <paren> which is called <font> a cubike bodie <$$font>
<$$paren> by geometricians , and an <font> ashler <$$font> of masons ,
there are .vi. sides , which are .vi. platte formes , and are the
boundes of the dye . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.55

But in a <font> Globe <$$font> , <paren> which is a bodie rounde as a
bowle <$$paren> there is but one platte forme , and one bounde ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.56

and these are the exaumples of them bothe . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.57

<font> A dye or ashler . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.58

A globe . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.59

{COM:figures_omitted}

But because you shall not muse what I dooe call <font> a bound ,
<$$font> I mean thereby a generall name , betokening the beginning , end
and side , of any forme . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.61

<font> A forme , figure , or shape , <$$font> is that thyng that is
inclosed within one bond or many bondes , so that you vnderstand that
shape , that the eye doth discerne , and not the substance of the bodie
. RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.62

Of <font> figures <$$font> there be manie sortes ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.63

for either thei be made of prickes , lines , or platte formes .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.64

Notwithstandyng to speake properlie , <font> a figure <$$font> is euer
made by platte formes , and not of bare lines vnclosed , neither yet of
prickes . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.65

Yet for the lighter forme of teachyng , it shall not be vnsemely to call
all suche shapes , formes and figures , whiche y=e= eye maie discerne
distinctly . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.66

And first to begin with prickes , there maie be made diuerse formes of
them , as partely here doeth folowe . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3R.67

<P_1,A3V>

<font> A lynearie number . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3V.69

Trianguler numbres RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3V.70

Long square nu~bre RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3V.71

Iust square numbers RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3V.72

a threcornered spire . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3V.73

A square spire . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3V.74

{COM:figures_omitted}

And so maie there be infinite formes more , whiche I omitte for this
time , co~sidering that their knowledg appertaineth more to Arithmetike
figurall , than to Geometrie . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3V.76

But yet one name of the pricke , whiche he taketh rather of his place
then of his fourme , maie I not ouerpasse . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3V.77

And that is , when a pricke standeth in the middell of a circle <paren>
as no circle can be made by co~passe without it <$$paren> then is it
called <font> a centre <$$font> . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3V.78

And thereof doe masons , and other worke_menne call that patron , a
<font> centre <$$font> , whereby they drawe the lines , for iust hewyng
of stones for arches , vaultes , and chimneies , because the chefe vse
of that patron is wrought by findyng that pricke or centre , from whiche
all the lynes are drawen , as in the thirde booke it doeth appere .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3V.79

Lynes make diuerse figures also , though properly thei maie not be
called figures , as I said before <paren> vnles the lines do close
<$$paren> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A3V.80

but onely for easie maner of teachyng , all shall be called figures ,
<P_1,A4R> that the eye can discerne , of whiche this is one , when one
line lyeth flatte <paren> whiche is named the <font> ground line
<$$font> <$$paren> and an other commeth downe on it , and is called a
<font> perpendiculer <$$font> or <font> plu~me lyne <$$font> , as in
this example you may see , where .A. B. is the grounde line , and C.D.
the plumbe line . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4R.81

{COM:figure_omitted}

And likewaies in this figure there are three lines , the grounde lyne
whiche is A.B. the plumme line that is A.C. and the bias line , whiche
goeth from the one of the~ to the other , and lieth against the right
corner in such a figure whiche is here .C.B. RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4R.83

{COM:figure_omitted}

But consideryng that I shall haue occasion to declare sundry figures
anon , I will first shew some certain varietees of lines that close no
figures , but are bare lines , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4R.85

and of the other lines will I make mencion in the description of the
figures . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4R.86

<font> Paralleles , <$$font> or <font> gemowe lynes <$$font> be such
lines as be drawen foorth still in one distaunce , and are not nerer in
one place then in an other , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4R.87

for and if they be nerer at one ende then at the other , then are they
no parallels , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4R.88

but maie bee called <font> bought lynes <$$font>
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4R.89

and soe here exaumples of the bothe . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4R.90

<font> tortuouse paralleles . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4R.91

{COM:figure_omitted}

<P_1,A4V>

<font> parallelis . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.94

bought lines RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.95

parallelis circular : RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.96

Concentrikes . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.97

{COM:figures_omitted}

I haue added also <font> paralleles tortuouse , <$$font> which bowe
co~trarie waies with their two endes : and <font> paralleles circular ,
<$$font> which be lyke vnperfecte compasses : RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.99

for if they bee whole circles , then are they called co~centrikes ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.100

that is to saie , circles drawe~ on one centre .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.101

Here might I note the error of good <font> Albert Durer , <$$font> which
affirmeth that no perpendicular lines can be paralleles , which errour
doeth spring partlie of ouersight of the difference of a streight line ,
and partlie of mistakyng certain principles geometrical , which al I wil
let passe vntil an other tyme , and wil not blame him , which hath
deserued worthyly infinite praise . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.102

And to returne to my matter . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.103

an other fashioned line is there , which is named a twine or twist line
, RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.104

and it goeth as a wreyth about some other bodie .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.105

And an other sorte of lines is there , that is called a <font> spirall
line , <$$font> or a <font> worm line , <$$font> whiche representeth an
apparant forme of many circles , where there is not one in dede :
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.106

of these .ii. kindes of lines , these be examples .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.107

<font> A twiste lyne . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.108

A spirall {TEXT:spirail} lyne <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,A4V.109

{COM:figures_omitted}

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_1_here}

<P_1,C4V>

<heading>

THE .VII. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.114

<$$heading>

<heading>

TO MAKE A PLUMBE LYNE OR ANY PORCION OF A CIRCLE ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.117

AND THAT ON THE VTTER OR INNER BUGHTE . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.118

<$$heading>

Mark first the pricke where y=e= plu~mbe line shal lyght :
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.120

and prick out on each side of it .ij. other poinctes equally distant
from that first pricke . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.121

Then set the one foote of the co~pas in one of those side prickes , and
the other foote in the other side pricke , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.122

and first moue one of the feete RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.123

and drawe an arche line ouer the middell pricke ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.124

then set the compas steddie with the one foote in the other side pricke
, RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.125

and with the other foote drawe an other arche line , that shall cut that
first arche , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.126

and from the very poincte of the meetyng , drawe a right line vnto the
firste pricke , where you do minde that the plumbe line shall lyghte .
And so haue you performed th@ @intent of this conclusion .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.127

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.128

{COM:figure_omitted}

The arche of the circle on whiche I would erect a plumbe line , is A.B.C
. RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.130

and B. is the pricke where I would haue the plumbe line to light .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.131

Therfore I meate out two equall distaunces on eache side of that pricke
B . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.132

and they are A.C . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.133

Then open I the compas as wide as A.C . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.134

and settyng one of the feete in A. with the other I drawe an arch line
which goeth by G . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.135

Likewaies I set one foote of the compas steddily in C .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.136

and with the other I draw an arche line , goyng by G. also .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.137

Now consideryng that G. is the pricke of their meetyng , it shall be
also the poinct from whiche I must drawe the plu~be line .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.138

Then draw I a right line from G. to B. RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.139

and so haue mine intent . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,C4V.140

Now as A.B.C. hath a plumbe line erected on his <P_1,D1R> vtter bought
, so may I erect a plumbe line on the inner bught
{COM:preceding_word_"bught"_emended} of D.E.F , doynge with it as I did
with the other , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.141

that is to saye , fyrste settyng forthe the pricke where the plumbe line
shall light , which is E , and then markyng one other on eache syde , as
are D. and F . And then proceding as I dyd in the example before .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.142

<heading>

THE VIII. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.144

<$$heading>

<heading>

HOW TO DEUIDE THE ARCHE OF A CIRCLE INTO TWO =L PARTES , WITHOUT
MEASURING THE ARCHE . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.147

<$$heading>

Deuide the corde of that line into ij. equall portions ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.149

and then from the middle prycke erecte a plumbe line , and it shal parte
that arche in the middle . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.150

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.151

{COM:figure_omitted}

The arch to be diuided ys A.D.C , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.153

the corde is A,B.C {COM:sic} , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.154

this corde is diuided in the middle with B , from which prick if I
erecte a plumb line as B.D , the~ will it diuide the arch in the middle
, that is to say , in D . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.155

<heading>

THE IX. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.157

<$$heading>

To do the same thynge other wise . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.159

And for shortenes of worke , if you wyl make a plumbe line without much
labour , you may do it with your squyre , so that it be iustly made ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.160

for yf you applye the edge of the squyre to the line in which the pricke
is , and foresee the very corner of the squyre doo touche the pricke .
And than frome that corner if you drawe a lyne by the other edge of the
squyre , yt will be a perpendicular to the former line .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1R.161

<P_1,D1V>

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.163

{COM:figure_omitted}

A.B. is the line , on which I would make the plumme line , or
perpendicular . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.165

And therefore I marke the prick , from which the plumbe lyne muste rise
, which here is C . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.166

Then do I sette one edg of my squyre <paren> that is B.C. <$$paren> to
the line A.B , so that the corner of the squyre do touche C. iustly .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.167

And from C. I drawe a line by the other edge of the squire , <paren>
which is C.D . <$$paren> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.168

And so haue I made the plumme line D.C , which I sought for .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.169

<heading>

THE X. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.171

<$$heading>

<heading>

HOW TO DO THE SAME THINGE AN OTHER WAY YET RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.174

<$$heading>

If so be it that you haue an arche of such greatnes , that your squyre
wyll not suffice therto , as the arche of a brydge or of a house or
window , then may you do this . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.176

Mete vnderneth the arch where y=e= midle of his cord wyl be ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.177

and there set a mark RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.178

Then take a long line with a plummet , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.179

and holde the line in such a place of the arch that the plummet do hang
iustely ouer the middle of the corde , that you didde diuide before ,
and then the line doth shewe you the middle of the arche .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.180

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.181

{COM:figure_omitted}

The arch is A.D.B , of which I trye the midle thus .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.183

I draw a corde from one syde to the other <paren> as here is A.B ,
<$$paren> which I diuide in the middle in C .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.184

The~ take I a line with a plummet <paren> that is D.E , <$$paren>
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.185

and so hold I the line that the plummet B , dooth hange ouer C ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D1V.186

And <P_1,D2R> then I say that D. is the middle of the arche .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.187

And to th@ @entent that my plummet shall point the more iustely , I doo
make it sharpe at the nether ende , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.188

and so may I trust this woorke for certaine .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.189

<heading>

THE XI. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.191

<$$heading>

<heading>

WHEN ANY LINE IS APPOINTED AND WITHOUT IT A PRICKE , WHEREBY A PARALLEL
MUST BE DRAWEN HOW YOU SHALL DOO IT . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.194

<$$heading>

Take the iuste measure betweene the line and the pricke , accordinge to
which you shal open your compasse . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.196

The~ pitch one foote of your compasse at the one ende of the line ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.197

and with the other foote draw a bowe line right ouer the pytche of the
compasse , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.198

lykewise doo at the other ende of the lyne , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.199

then draw a line that shall touche the vttermoste edge of bothe those
bowe lines , and it will bee a true parallele to the fyrste lyne
appointed . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.200

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.201

{COM:figure_omitted}

A.B , is the line vnto which I must draw an other gemowe line , which
must passe by the prick C , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.203

first I meate with my compasse the smallest distance that is from C. to
the line , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.204

and that is C.F , wherfore staying the compasse at that distaunce , I
sette the one foote in A , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.205

and with the other foot I make a bowe lyne , which is D ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.206

the~ like wise set I the one foote of the compasse in B ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.207

and with the other I make the second bow line , which is E .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.208

And then draw I a line , so that it toucheth the vttermost edge of bothe
these bowe lines , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.209

and that lyne passeth by the pricke C , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.210

and is a gemowe line to A.B , as my sekyng was .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2R.211

<P_1,D2V>

<heading>

THE .XII. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.214

<$$heading>

<heading>

TO MAKE A TRIANGLE OF ANY .III. LINES , SO THAT THE LINES BE SUCHE ,
THAT ANY .IJ. OF THEM BE LONGER THEN THE THIRDE .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.217

FOR THIS RULE IS GENERALL , THAT ANY TWO SIDES OF EUERIE TRIANGLE TAKEN
TOGETHER , ARE LONGER THEN THE OTHER SIDE THAT REMAINETH .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.218

<$$heading>

If you do remember the first and seconde conclusions , then is there no
difficultie in this , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.220

for it in maner the same woorke . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.221

First co~sider the .iij. lines that you must take ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.222

and set one of the~ for the ground line , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.223

then worke with the other .ij. lines as you did in the first and second
conclusions . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.224

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.225

{COM:figure_omitted}

I haue .iij. lynes .A.B. and C.D. and E.F. of which I put .C.D. for
my ground line , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.227

then with my compas I take the length of .A.B. ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.228

and set the one foote of my compas in C , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.229

and draw an archline with the other foote . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.230

Likewaies I take the le~gth of E.F , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.231

and set one foote in D , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.232

and with the other foote I make an arch line crosse the other arche ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.233

and the pricke of their metyng <paren> whiche is G. <$$paren> shall be
the thirde corner of the triangle , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.234

for in all such kyndes of woorkynge to make a tryangle , if you haue one
line drawen , there remayneth nothyng els but to fynde where the pitche
of the thirde corner shal bee , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.235

for two of them must needes be at the two eandes of the lyne that is
drawen . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D2V.236

<P_1,D3R>

<heading>

THE XIII. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.239

<$$heading>

<heading>

IF YOU HAUE A LINE APPOINTED , AND A POINTE IN IT LIMITED , HOWE YOU
MAYE MAKE ON IT A RIGHTE_LINED ANGLE , =LY TO AN OTHER RIGHT_LINED ANGLE
, ALLREADY ASSIGNED . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.242

<$$heading>

Fyrste draw a line against the corner assigned , and so is it a triangle
, RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.244

then take heede to the line and the pointe in it assigned ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.245

and consider if that line from the pricke to this end bee as long as any
of the sides that make the triangle assigned ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.246

and if it bee longe inoughe , then prick out there the length of one of
the lines , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.247

and then woorke with the other two lines , accordinge to the laste
conclusion , makynge a triangle of thre like lynes to that assigned
triangle . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.248

If it bee not longe inoughe , thenne lengthen it fyrste ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.249

and afterwarde doo as I haue sayde before . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.250

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.251

{COM:figure_omitted}

Lette the angle appoynted bee A.B.C , and the corner assigned , B .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.253

Farthermore let the lymited line bee D.G , and the pricke assigned D .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.254

Fyrste therefore by drawinge the line A.C , I make the triangle A.B.C .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.255

Then consideringe that D.G , is longer thanne A.B , you shall cut out a
line fro~ D toward G , equal to A.B , as for exa~ple D,F .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.256

The~ measure oute the other ij. lines RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.257

and worke with the~ according as the conclusion with the fyrste also and
the second teacheth yow , and then haue you done .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3R.258

<P_1,D3V>

<heading>

THE XIIII. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.261

<$$heading>

<heading>

TO MAKE A SQUARE QUADRATE OF ANY RIGHTE LYNE APPOINCTED .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.264

<$$heading>

First make a plumbe line vnto your line apointed , whiche shall light at
one of the endes of it , accordyng to the fifth conclusion ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.266

and let it be of like length as your first line is ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.267

then ope~ your compasse to the iuste length of one of them ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.268

and sette one foote of the compasse in the ende of the one line ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.269

and with the other foote draw an arche line , there as you thinke that
the fowerth corner shall be , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.270

after that set the one foote of the same compasse vnsturred , in the
eande of the other line , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.271

and draw an other arche line crosse the first arche line , and the
poincte that they do crosse in , is the pricke of the fourth corner of
the square quadrate which you seke for , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.272

therfore draw a line from that pricke to the eande of eche line , and
you shall therby haue made a square quadrate .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.273

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.274

{COM:figure_omitted}

A.B. is the line proposed , of whiche I shall make a square quadrate ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.276

therefore firste I make a plu~be line vnto it , which shall lighte in A
, and the plu~b line in A.C , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.277

then open I my compasse as wide as the length of A.B , or A.C ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.278

<paren> for they must be bothe equall <$$paren>
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.279

and I set the one foote of th@ @end in C , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.280

and with the other I make an arche line nigh vnto D ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.281

afterward I set the compas again with one foote in B ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.282

and with the other foote I make an arche line crosse the first arche
line in D , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.283

and from the prick of their crossyng I draw .ij. lines , one to B , and
an other to C , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.284

and so haue I made the square quadrate that I entended .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D3V.285

<P_1,D4R>

<heading>

THE .XV. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.288

<$$heading>

<heading>

TO MAKE A LIKEIA~ME =L TO A TRIANGLE APPOINTED ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.291

AND THAT IN A RIGHT_LINED A~GLE LIMITED . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.292

<$$heading>

First from one of the angles of the triangle , you shall draw a gemowe
line , whiche shall be a parallel to that syde of the triangle , on
whiche you will make that likeiamme . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.294

Then on one end of the side of the triangle , whiche lieth against the
gemowe lyne , you shall draw forth a line vnto the gemow line , so that
one angle that commeth of those .ij. lines be like to the angle whiche
is limited vnto you . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.295

Then shall you deuide into ij. equall partes that side of the triangle
whiche beareth that line , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.296

and from the pricke of that deuision , you shall raise an other line
parallele to that former line , and continewe it vnto the first gemowe
line , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.297

and the~ of those .ij. last gemowe lyndes , and the first gemowe line ,
with the halfe side of the triangle , is made a lykeiamme equally to the
triangle appointed , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.298

and hath an angle lyke to an angle limited , accordyng vnto the
conclusion . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.299

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.300

{COM:figure_omitted}

B.C.G , is the triangle appoincted vnto , {COM:sic} which I muste make
an equall likeiamme . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.302

And D , is the angle that the likeiamme must haue .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.303

Therfore first entendyng to erecte the likeia~me on the one side , that
is {TEXT:missing_"is"} the ground line of the triangle <paren> whiche is
B.G. <$$paren> I do draw a gemow line by C , and make it parallele to
the ground line B.G , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.304

and that new gemow line is A.H . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.305

Then do I raise a line from B. vnto the gemowe line , <paren> which
line is A.B <$$paren> and make an angle equally to D ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.306

that is the appointed angle <paren> {COM:no_matching_close_paren}
accordyng as the .viij. co~clusion teacheth ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.307

and that angle is B.A.E . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4R.308

Then to procede , I doo parte in y=e= middle the said grou~d line B.G ,
in the prick F , fro~ which prick I draw <P_1,D4V> to the first gemowe
line <paren> A.H. <$$paren> an other line that is parallel to A.B ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.309

and that line is E.F . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.310

Now saie I that the likeia~me B.A.E.F , is equall to the triangle B.C.G.
And also that it hath one angle <paren> {COM:no_matching_close_paren}
that is B.A.E. like to D. the angle that was limitted .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.311

And so haue I mine intent . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.312

The profe of the equalnes of those two figures doeth depend of the .xli
proposition of Euclides first boke , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.313

and is the .xxxi. proposition of this second boke of Theoremis , whiche
saieth , that whan a tryangle and a likeiamme be made between .ij.
selfe_same gemow lines , and haue their ground line of one length , then
is the likeiamme double to the triangle , wherof it foloweth , that if
.ij. suche figures so drawen differ in their groundline onely , so that
the ground line of the likeiamme be but halfe the ground line of the
triangle , then be those .ij. figures equall , as you shall more at
large perceiue by the boke of Theoremis , in y=e= .xxxi. theoreme .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.314

<heading>

THE .XVI. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.316

<$$heading>

<heading>

TO MAKE A LIKEIAMME =L TO A TRIANGLE APPOINCTED , ACCORDYNG TO AN ANGLE
LIMITTED , AND ON A LINE ALSO ASSIGNED . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.319

<$$heading>

In the last conclusion the sides of your likeiamme wer left to your
libertie , though you had an angle appoincted .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.321

Nowe in this conclusion you are somwhat more restrained of libertie sith
the line is limitted , which must be the side of the likeia~me .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.322

Therfore thus shall you procede . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.323

Firste accordyng to the laste conclusion , make a likeiamme in the angle
appoincted , equall to the triangle that is assigned .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.324

Then with your compasse take the length of your line appointed ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.325

and set out two lines of the same length in the second gemowe lines ,
beginnyng at the one side of the likeiamme , and by those two prickes
shall you draw an other gemowe line , which shall be parallele to two
sides of the likeiamme . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,D4V.326

Afterward shall you draw .ij. lines more for the accomplishement of
your worke , whiche better shall be <P_1,E1R> perceaued by a shorte
exaumple , then by a greate numbre of wordes only without example ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.327

therefore I wyl by example sette forth the whole worke .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.328

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.329

{COM:figure_omitted}

Fyrst , according to the last conclusion , I make the likeiamme E.F.C.G
, equal to the triangle D , in the appoynted angle whiche is E .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.331

Then take I the lengthe of the assigned line <paren> which is A.B ,
<$$paren> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.332

and with my compas I sette forthe the same le~gth in the ij. gemow
lines N.F. and H.G , setting one foot in E , and the other in N , and
againe settyng one foote in C. , and the other in H .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.333

Afterward I draw a line from N. to H , whiche is a gemow lyne , to ij.
sydes of the likeiamme . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.334

thenne drawe I a line also from N. vnto C , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.335

and extend it vntyll it crosse the lines , E.L. and F.G , which both
must be drawen forth longer then the sides of the likeiame .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.336

and where that lyne doeth crosse F.G , there I sette M .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.337

Nowe to make an ende , I make an other gemowe line , which is parallel
to N.F and H.G , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.338

and that gemowe line doth passe by the pricke M ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.339

and then haue I done . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.340

Now say I that H.C.K.L , is a likeiamme equall to the triangle appointed
, which was D , and is made of a line assigned that is A.B ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.341

for H.C , is equall vnto A.B , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.342

and so is K.L , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.343

The profe of y=e= equalnes of this likeiam vnto the tria~gle , depe~deth
of the thirty_and_two Theoreme : as in the boke of Theoremes doth appear
, where it is declared , that in al likeiammes , whe~ there are more
then one made about one bias line , the filsquares of euery of them
muste needes be equall . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1R.344

<P_1,E1V>

<heading>

THE XVII. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1V.347

<$$heading>

<heading>

TO MAKE A LIKEIAMME = TO ANY RIGHT_LINED FIGURE ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1V.350

AND THAT ON AN ANGLE APPOINTED . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1V.351

<$$heading>

The readiest way to worke this conclusion , is to tourn that rightlined
figure into triangles , and then for euery triangle to gether an equal
likeiamme , according vnto the eleuen co~clusion , and then to ioine al
those likeiammes into one , if their sides happen to be equal , which
thing is euer certain , when al the triangles happe~ iustly betwene one
pair of gemow lines . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1V.353

but and if they will not frame so , then after that you haue for the
first triangle made his likeiamme , you shall take the le~gth of one of
his sides , and set that as a line assigned , on whiche you shal make al
the other likeiams , according to the twelft co~clusion ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1V.354

and so shall you haue al your likeiames with ij. sides equal , and ij.
like angles , so y=t= you mai easily ioyne the~ into one figure .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1V.355

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1V.356

{COM:figures_omitted}

If the right_lined figure be like vnto A , the~ may it be turned into
triangles that will sta~d betwene ij. parallels anye ways , as you mai
se by C and D , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1V.358

for ij. sides of both the tria~gles are parallels .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1V.359

Also if the right_lined figure be like vnto E , the~ wil it be turned
into tria~gles , liyng betwene two parallels also , as y=e= other did
before , as in the exa~ple of F.G . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E1V.360

But and if y=e= <P_1,E2R> right_lined figure be like vnto H , and so
turned into tria~gles as you se in K.L.M , wher it is parted into iij
tria~gles , the~ wil not all those triangles lye between one pair of
parallels or gemow lines , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2R.361

but must haue many , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2R.362

for euery triangle must haue one paire of parallels seuerall ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2R.363

yet it maye hapen that when there bee three or fower triangles , ij. of
theym maye happen to agre to one pair of parallels , whiche thinge I
remit to euery honest witte to serche , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2R.364

for the manner of their draught wil declare , how many paires of
parallels they shall neede , of which varietee bicause the examples are
infinite , I haue set forth these few , that by them you may coniecture
duly of all other like . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2R.365

{COM:figures_omitted}

Further explicacion you shal not greatly neede , if you remembre what
hath ben taught before , and then dilige~tly behold how these sundry
figures be turned into tria~gles . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2R.367

In the fyrst you se I haue made v. triangles , and four paralleles .
in the seconde vij. triangles and foure paralleles , in the thirde thre
tria~gles , and fiue parallels , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2R.368

in the iiij. you se fiue tria~gles & four parallels . in the fifth ,
iiij. tria~gles and .iiij. parallels , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2R.369

& in y=e= sixt there are fiue tria~gles & iiij. paralels .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2R.370

Howbeit a ma~ maye at liberty alter them into diuers formes of tria~gles
, RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2R.371

& therefore I <P_1,E2V> leue it to the discretion of the woorkmaister ,
to do in al suche cases as he shall thinke best ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.372

for by these examples <paren> if they bee well marked <$$paren> may al
other like conclusions be wrought . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.373

<heading>

THE XVIII. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.375

<$$heading>

<heading>

TO PARTE A LINE ASSIGNED AFTER SUCHE A SORTE , THAT THE SQUARE THAT IS
MADE OF THE WHOLE LINE AND ONE OF HIS PARTS , SHAL BE = TO THE SQUAR
{COM:sic} THAT COMETH OF THE OTHER PARTE ALONE .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.378

<$$heading>

First deuide your lyne into ij. equal parts ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.380

and of the length of one part make a perpendicular to light at one end
of your line assigned . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.381

then adde a bias line , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.382

and make therof a triangle , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.383

this done if you take from this bias line the halfe lengthe of your line
appointed , which is the iuste length of your perpendicular , that part
of the bias line whiche dothe remayne , is the greater portion of the
deuision that you seke for , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.384

therefore if you cut your line according to the lengthe of it , then
will the square of that greater portion {SIC:portior} be equall to the
square that is made of the whole line and his lesser portion .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.385

And contrarywise , the square of the whole line and his lesser parte ,
wyll be equall to the square of the greater parte .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.386

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.387

{COM:figure_omitted}

A.B , is the lyne assigned . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.389

E. is the middle pricke of A.B , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.390

B.C. is the plumb line or perpendicular , made of the halfe of A.B ,
equall to A.E , other B.E , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.391

the byas line is C.A , from whiche I cut a peece ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.392

that is C.D , equall to C.B , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.393

and accordyng to the lengthe of {SIC:so} the peece that remaineth
<paren> whiche is D.A , <$$paren> I doo deuide the line A.B , at whiche
diuision I set E . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E2V.394

Now say I , that this line A.B <paren> w=ch= was assigned vnto me
<$$paren> is so diuided in this point F , y=t= y=e= square of y=e= hole
line A.B , & of the one portio~ <paren> y=t= is F.B , the <P_1,E3R>
lesser part <$$paren> is equall to the square of the other parte ,
whiche is F.A , and is the greater part of the first line .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.395

The profe of this equalitie shall you learne by the .xl. Theoreme .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.396

<heading>

THE .XIX. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.398

<$$heading>

<heading>

TO MAKE A SQAURE QUADRATE =L TO ANY RIGHT_LINED FIGURE APPOINCTED .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.401

<$$heading>

First make a likeiamme equall to that right_lined figure , with a right
angle , accordyng to the .xi. conclusion , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.403

then consider the liekiamme , whether it haue all his sides equall , or
not : RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.404

for yf they be all equall , then haue you doone your conclusion .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.405

but and if the sides be not all equall , then shall you make one right
line iuste as long as two of those vnequall sides ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.406

that line shall you deuide in the middle , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.407

and on that pricke drawe half a circle , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.408

then cutte from that diameter of the halfe circle a certayne portion
equall to the one side of the likeiamme , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.409

and from that pointe of diuision shall you erecte a perpendicular ,
which shall touche the edge of the circle . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.410

and that perpendicular shall be the iuste side of the square quadrate ,
equall both to the lykeiamme , and also to the right_lined figure
appointed , as the conclusion willed . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.411

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.412

{COM:figures_omitted}

K , is the right_lined figure appointed , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.414

and B.C.D.E , is the likeia~me , with right angles equall vnto K ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.415

but because that this likeiamme is not a square quadrate , I must turne
it into such one after this sort , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.416

I shall make one right line , as long as .ij. vnequall sides of the
likeia~me , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.417

that line here is F.G , which is equall to B.C , and C.E .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3R.418

Then part I that line in the middle in the <P_1,E3V> pricke M ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.419

and on that pricke I make halfe a circle , accordyng to the length of
the diameter F.G . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.420

Afterward I cut awaie a peece from F.G , equally to C.E , markyng that
point with H . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.421

And on that pricke I erecte a perpendicular H.K , whiche is the iust
side to the square quadrate that I seke for ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.422

therfore accordyng to the doctrine of the .x. conclusion , of that lyne
I doe make a square quadrate , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.423

and so haue I attained the practise of this conclusion .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.424

<heading>

THE .XX. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.426

<$$heading>

<heading>

WHEN ANY .IJ. SQUARE QUADRATES ARE SET FORTH , HOW YOU MAIE MAKE ONE =L
TO THEM BOTHE . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.429

<$$heading>

First draw a right line equall to the side of one of the quadrates :
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.431

and on the ende of it make a perpendicular , equall in length to the
side of the other quadrate , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.432

then draw a byas line betwene those .ij. other lines , makyng thereof a
right_angeled triangle . And that byas lyne wyll make a square quadrate
, equall to the other .ij. quadrates appointed .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.433

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.434

{COM:figures_omitted}

A.B. and C.D , are the two square quadrates appointed , vnto which I
must make one equal square quadrate . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.436

First therfore I dooe make a righte line E.F , equall to one of the
sides of the square quadrate A.B . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.437

And on the one end of it I make a plumbe line E.G , equall to the side
of the other quadrate D.C . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E3V.438

Then drawe I a byas line G.F , whiche beyng made the side of a quadrate
<P_1,E4R> <paren> accordyng to the tenth conclusion <$$paren> will
accomplisshe the worke of this practise : RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.439

for the quadrate H. is as muche iust as the other two . I meane A.B.
and D.C . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.440

<heading>

THE XXI. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.442

<$$heading>

<heading>

WHEN ANY TWO QUADRATES BE SET FORTH , HOWE TO MAKE A SQUIRE ABOUT THE
ONE QUADRATE , WHICHE SHALL BE =L TO THE OTHER QUADRATE .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.445

<$$heading>

Determine with your selfe about which quadrate you wil make the squire ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.447

and drawe one side of that quadrate forth in lengte {COM:sic} ,
accordyng to the measure of the side of the other quadrate , which line
you maie call the grounde line , and then haue you a right angle made on
this line by an other side of the same quadrate :
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.448

Therfore turne that into a right_cornered triangle , accordyng to the
worke in the laste conclusion , by makyng of a byas line , and that byas
lyne will performe the worke of your desire .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.449

For if you take the length of that byas line with your compasse , and
then set one foote of the compas in the furthest angle of the first
quadrate <paren> whiche is the one ende of the groundline <$$paren> and
extend the other foote on the same line , accordyng to the measure of
the byas line , and of that line make a quadrate , enclosyng y=e= first
quadrate , then will there appere the forme of a squire about the first
quadrate , which square is equall to the second quadrate .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.450

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.451

{COM:figures_omitted}

The first square quadrate is A.B.C.D , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.453

and the seconde is E . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.454

Now would I make a squire about the quadrate A.B.C.D , whiche shall bee
equall vnto the quadrate E . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4R.455

<P_1,E4V>

Therfore first I draw the line A.D , more in length , accordyng to the
measure of the side of E , as you see , from D. vnto F ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.457

and so the hole line of bothe these seuerall sides is A.F ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.458

the~ make I a byas line from C , to F , whiche byas line is the measure
of this woorke , wherefore I open my compas accordyng to the length of
that byas line C.F , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.459

and set the one compas foote in A , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.460

and extend th@ @other foote of the compas toward F , makyng this pricke
G , from whiche I erect a plumbe line G.H , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.461

and so make out the square quadrate A.G.H.K , whose sides are equall
eache of them to A.G . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.462

And this square doth contain the first quadrate A.B.C.D , and also a
squire G.H.K , whiche is equall to the second quadrate E ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.463

for as the last conclusion declareth , the quadrate A.G.H.K , is equall
to bothe the other quadrates proposed , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.464

that is A.B.C.D , and E . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.465

Then muste the squire G.H.K. needes be equall to E , consideryng that
all the rest of that great quadrate is nothyng els but the quadrate self
, A.B.C.D , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.466

and so haue I th@ @intent of this conclusion .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.467

<heading>

THE .XXI. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.469

<$$heading>

<heading>

TO FIND OUT THE CE~TRE OF ANY CIRCLE ASSIGNED .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.472

<$$heading>

Draw a corde or stryng line crosse the circle ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.474

then deuide into .ij. equall partes , both the corde , and also the
bowe line , or arche line , that serueth to the corde , and from the
prickes of those diuisions , if you draw an other line crosse the circle
, it must nedes passe by the centre . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.475

Therfore deiude that line in the middle , and that middle pricke is the
centre of the circle proposed . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.476

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.477

{COM:figure_omitted}

Let the circle be A.B.C.D , whose centre I shall seke .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.479

First therfore I draw a corde crosse the circle ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.480

that is A.C . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.481

Then do I deuide that corde in the middle , in E ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.482

and likewaies also do I deuide his arche line A.B.C , in the middle , in
the pointe B . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,E4V.483

Afterward I drawe a line from B. to E , and so crosse the <P_1,F1R>
circle , which line is B.D , in which line is the centre that I seeke
for . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1R.484

Therefore if I parte that line B.D , in the middle in to two equall
portions , that middle pricke <paren> whiche here is F <$$paren> is the
verye centre of the sayde circle that I seke .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1R.485

This conclusion may other waies be wrought , as the most part of
conclusions haue sondry formes of practise , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1R.486

and that is , by makinge thre prickes in the circu~ference of the circle
, at liberty where you wyll , and then finding the centre to these thre
prickes , which worke bicause it serueth for sondry vses , I thinke meet
to make it a seuerall conclusion by it selfe .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1R.487

<heading>

THE XXIII. CONCLVSION . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1R.489

<$$heading>

<heading>

TO FIND THE COMMEN CENTRE BELONGYNG TO ANYE THREE PRICKES APPOINTED , IF
THEY BE NOT IN AN EXACTE RIGHT LINE . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1R.492

<$$heading>

It is to be noted , that though euery small arche of a greate circle do
seeme to be a right lyne , yet in very dede it is not so ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1R.494

for euery part of the circumference of al circles is compassed , though
in litle arches of great circles the eye can@ @not discerne the
crokendess , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1R.495

yet reason doeth alwaies declare it , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1R.496

therefore iij. prickes in an exact right line can not bee brought into
the circumference of a circle . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1R.497

But and if they be not in a right line how so euer they stande , thus
shall you find their com~on centre . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1R.498

Ope~ your compas so wide , that it be somewhat more then the <P_1,F1V>
halfe distance of two of those prickes . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.499

Then sette the one foote of the compas in the one pricke ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.500

and with the other foot draw an arche lyne toward the other pricke ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.501

then againe putte the foot of your compas in the second pricke ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.502

and with the other foot make an arche line , that may crosse the firste
arch line in ij. places . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.503

Now as you haue done with those two prickes , so do with the middle
pricke , and the thirde that remayneth . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.504

Then draw ij. lines by the poyntes where those arche lines do crosse ,
and where those two lines do meete , there is the centre that you seeke
for . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.505

<font> Example . <$$font> RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.506

{COM:figure_omitted}

The iij. prickes I haue set to be A.B , and C , whiche I wold bring
into the edg of one comon circle , by finding a centre co~men to them
all , RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.508

fyrst therefore I open my co~pas , so that they occupye more then y=e=
halfe distance betwene ij. pricks <paren> as are A.B. <$$paren>
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.509

and so settinge one foote in A. and extendinge the other toward B , I
make the arche line D.E . RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.510

Like wise setti~g one foot in B , and turninge the other toward A , I
draw an other arche line that crosseth the first in D. and E .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.511

Then from D. to E , I draw a right lyne D.H .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.512

After this I open my co~passe to a new distance ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.513

and make ij. arche lines betwene B. and C , which crosse one the other
in F. and G , by whiche two pointes I draw an other line , that is F.H
. RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.514

And bycause that the lyne D.H. and the lyne F.H. doo meete in H , I
saye that H. is the centre that serueth those iij. prickes .
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.515

Now therfore if you set one foot of your compas in H , and extend the
other to any of the iij. prickes , you may draw a circle w=ch= shal
enclose those iij. pricks in the edg of his circu~fere~ce ,
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.516

& thus haue you attained y=e= use of this co~clusio~
RECORD-1555-E1-P1,1,F1V.517

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2}

