<BEGIN_rhaddsr-1658-e3-p1>

<P_1>

<heading:edcomment:CAPTAIN_RICHARD_HADDOCK_TO_HIS_FATHER>

Dragon frig=t= in the Downes , RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.4

this 30th May , a=o= 1657 RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.5

Hon=d= Father , Sir , these I hope will congratulate yo=r= safe arrivall
at Leghorne , w=ch= God graunt may be with yo=r= health and well_fare ,
for the continuation whereof I shall ever pray . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.6

I can@ @not yet forgett my unhapynes y=t= soe short a tyme and small
distance hindred me the inioym=t= of seeing you before you gote out y=e=
Channell , seeing I made it my aime and bussines to performe it ,
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.7

but pleased God to frustrate me of my intended hapynes .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.8

I hope y=t= our next interview may be with the greater ioy and comfort .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.9

Indeed , when I returned to Dover , which was the Sonday following yo=r=
departure , I was not a little greived when Major Gen=ll= Kelsey tould
me y=e= unwellcome news of yo=r= being past by ; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.10

and himselfe was very sory when I gave him an acc=t= y=t= I mett you not
, RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.11

and tould me , if I had in y=e= least desired not to have gone for
Zeinhead , he would have ordered an other ship in o=r= roome .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.12

I was very thankfull for his respect he exprest towards yo=u= ,
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.13

but I knew not before y=t= I might be soe bould w=th= him as to desire
such a favor . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.14

Yo=u= saild hence y=e= Fryday evening ; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,1.15

and Satuarday , by 10 in y=e= forenoone , we were soe neare y=e= head of
Beachy y=t= noe shipp could or did passe <P_2> by us , but we spake
w=th= in hopes of meeting yo=u= . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.16

Surely the wind blew the harder to deny me y=t= hapynes .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.17

God in mercy goe alongst with yo=u= RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.18

and preserve yo=u= from the rage of unreasonable men .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.19

I shall not be wanting , as I am bound in duty , to make it my earnest
request to God for yo=r= preservation . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.20

My wife , in good health , presents her humble duty to you ,
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.21

and hath ever since bine very sorrowfull she stayed not behind to
present her duty and respects to yo=u= at yo=r= departure .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.22

Sir , litle of novelty ofers at present , only of great preparations for
y=e= fitting out seavrall great shipps , as y=e= Resolution , Naiesby ,
and Andrew , from Portsm=o= ; y=e= Tryomph , Victory , Vantguard , and
Entrance , from Chatham . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.23

I can@ @not give you an acc=t= , y=e= occasion or upon w=t= designe y=e=
shipps are prepared ; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.24

only suppose it may be to be in a readynes to defend our selves if any
treachorus act should be ofered by the Hollander , who will have 70
saile men of warr out very sodainely , as is certainely reported .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.25

I hope noe act of hostillity against us is intended .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.26

We have iust cause to feare y=e= worst ; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.27

and I think , as farr as I am able to aprehend , yo=u= will have little
occasion to trust or put any confidence in them abroad .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.28

God send us peace at home and abroad ; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.29

but , if these faile us , peace wth God will beare up our spirits in the
greatest dificulties y=t= doe atend our earthly pilgrimage .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.30

Sir , my wife desires yo=u= please , at yo=r= arrivall at Ven=a= , to
buy for her a foiled stone of the measure I conseave was given by her
sisters to Brother Andrew at Leigh ; as alsoe a pott ketle and 2 stue
panns , one lesser than the other ; as alsoe a jarr from Leghorne , with
w=t= other things nessesary for a howse , to y=e= value of 3 +L
{TEXT:+L3} in fower pound in all , which shall be thankfully repayed .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.31

I intend to wright yo=u= to Ven=a= , when I
{COM:preceding_word_"I"_emended} conseave you may ataine thither ,
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.32

and what ofers shall not be wanting of advizeing you .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.33

My Lord Protector hath denyed y=e= governm=t= of the Comonwealth under
y=e= title of King , RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.34

and since , it@ @s established to him in the title he now beares .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,2.35

<P_3>

I have not heard from home since yo=r= departure .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.37

My intire love with my wives remembred to our 3 brothers w=th= all o=r=
freinds on bord you . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.38

Brother Wm. , in health , pres=ts= his humble duty to yo=u= , w=th= his
love to his Bro=r= . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.39

My saluts to Mr. Holder ; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.40

and , with my most humble duty presented to yo=r= self , I remayne , Sir
, yo=r= ever lo. and obedient sonne till death , Richard Haddock .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.41

My wife being present desires , w=th= y=e= presenting her humble duty to
you , to subscribe herselfe yo=r= lo. daughter till death , Lydia
Haddocke . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.42

Since y=e= Wrighting y=e= above lynes I have rec=d= order to goe over
and ryde before Dunkerk , and to take y=e= comand of y=t= squadron now
riding there . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.43

This day is arrived hapy news , Gen=ll= Blake's burneing and sinking 16
saile of the K. of Spaine@ @s gallions and shipps at S=ta= Cruse , most
welcome and true . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.44

R. H. RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.45

To his hon=d=. father , Capt. Wm. Haddock , Comander of the shipp
Hanniball , these present , RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.46

Livorno . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.47

<heading:edcomment:THE_SAME_TO_THE_SAME>

Dragon frig=t= in Dunkirk Road , RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.49

this 15=th= June , a=o= 1657 RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.50

Hon=d= Father , S=r= , my most humble duty w=th= Bro. Wms. presented
unto you w=th= o=r= intire loves to o=r= loveing brothers and freinds
w=th= you . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,3.51

These only serve to advize yo=u= of our wellfare , hopeing and earnestly
praying to the Lord that y=e= like good health atends you y=t= , blessed
<P_4> be God , we injoy . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.52

These I hope will find you safe arrived at Leghorne .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.53

My last from the Downes gave you an acc=t= y=t= we were ordered over
hither to take the command of this squadron that now lyes w=th= us
before this place . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.54

Since o=r= arrivall heere , w=ch= is 14 dayes since , not anything of
action hath ofered worth yo=r= advice ; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.55

the good we doe heere is only to keepe there men of warr in y=t= are in
, and prevent those comeing in w=th= there prisses {CODE:sic} y=t= are
abroad . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.56

But they want not harbours in Holland to secure them and w=t= they ketch
from us . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.57

I conseave yo=u= want not letters of caution from yo=r= owners to be
carefull of trusting the Hollanders . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.58

I feare they will prove treacherous to there ingagem=ts= w=th= us in the
peace agreed betwixt us . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.59

They are almost ready to saile w=th= 50 or upward men of warr , besides
16 saile now in or Channell . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.60

My Lord Protector is not wanting to prevent there treacherous actions ,
if any be {TEXT:missing_"be"} intended against us .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.61

I conseave in 14 dayes we may have upwards of 40 saile , considerable
men of warr , in the Downes , to answer any atempt may be ofered by them
; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.62

and doe beleive both we and the squadron before Ostend may be called of
, as soone as we have any intelligence of there redynes to saile .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.63

All o=r= freinds in England , I heare , are in health .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.64

My wife still at Deall , RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.65

and stayes to accomp=a= Aunt Morgan to London ; my unkle now being in
the Downes , RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.66

and conseave may saile very sodainely , the wind presenting faire at
present . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.67

Sir , please at yo=r= arrival at Ven=a= to present my service and
respects to my Mr. and Mrs. Hobson , with Mr. Jno. Hobson , jun=r=.
my saluts ; as also to Mr. Jones and his wife .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.68

Sir , I have not else at present worth yo=r= advice .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,4.69

With my earnest prayers to Almighty God to preserve you out of the hands
of yo=r= mercyles enemyes , and send yo=u= a safe returne to the injoymt
of yo=r= <P_5> relations , for the happy accomplishm=t= whereof itt
shall be the earnest request of , Sir , yo=r= most affectionate
{SIC:affetionate} and obedient sonne till death , Richard Haddock .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.70

To his hon=d= freind Capt. Wm Haddock , Comander of the ship Hanniball
, these present , at Livorno . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.71

<heading:edcomment:THE_SAME_TO_THE_SAME>

Dragon frig=t= in Dunkirke Road , RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.73

this 26 Aprill , 1658 ; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.74

Monday RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.75

Hon=d= Father , S=r= , my most humble duty presented unto yo=u= w=th= my
deare Mother , Grandfather , and Grandm=o= , w=th= my loveing saluts to
my wife , bro=s= , sisters , and freinds . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.76

My last , of 18 instant , I sent by my Bro=r= Wm. , whome I gave leave
to goe to London ; w=ch= hope is safely arrived with you . Since w=ch=
, litle of acction here in these parts . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.77

The 21 instant , about midnight , heere escaped out a small pickeron of
4 or 6 guns out this habo=r= {COM:sic} , notw=th=standing our vigilancy
and indeavors for his surprizall , haveing o=r= boates in w=th= the
shore and a small frig=t= , who gave him chase and fired seavrall guns
at him ; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.78

but the darknes of the night prevented there long keepeing sight of him
, RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.79

and , notw=th=standing they made after him to the best of there
understanding , yet he got away RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.80

and noe sight of him at day light . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.81

Last Saturday heere went from Mardike Marshall d'Aumon , Duke of
Bouligne , with 13_hundred French souldiers , imbarqued in seaverall
vessells , RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.82

and gone to Oastend , before w=ch= place they arrived that night w=th=
the Vice Admirall . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,5.83

<P_6>

If the intelligence given me be true , we shall see a sodaine alteration
in Flaunders . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.85

It@ @s said y=t= , for a considerable summe of mony , the towne of
Ostend is to be delivered up to y=e= King of Fraunce by the Governor and
inhabitants of s=d= place , they being in such a sad condition by
reasone of the extreame burden y=t= lyes upon them .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.86

For security of performance there is a considerable man , who hath
confirmed the accord w=th= the K. of Fraunce , now w=th= Marshall
d'Aumon , that belongs to Ostend , who hath ingaged his life for
performance . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.87

I pray God they faile not in there undertakeings ;
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.88

and , although treachery be hateful and odious throughout the world ,
yet doubtles 't@ @will prove hapye for our poore traders when such a
considerable place as yt is , a neast of roages , shall be routed .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.89

If it proves efectuall , farwell most p=ts= of Flaunders this sumer .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.90

S=r= , please to keepe this intelligence to yo=r= selfe , least it
should come from me , being privately advized me .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.91

I hope , when our victualling is out , we shall come over to tallow ;
w=ch= God graunt , that I may not fayle of my earnest desire of seeing
you before you goe forth . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.92

I intend sodaynly to send to the Vice Admirall to know where we shall be
disposed by him or otherwise from the Comiss=rs= of Admiralty .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.93

S=r= , I have not other at present . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.94

W=th= my humble request to ye Allmighty for yo=r= preservation , I
remayne Yo=r= most loveing and obedient son till death , Richard Haddock
. RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.95

To his hon=d= freind Capt. Wm. Haddock , at his howse nere the
Newstaires in Wapping , these present , in London .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.96

<heading:edcomment:THE_SAME_TO_THE_SAME>

Dragon frig=t= in Dunkirke Road , RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.98

this prim=o= May , 1658 ; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.99

Satuarday RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.100

Hon=d= Father , S=r= , my last from this place was of 26th past , since
w=ch= not anything hath ofered . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.101

The great Mons=r= with the soldiers I gave yo=u= acc=t= of are yet
before Oastend with the Vice Admirall RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,6.102

have efected <P_7> nothing , not haveing had opertunity , these out
winds preventing there landing . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,7.103

God sending us shore winds , we shall quicklie see the result of the
action in hand . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,7.104

I sent to the Vice Admirall to desire he would order us into the river
to tallow and revictuall ; RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,7.105

but he wrights me , in regard he hath noe ship with him to place in our
roome , he will not w=th=out order from the Adm=ty= .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,7.106

Soe this day I have wrote to them , advizeing the neere expiration of
our victualling , also makeing it my humble request that we may come to
Chatham to tallow and revictuall ; w=ch= I hope they will graunt ,
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,7.107

but am dubious of my desired hapynesse of seeing you before you goe
forth . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,7.108

My humble duty presented to my deare Mother , Grandfather , and
Grandm=o= , Father and Mother Steevens , w=th= my loveing salute to my
wife , brothers , sisters , and freinds in gen=ll= ;
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,7.109

and , w=th= my most humble duty to yo=r= selfe , w=th= prayers to the
Allmighty for yo=r= continued preservation , I remayne , S=r= , your
most loveing and dutyfull sonne till death , Richard Haddock .
RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,7.110

Being hast , y=e= frig=t= under saile with a lee tyde , my wife must
excuse my not wrighting her at present . RHADDSR-1658-E3-P1,7.111

