<BEGIN_rich-1624-e2-p1>

<P_1.3,169>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCCI_LORD_KENSINGTON_TO_THE_DUKE_OF_BUCKINGHAM,_DETAILING_THE_PARTICULARS_OF_HIS_INTERVIEW_WITH_THE_QUEEN_MOTHER_OF_FRANCE>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<P_1.3,170>

My most deare and noble lord besides that joint Letter to your Lordship
from my collegue and my self , I think fitt to add this particular
accompt of what passed yesterday at Ruel betwixt Queen Mother and me .
Whither going to give her double thanks ; as for the libertie she had
given me of accesse at all tymes to Madame , to enterteyne her
henceforth with a more free and amorous kinde of language from the
Prince , so for having so readily condescended to an humble suite of
myne in the behalf of my Lo. of Carlile for a favorable letter for him
to your Lordship . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,170.6

She was pleased to oblige me further , in telling me she did it meerly
for my sake . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,170.7

I redoubled my thanks ; RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,170.8

and added , that I knew your Lordship would esteeme it one of the
greatest happinesses that could befall yow , to have any occasion
<P_1.3,171> offred wherby yow might witnesse how much yow adored her
Majesties royall virtues , and how infinitely yow were her servant ,
ready to receyve lawe from her whensoever by the least syllable of her
blessed lips or pen she should please to impose it .
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,171.9

And this I did , as on the one side to gratifye my collegue , who would
be infinitely sensible of the disgrace he apprehends in the misse of the
ribbon , being thus brought upon the stage for it , as also to help to
mesuage that your gracious favor which Mons=r= de Fiatt's letter to my
Lord represents unto him , by giving yow means withall to oblige this
sweet and blessyd Queen , who hath your Lordship in a very high accompt
, and would be glad to finde occasions how she may witnesse it .
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,171.10

The mention of my lord of Carlile upon this occasion refreshed her
remembrance of the late falling out betwixt the Cardinal and him ;
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,171.11

and though she were sufficiently informed of the particulars by the
Cardinal himself , yet she would needs have a relation from me , who in
a merry kinde of fashion obeyed her commaund , and salved every thing
the best I could . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,171.12

She would needs know my opinion of the Cardinal , who so magnified to
her his wisdome , his courage , his curtesie , his fidelity to her
service , his affection to our buisinesse , as pleased her not a little
. RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,171.13

Nether did my heart and my tongue differ : RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,171.14

for I esteeme him such . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,171.15

This discourse she left to fall upon a better subject , the Prince ;
concerning whose voyage into Spaine , <P_1.3,172> the censure of Italie
, she sayd , was , that two Kings had therin committed two great errours
; the one in adventuring so precious a pledge to so hazardous an
enterprize ; the other in so badly using so brave a guest .
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.16

The first Madame , answered I , may be excused from the end , the common
good of all Christendome , which then standing upon desperate termes had
need of desperate remedy : RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.17

the second had need of a better advocate than I , to putt any colour of
defence upon it . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.18

But his Highnes had observed as great a weaknes and follye as that , in
that after they had used him so ill , they would suffer him to depart ;
which was one of the first speeches he uttered after he was entred into
his Ship . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.19

But " did he say so ? " said the Queen . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.20

" Yes Madame , I will assure you , " quoth I , " from the witnesse of my
owne eares . " RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.21

She smiled RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.22

and replied ; " Indeed I heard he was used ill . "
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.23

" So he was , " answered I , " RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.24

but not in his enterteynement , for that was as splendid as that country
could afford it ; but in their frivolous delayes , and in the
unreasonable conditions which they propounded , and pressed , upon the
advantage they had of his Princely person . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.25

And yet , " smilingly added I , " yow heer , Madame , use him farre
worse . " RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.26

" And how so " presently demaunded she ? RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,172.27

" In that yow presse , " quoth I , " upon that most worthy and noble
Prince , who hath with so much affection to your Majesties service , so
much passion to Madame , sought this <P_1.3,173> alliance , the same ,
nay more unreasonable conditions then the other ;
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,173.28

and what they traced out for the breaking of the match , yow follow ,
pretending to conclude it ; RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,173.29

very unseasonably in this conjuncture of tyme especially , when the
jealousies that such great changes in state are apt to begett , are
cunningly fomented by the Spanish Embassador in England ; who vaunts it
forth that there is not soe great a change in La Vieuvilles particular
person , as there is in the general affections ; which did but follow
before the streame of his greatnes and credit : thus casting in the
Kings mynde the seed of doubts , whereunto the Conde d'Olivarez in
Spaine has been willing to contribute by this braving speech to our
royall master's Embassador , that if the Pope ever granted a
dispensation for the match with France , the King of Spaine wold march
with an army to Rome and sack it . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,173.30

" Vrayement nous l'en empescherons bien , " promptly answered she ,
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,173.31

" car nous luy taglierons assez de besengne ailleurs .
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,173.32

Mais qu'est-ce qui vous presse le plus ? " RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,173.33

I represented to her the unfitnesse of the seventh article <paren> even
qualified by that interpretation that it is <$$paren> and the
impossibility of the last , which requires and prescribes an Oath :
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,173.34

desired that the honor of the Prince , with whom she pretended a will to
match her daughter , might be deerer to her then to be balanced with
that which could adde nothing to their assurance
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,173.35

humbly besought her to employ her credit with the <P_1.3,174> King her
son , her authority to the ministers , for a reformation of these two
articles specially , and a friendly and speedy dispatch of all .
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.36

And if we must come to that extreamity that more could not be altred
then allready was , yet at least she would procure the allowance of this
protestation by the King our master when he should swear them , that he
intended no further to oblige himself by that Oath then might well stand
with the surety , peace , tranquillity , and conveniency of his state .
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.37

This she thought reasonable , RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.38

and promised to speak with the King and Cardinal about it .
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.39

" And if yow speake , as you can , replied I , I know it wil@ @be done ;
" though when all this is done I knowe not whether the King my master
will condescend so farre yea or not . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.40

Here I entreated I might weary her Majestie no farther , but take the
liberty she had pleased to give me in interteyning Madame with such
commandments as the Prince had charged me withall to her .
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.41

She would needs know what I would say . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.42

" Nay then ; " smilingly quoth I , RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.43

" your Majestie will impose upon me the like Lawe that they in Spaine
did upon his Highnes . " RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.44

" But the case is now different , " sayd she ,
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.45

" for there the Prince was in person , RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.46

heer is but his deputy . " RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.47

" But a deputy , " answerd I , " that represents his person . "
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.48

" Mais pour tout cela , " dit elle , " qu'est ce que vous direz ? "
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.49

" Rien , " dis je , " qui ne soit digne des orailles d'une si vertueuse
Princesse . " RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,174.50

" Mais qu'est-ce ? " <P_1.3,175> redoubled she .
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,175.51

" Why then Madame ; " quoth I , " yf yow will needs knowe , it shall be
much to this effect : that your Majestie having given me the liberty of
some freer language than heretofore , I obey the Prince his commaundment
in presenting to her his service , not by way of complement any longer ,
but out of passion and affection , which both her outward and inward
beautyes , the vertues of her mynde , so kindled in him , as he was
resolved to contribute the uttermost he could to the alliance in
question , and would think it the greatest happines in the world , if
the successe therof might minister occasion of expressing in a better
and more effectuall manner his devotion to her service ;
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,175.52

with some little other such like amorous language .
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,175.53

" Allez , allez . Il n'y a point de danger en tout cela , " smilingly
answered she , RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,175.54

" je me fie en vous ; je me fie en vous . " RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,175.55

Neither did I abuse her trust , RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,175.56

for I varyed not much from it in delyvering it to Madame , save that I
amplified it to her a little more , who drunk it downe with joy ,
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,175.57

and with a lowe curtesie acknowledged it to the Prince ; adding that she
was extreamly obliged to his Highnes , and would think her self happie
in the occasion that should be presented , of meriting the place she had
in his good graces . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,175.58

After that , I turned my speech to the ould Ladyes that attended ,
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,175.59

and told them , that sith the Queen was pleased to give me this liberty
, it would be henceforth fit for them to speake a sutable language :
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,175.60

<P_1.3,176>

lett them knowe that his Highnes had her Picture , which he kept in his
Cabinet , and fedd his eyes many tymes with the sight and contemplation
of it , sith he could not have the happines to behold her person . All
which and other such like speeches , she , standing by , quickly tooke
up , without letting any one fall to the grownd .
RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,176.62

But I feare your Lordship will think I gather together too much to
enlarge my Letter thus farre . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,176.63

But it is , that , by these circumstances your Lordship may make a
perfecter judgement of the issue of our negotiation , which I doubt not
but will succeed to his Majesties , his Highnes's , and your Lordship's
contentment , and so yield matter of triumph to yow , and infinite joy
to me . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,176.64

Your Lordship's most humble , most obliged , and most obedient servant
Kensington . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,176.65

Paris RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,176.66

Aug. 31 1624 st=o=._n=o=. RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,176.67

I beseech your Lordship excuse me that I present unto yow a strange hand
. RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,176.68

I meant your Lordship my owne characters : RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,176.69

but being hardly yet recovered from the paine of my head , which was my
late sickness , I found my self , even before I had finished a Letter
which I write unto his Highnes , alltogether indisposed and unfitt to
beginne another . RICH-1624-E2-P1,1.3,176.70

