<BEGIN_roper-1555-e1-p1>

<P_44>

And as fewe Iniunctions as he graunted while he was lorde
{COM:preceding_word_"lorde"_emended} chauncelour , yeat were they by
some of the Judges of the lawe misliked , which I vnderstanding ,
declared the same to Sir Thomas Moore , who aunswered me that they
should have litle cause to find fault with him therefore .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,44.3

And therevppon caused he one master Crooke , cheif of the six clerks ,
to make a docket contayning the whole number and causes of all such
Iniunctions as either in his tyme had alredy passed , or at that present
depended in any of the kings Courtes at westminster before him . Which
done , he invited all the Judges to dyne with him in the councell
chamber at westminster : where , after dynner , when he had broken with
them what complaintes he had heard of his Iniunctions , and moreouer
shewed them bothe the number and causes of euery one of them , in order
, so <P_45> plainely that , vppon full debating of thos matters , they
were all inforced to confes that they , in like case , could haue done
no other wise themselfes , Then offred he this vnto them : that if the
Iustices of euery courte <paren> vnto whom the reformacion of the rigour
of the lawe , by reason of their office , most especially appertained
<$$paren> wold , vppon resonable considerations , by their owne
discretions <paren> as they were , as he thought , in consciens bound
<$$paren> mitigate and reforme the rigour of the lawe themselves , there
should from thenceforth by him no more Iniunctions be graunted .
Wherunto when they refused to condiscend , then said he vnto them : "
Forasmuch as your selves , my lordes , drive me to that necessity for
awardinge out Iniunctions to releive the peoples iniury , you ca@ @not
hereafter any more justly blame me . " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,45.4

After that he said secreatly vnto me : " I perceive , sonne , why they
like not so to doe , ROPER-1555-E1-P1,45.5

for they see that they may by the verdicte of the Iurye cast of all
quarrells from them selves vppon them , which they accompte their cheif
defens ; ROPER-1555-E1-P1,45.6

and therefore am I compelled to abide th@ @adventure of all such
reportes . " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,45.7

And as litle leysure as he had to be occupied in the study of holy
scripture and controuersies vppon religion <P_46> and such other
vertuous exercises , being in manner contynually busied about th@
@affaires of the kinge and the realme , yeat such watche and payne in
setting forth of divers profitable workes , in defens of the true
Christian {COM:preceding_word_"Christian"_emended} religion , against
hereseies secreatly sowen abrode in the Realme , assuredly sustayned he
, that the Byshoppes , to whose pastorall cure the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} reformacione
{COM:preceding_word_"reformacione"_emended} thereof principally
appertained , thinking themselfes by his travaile , wherein by their
owne confession they were not able with him to make comparison , of
their duties in that behalf discharged , And considering that for all
his princes favour he was no rich man , nor in yearly revenues advaunced
as his worthines deserved ; Therefore , at a convocation among
themselfes and other of the clergie , they agreed together and concluded
vppon a some of foure or five_thowsand poundes , at the least , to my
remembraunce , for his paynes to recompence him . To the payment
whereof euery Byshop , Abbott , and the rest of the Clergye were , after
the rate of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} their
{COM:preceding_word_"their"_emended} abillityes
{COM:preceding_word_"abillityes"_emended} , liberall contributories ,
hoping this porcion should be to his contentation . <P_47> Whervppon
Tunstall , Bishopp of Dirham , Clark , Bishopp of Bath , and , as farr
as I can call to mind , Vaysey , Bishop of Exeter , repayred vnto him ,
declaring howe thanckfully for his travailes , to their discharge , in
godes cause bestowed , they reckned themselves bounden to consider him ;
And that albeit they could not , according to his desertes , so worthily
as they gladly wold , requite him therefore , but must reserve that only
to the goodnes of god , yeat for a small parte of recompense , in
respecte of his estate so vnequall to his worthines , in the name of
their whole convocacion , they presented vnto him that some , which they
desired him to take in good parte . Who , forsaking it , said , That
like as it was no small comforte vnto him that so wise and learned men
so well accepted his simple doings , for which he never intended to
receiue reward but at th@ @ands of god onlye , to whom alone was the
thanck thereof cheefly to be ascribed , So gaue he most hvmble thanckes
to their honours all for their so {COM:preceding_word_"so"_emended}
bountiffull and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} freindly
{COM:preceding_word_"freindly"_emended} consideration .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,46.8

When they , for all their importune pressinge vppon him , that fewe wold
haue went he could haue refused it , could by no meanes make him to take
it , Then besought they <P_48> him to be content yeat that they might
bestowe it vppon his wife and children . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,48.9

" Not so , my Lordes , " quothe he , ROPER-1555-E1-P1,48.10

" I had leuer see it all cast into the Themes , then I , or any of mine
, should haue thereof the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} worthe
{COM:preceding_word_"worthe"_emended} of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} one peny . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,48.11

For thoughe your offer , my lordes , be indeede very
{COM:preceding_word_"very"_emended} frendly
{COM:preceding_word_"frendly"_emended} and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} honorable
{COM:preceding_word_"honorable"_emended} , yet set I so much by my
plesure and so litle by my profitt , that I wold not , in good faith ,
for so much , and much more to , haue losst the rest of so many nightes
sleepe as was spent vppon the same . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,48.12

And yeat wish wold I , for all that , vppon condicion that all hereseyes
were suppressed , that all my bookes were burned and my labour vtterly
lost . " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,48.13

Thus departing , were they fayne to restore vnto euery man his owne
agayne . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,48.14

This Lord Chauncelour , albeit he was to god and the world well knowen
of notable vertue <$$paren> thoughe not so of euery man considered
<$$paren> yeat , for the avoiding of singularity , wold he appeare none
otherwise then other men in his apparell and other behaviour .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,48.15

And albeit outwardly he appeared honorable like one of his callinge ,
yeat inwardly he no such vanityes esteeming , secreatly next his body
ware a shirte of heare ; which my sister <P_49> Moore , a yong
gentlewoman , in the sommer , as he sate at supper , singly in his
doublet and hose , wearing them vppon a plaine shirte , without ruffe or
coller , chauncing to spye , began to laughe at it .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,49.16

My wife , not ignorant of his manner , perceyuinge the same , pryvily
told him of it ; ROPER-1555-E1-P1,49.17

And he , beinge sory that she sawe it , presently amended it
{COM:preceding_word_"it"_emended} . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,49.18

He vsed also sometymes to pvnishe his body with whippes , the cordes
knotted , which was knowen only to my wife , his eldest daughter , whom
for her {COM:preceding_word_"her"_emended} secrecy aboue all other he
specially trusted , causing her , as need required , to washe the same
shirte of heare . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,49.19

Nowe shortly vppon his entry into the highe office of the
Chauncelorshipp , the king yeat {COM:preceding_word_"yeat"_emended}
eftssoones agayne moved him to waighe and consider his greate matter ;
who , falling downe vppon his knees , hvmbly besought his highnes to
stand his gratious soueraigne , as he {COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended}
euer since his entry into his graces
{COM:preceding_word_"graces"_emended} service had founde him ; sayeng
there was nothing in the world had bine so greiuous vnto his harte as to
remember that {COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} he was not able , as
he willingly wold , with the losse of one of <P_50> his limbes , for
that matter any thing to finde wherby he could , with
{COM:preceding_word_"with"_emended} his
{COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended} consciens
{COM:preceding_word_"consciens"_emended} , safely
{COM:preceding_word_"safely"_emended} serve his graces contentacion ; As
he that alwaies bare in mynde the most godly wordes that his highnes
spake vnto him at his first coming into his noble service , the most
vertuous lesson that euer prince taught his servant , willing him first
to looke vnto god , and after god to him ; as , in good faith , he said
, he did , or els might his grace well accompt him his most vnworthy
servaunt . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,50.20

To this the kinge awneswered , that if he could not therein
{COM:preceding_word_"therein"_emended} with his consciens serue him , he
was content accept his service otherwise ; And vsing the aduice of other
of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} his learned councell , whose
consciences could well inough agre therewith , wold neuertheles
contynewe his gratious favour towards him , and neuer with that matter
molest his consciens after . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,50.21

But Sir Thomas Moore , in processe of time , seing the king fully
determined to proceede forthe {COM:preceding_word_"forthe"_emended} in
the mariage of Queene Anne , and when he , with the Bishopps and nobles
of the higher house of the parliament , were , for the furtheraunce of
that mariage , comaunded by the kinge to goe downe to the comon house ,
to shewe vnto them both what the vniuersities , as@ @well of other
partes beyond the seas as of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} Oxford
and Cambridge , had done <P_51> in that behalf , and their seales also
teatifyenge the same - All which matters , at the kings request , not
shewing of what minde himself was therein , he opened to the lower house
of the parliament - Neuertheles , doubtinge least further attemptes
after should followe , which , contrary to his consciens , by reson of
his office , he was likely to be putt vnto , He made sure vnto the Duke
of Norfolk , his singuler deere freind , to be a meane to the kinge that
he might , with his graces favour , be discharged of that chargeable
roome of the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} Chauncelourshippe ,
wherein , for certaine infirmities of his bodye , he pretended himself
vnable any longer to serve . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,51.22

This Duke , cominge on a tyme to Chelsie to dyne with him , fortuned to
find him at the Church , singing in the Quier , with a surplus on his
backe ; To whom , after service , as they went homeward together , arme
in arme , the Duke said : " God body , god body , my lord Chauncelour ,
a parish Clark , a parish clark ! ROPER-1555-E1-P1,51.23

you dishonor the king and his office . " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,51.24

" Nay , " quoth Sir Thomas Moore , smilinge vppon the Duke ,
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,51.25

" Your grace may not thinck that the king , your master and myne , will
with me , for servinge of god , his master , be offended , or therby
count his office dishonoured . " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,51.26

When the Duke , beinge therunto often sollicited , by <P_52> importunate
sute had at length of the king obtayned for Sir Thomas Moore a cleere
discharge of his office , Then , at a tyme convenient , by his highnes
apointment , repayred he to his grace , to yealde vpp vnto him the
greate seale . Which , as his grace , with thancks and prayse for his
worthy service in that office , courteously at his handes receaved , so
pleased it his highnes further {COM:preceding_word_"further"_emended} to
say vnto him , that for the service that he before had done hym , in
anye sute which he should after haue vnto him , that either should
concerne his honor <paren> for that word it liked his highnes to vse
vnto him <$$paren> or that should appertaine vnto his profitt , he
should find his highnes good and gratious Lord vnto him .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,52.27

After he had thus geuen ouer the Chauncelourshipp , and placed all his
gentlemen and yeomen with Byshoppes and noble men , and his eight
watermen with the Lord Awdley , that in the same office succeded him ,
to whom also he gaue his greate barge , Then , calling vs all that were
his children vnto him , and asking our advise howe we mighte nowe , in
this decay of his abilyty <paren> by the surrender of his office so
impaired that he could not , as he was wont , and gladly wold , beare
out the whole <P_53> charges of them all all himself <$$paren> from
thencforth {COM:preceding_word_"thencforth"_emended} be able to liue and
contynewe together , as he wished we should ; when he sawe vs silent ,
and in that case not redy to shewe our opinions to him , " Then will I ,
" said he , " shewe my poore minde vnto you . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,53.28

I haue bine brought vpp , " quoth he , " at
{COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} Oxforde , at an
{COM:preceding_word_"an"_emended} Inne of Chauncery , at Lyncolnes Inne
, and also in {COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended} the kings Courte ,
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,53.29

and so forth from the lowest degree to the highest ,
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,53.30

and yeat haue I in yearely revennewes at this present left me litle
aboue an_hundrethe poundes by the yeare , So that nowe muste we
hereafter , if we like to live together , be contented to become
contributaries together . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,53.31

But , by my councell , it shall not be best for vs to fall to the lowest
fare firste : ROPER-1555-E1-P1,53.32

we will not therefore descend to Oxforde fare , nor to
{COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} the fare of Newe Inne ,
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,53.33

But we will begin with Lyncolnes Inne diet , where many right
worshippfull and of good yeares do live full <P_54> well ; whiche , if
we find not our selves the first yeare able to maynetayne , then will we
the next yeare goe one steppe downe to New Inne Fare , wherewith many an
honest man is well contented . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,54.34

If that exceed our ability to , then will we the next yeare after
descend to Oxford fare , where many grave , learned , and auncient
fathers be contynewally conversant ; which , if our powre
{COM:preceding_word_"powre"_emended} stretch not to mayntayne neyther ,
then may we {COM:preceding_word_"we"_emended} yeat , with baggs and
walletes , go a begging together , and hoping that for pity some good
folke will geeue vs their charytye , at euery mans doore to singe <font>
salue Regina <$$font> , and so still keepe company and bee mery together
. " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,54.35

And whereas you haue herd before , he was by the kinge from a very
worshippfull livinge taken into his graces service , with whom , in all
the greate and waighty causes that concerned his highnes or the realme ,
he consvmed and spent with paynefull cares , travells
{COM:preceding_word_"travells"_emended} , and troubles
{COM:preceding_word_"troubles"_emended} , as@ @well beyond the seas as
within the realme , in effecte the whole substaunce of his life , yeat
with all the gayne he gatt thereby , being never wastfull spender
thereof , was he not able , after the resignacion of his office of the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} Lord Chauncelor , for the
maynetenaunce of him self and such as necessaryly belonged vnto him ,
<P_55> sufficiently to find meate , drinck , fuell , apparell , and such
other necessary charges . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,55.36

All the land that euer he purchased , which also he purchased before he
was lord Chauncelour , was not , I am well assured , aboue the valewe of
xx=ti= markes by the yeare . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,55.37

And after his dettes paid , he had not , I knowe , his chaine excepted ,
in gould and siluer lefte him the worth of one_hundreth poundes .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,55.38

And whereas vppon the holidayes during his highe Chauncelourshipp , one
of his gentlemen , when service at the church was done , ordinarily vsed
to come to my lady his wive@ @s pue , and say vnto
{COM:preceding_word_"vnto"_emended} her
{COM:preceding_word_"her"_emended} , " Madame , my lord is gone , " the
next holiday after the surrender of his office and departure of his
gentlemen , he came vnto my lady his wife@ @s
{COM:preceding_word_"wifes"_emended} pue himself ,
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,55.39

and making a lowe curtesye , said vnto her , " Madame , my lord is gone
. " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,55.40

In the tyme somewhat before his trouble , he wold talke with his wife
and children of the ioyes of heuen and the paynes of hell , of the lyves
of holy martires , of their greiuous martirdomes
{COM:preceding_word_"martirdomes"_emended} , of their marvelous patiens
, and of their passions and deathes that they suffred rather <P_56> then
they wold offend god ; And what an happie and blessed thinge it was ,
for the love of god , to suffer losse of goods , imprisonement , losse
of lands and life also . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,56.41

He wold further say vnto them that , vppon his faith , if he might
perceyue his wife and children wold incourage him to dye in a good cause
, it should so comforte him that , for very ioy thereof , it wold make
him merelye runne to deathe . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,56.42

He shewed vnto {COM:preceding_word_"vnto"_emended} them afore what
trouble might after {COM:preceding_word_"after"_emended} fall vnto him ;
wherewith and the like vertuous talke he had so longe before his trouble
{COM:preceding_word_"trouble"_emended} incouraged them , that when he
after fell into the trouble indeede , his trouble to them was a greate
deale the lesse : ROPER-1555-E1-P1,56.43

<font> Quia spicula preuisa {COM:preceding_word_"preuisa"_emended} minus
laedunt . <$$font> ROPER-1555-E1-P1,56.44

Nowe vppon this resignement of his office , came Master
{COM:preceding_word_"Master"_emended} Thomas Cromewell , then in the
kings highe favour , to Chelsey to him , with
{COM:preceding_word_"with"_emended} a message frome the kinge ; Wherein
when they had throughly commoned together : " Master Cromewell , " quoth
he , " you are nowe entered into the service of a most noble , wise and
liberall prince . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,56.45

If you will followe my poore advise , you shall , in your
councell_gevinge vnto his grace , ever <P_57> tell him what he owght to
doe , but never what he is able to doe . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,57.46

So shall you shewe yourself a true faithfull servant and a right worthy
Councelour . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,57.47

For if a {COM:preceding_word_"a"_emended} Lion knewe his owne strength ,
harde were it for any man to rule him . " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,57.48

Shortly therevppon was there a Comission directed to Cranmer , then
Arch-Bishoppe {COM:preceding_word_"Arch-Bishoppe"_emended} of Canterbury
, to determine the matter of the matrimony betweene the king and Queene
Katherine , at St. Albones , where , according to the kings mynd , it
was throughly determined : who , pretending he had no iustice at the
Popes hands {COM:preceding_word_"hands"_emended} , frome thenceforth
sequestered himself from the Sea of Roome , and so maried the Ladye Anne
Bulleyne ; which Sir Thomas Moore vnderstanding , said vnto me : " God
geeue grace , sonne , that thes matters within a while be not confirmed
with othes . " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,57.49

I , at that tyme seing no likelyhoode thereof , yeat fearing least for
his forespeakinge it wold the sooner come to pas , waxed therefore for
his so sayeing much offended with him . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,57.50

It Fortuned not longe before the coming of Queene Anne thoroughe the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} streetes of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} London frome the Tower to westminster
to her Coronation , that he receaved a letter frome the Bishoppes
{COM:preceding_word_"Bishoppes"_emended} of Dyrham , Bathe and
Winchester , requestinge {COM:preceding_word_"requestinge"_emended} him
{COM:preceding_word_"him"_emended} bothe to keepe them company <P_58>
frome the Tower to the Coronation , and also to take twenty poundes that
by the berer thereof they had sent him to buy him a gowne with ; which
he thanckefully receaving , and at home still tarienge , at their next
meting said meerily vnto them : " My lords , in the letters which you
lately sent me , you required two thinges of me , The tone whereof ,
sith I was so well content to graunt you , The t@ @other therefore I
thought I might be the boulder to denye you . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,58.51

And like as the tone , because {COM:preceding_word_"because"_emended} I
took you for no beggers , and my self I knewe to be no riche man , I
thoghte I might the rather fullfill , So th@ @other did put me in
remembraunce of an Emperour that had ordained a lawe that whosoever
comitted a certaine offence <paren> which I nowe remember not <$$paren>
excepte it were a virgine , should suffer the paynes of death , such a
reuerens had he to virginity . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,58.52

Nowe so it happened that the first comitter of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} offence
{COM:preceding_word_"offence"_emended} was indeed a virgine , whereof
th@ @emperour hearinge was in no small perplexity , as he that by some
example fayne wold haue had that lawe to have ben put in execution .
Wherevppon when his councell had sate long , solembly <P_59> debatinge
this case , sodenly arose there vpp one of his councell , a good playne
man , among them , ROPER-1555-E1-P1,59.53

and said ' Why make you so much adoe , my lordes , about so small a
matter ? ROPER-1555-E1-P1,59.54

Let her first be deffloured , and then after may she be devoured . '
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,59.55

And so thoughe your lordshippes haue in the matter of the matrimony
hitherto kepte your selves pure virgines , yeat take good head , my
lordes , that you keepe your virginity still . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,59.56

For some there be that by procuringe your lordshippes first at the
coronacion to be present , and next to preach for the setting forth of
it , and Finally to write bookes to all the world in defens therof , are
desirous to deffloure you ; ROPER-1555-E1-P1,59.57

and when they haue defloured you , then will they not faile soone after
to devoure you . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,59.58

Nowe my lordes , " quoth he , " it lieth not in my power but that they
maye devoure me ; ROPER-1555-E1-P1,59.59

but god being my good lord , I will provide that they shall neuer
deflloure me . " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,59.60

In Continewans , when the king sawe that he could by no manner of
benefittes winne him to his side , Then , loe , went he aboute by
terrors and threates to drive him thereunto . The begininge of which
trouble grewe by <P_60> occasion of a certaine Nonne dwelling in
canterbury , for her vertue and holines among the people not a litle
esteemed ; vnto whom , for that cause , many religious persons , doctors
of Divynity , and divers others of good worshippe of the laity vsed to
resorte ; who , affirming that she had revelations from god to geeue the
king warninge of his wicked life , and of th@ @abuse of the sword and
aucthoryty comitted vnto him by god , And vnderstanding my lord of
Rochester , Byshopp Fisher , to be man of notable vertuos livinge and
learninge , repaired to Rochester , and there disclosed to him all her
revelacions , desiring his advise and councell therein ; which the
Bishoppe perceyvinge might well stand with the Lawes of god and his holy
Churche , advised her <paren> as she before had warninge and intended
<$$paren> to goe to the kinge her self , and to let him vnderstand the
whole circumstaunce thereof . Whervppon she went to the kinge and told
him all her revelations , and so retourned home againe .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,60.61

And in shorte space after , she , making a voiage to the Nonnes of Sion
, by meanes of one master Raynolds , a father of the same house , there
fortuned concerninge such secretes as had bine revealed vnto her <paren>
some parte wherof seemed to touche the matter of the kings supremacie
and mariage , whiche shortly therevppon folowed <$$paren> to enter into
talke with Sir Thomas Moore ; who , not_withstanding <P_61> he might
well , at that tyme , without daunger of any lawe <paren> thoughe after
, as himself had prognosticated before , those
{COM:preceding_word_"those"_emended} matters were stablished by statutes
and confirmed by {COM:preceding_word_"by"_emended} othes <$$paren>
freely and saflye have talked with her therein ; Neuertheles , in all
the comunication betweene them <paren> as in proces it appeared
<$$paren> had alwaye so discreetely demeaned himself that he deserved
not to be blamed , but contrary wise to be comended and praised .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,61.62

And had he not bine one that in all his greate offices
{COM:preceding_word_"offices"_emended} and doings for the kinge and the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} realme , so many yeares together ,
had from all curruption of wronge_doinge or bribes_taking kept him self
so cleere that no man was able therewith once to blemishe him , or
{COM:preceding_word_"or"_emended} make
{COM:preceding_word_"make"_emended} any
{COM:preceding_word_"any"_emended} iust
{COM:preceding_word_"iust"_emended} quarrell
{COM:preceding_word_"quarrell"_emended} agaynst
{COM:preceding_word_"agaynst"_emended} him
{COM:preceding_word_"him"_emended} , Itt wold , without doubte , in this
troubleous tyme of the kings indignation towardes him , haue bine
deapely laid to his charge , and of the kings highnes most favorably
accepted , As in the case of one Parnell it most manifestly appeared ;
against whom , because Sir Thomas Moore , while he was Lord Chauncelour
, at the suite of one Vaghen , his aduersary , had made a decree , This
Parnell to his {COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended} highnes most
greiuously complayned that Sir Thomas Moore , for makinge the same
{COM:preceding_word_"same"_emended} decree , had of the same
{COM:preceding_word_"same"_emended} Vaughen <P_62> <paren> vnable for
the gowte to travaile abrode himself <$$paren> by th@ @andes of his wife
taken a faire greate gilte Cuppe for a bribe . Who thervppon , by the
kings apointment , being called before the whole Councell , where that
matter was haynously laid to his chardge , forthwith confessed that
forasmuch as that Cuppe was , longe after the foresaid
{COM:preceding_word_"foresaid"_emended} decree , brought him for a
newyeares gyfte , he , vppon her importunate pressinge vppon him
therefore , of curtesye refused not to receaue it .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,62.63

Then the Lord of Wiltshire <paren> for hatred of his religion preferrer
of this sute <$$paren> with muche reioycinge said vnto the Lordes , " Lo
, did I not tell you , my lordes , that you shoulde fynd this matter
trewe ? " Wherevppon Sir Thomas Moore desired their lordships that as
they had courteously herd him tell th@ @one parte of his tale , so they
wold vouchsafe of their honors indifferently to hear th@ @other . After
which obtayned , he further declared vnto them That , albeit he had
indeed , with much worke , receaved that cuppe , yeat immediately
theruppon he caused his butler to fill it with wyne , and of that cupp
drancke to her ; and that when he {COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} had
{COM:preceding_word_"had"_emended} soe
{COM:preceding_word_"soe"_emended} donne
{COM:preceding_word_"donne"_emended} , and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} she pleadged him , then as freely as
her husband had geuen it to him , Euen so freely gave he <P_63> the same
vnto her agayne , to geeue vnto her husband for his neweyeares gifte ;
which , at his instant requeste , thoughe muche against her will , at
length yeat she was fayne {COM:preceding_word_"fayne"_emended} to
receave , as her self , and certayne other there , presently before them
deposed . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,63.64

Thus was the greate mountayne turned scant to a litle molehill .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,63.65

So I remember that at an other tyme , vppon a newe yeares day , there
came to him one mistres Crocker , a Rich widowe , for whom , with no
small paine , he had made a decree in the Chauncery against the Lord of
Arondell , to present him with a payre of gloves , and fourty poundes in
Angels in them , for a newe yeares gifte . Of whom he thancfully
receyuing the gloues , but refucing the money , said vnto her : "
Mistres , since it were againste good manners
{COM:preceding_word_"manners"_emended} to forsake a gentlewomans newe
yeares gifte , I am content to take your gloues , ROPER-1555-E1-P1,63.66

but as for your money I vtterley refuse . " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,63.67

So , muche against her mynde , inforced he her to take her gold againe .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,63.68

And one master Gresham likewise , having at
{COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} the same tyme a cause depending in the
Chauncerye before {COM:preceding_word_"before"_emended} him , sent him
for a newe yeares gifte a faire gilted cuppe , the fashion whereof he
very well likinge , caused one of <P_64> his owne <paren> thoughe not in
his fantasie of so good a fashion , yeat better in valewe <$$paren> to
be browght him {COM:preceding_word_"him"_emended} out of his chamber ,
which he willed the messenger , in recompens , to deliuer to his master
; ROPER-1555-E1-P1,64.69

and vnder other condicione {COM:preceding_word_"condicione"_emended}
wold he in no wise receave it . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,64.70

Many things moe of like effect , for the declaration of his innocency
and cleerenes from all corruption or evill affection , could I heare
reherse besides ; which , for tedioussnes omyttynge , I refer to the
readers by these fewe before remembred examples , with their owne
iudgmentes wiselye to weighe and consider the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} same
{COM:preceding_word_"same"_emended} . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,64.71

Att the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} Parliament folowing , was
there put into the lordes house a bill to attaint the Nonne and divers
other religious persons of highe treson , and the Bishoppe of Rochester
, Sir Thomas Moore , and certaine others of misprision of treason ; The
kinge presupposinge of likelihood that this bill would be to Sir Thomas
Moore so troublous and terrible that it wold force him to relent and
condiscend to his request - wherein his grace was much deceued . To
which bill Sir Thomas Moore was a suter personally to be receaved in his
owne defens to make awnswer . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,64.72

But the kinge , not likinge that , assigned <P_65> the Bishoppe of
Canturburye , the lorde Chaunceloure , the Duke of Norffolke , and
master Cromwell , at a day and place appointed , to call Sir Thomas
Moore before them . At which tyme I , thincking that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} I had a good opportunitye , ernestly
advised him to labour vnto those Lordes for the helpe of his discharge
out of that {COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} Parliament bill . Who
awneswered me he wold . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,65.73

And at his cominge before them , accordinge to theyr appointment , they
intertayned him very freindly , wyllinge him to sitte downe with them ,
which in no wise he wold . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,65.74

Then began the Lord Chauncelour to declare vnto him howe many wayes the
kinge had shewed his love and favor towards hym ; howe faine he would
have had hym contynewe in his office ; howe glad he would haue bine to
haue heaped more benefittes vppon him ; and finally howe he could aske
no worldly honour nor profitte at his highnes handes that were likely to
be denyed him ; hopinge , by the declaracion of the kings kindnes and
affection towardes him , to provoke him to recompence his grace with the
like agayne ; and vnto those things that the parliament , the Bishops ,
and vniuersities had already passed , to adde his consente .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,65.75

To this Sir Thomas Moore mildlye made awneswer , sayenge : " No man
lyuinge is there , my lordes , that <P_66> woulde with better will doe
the thinge that shoulde be acceptable to the kings highnes then I ,
which must needes confes his manyfold goodnes and bountifull benefites
most benignely bestowed on me . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,66.76

Howebeit I veryly hoped that I should neuer have herd of this matter
more , consideringe that I haue , from tyme to tyme , alwayes from the
beginninge , so plainely and truly declared my minde unto his grace ,
which his highnes to me euer seemed , like a most gracious prince , very
well to accepte , neuer myndinge , as he said , to molest me more
theerewith ; Since which tyme any further thinge that was able to move
me to any {COM:preceding_word_"any"_emended} chainge coulde I neuer find
; ROPER-1555-E1-P1,66.77

And if I could , there is none in all the world that would
{COM:preceding_word_"would"_emended} haue bine gladder of it then I . "
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,66.78

Many things more were there of like sorte
{COM:preceding_word_"sorte"_emended} vttered on bothe sides .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,66.79

But in the ende , when they sawe they could by no manner of perswasions
remove him from his former determinacion , Then began they more
terriblie to touche him ; tellinge him that the kinges highnes had given
them in Commaundment , yf they coulde by noe gentellnes winne him , in
his name with his greate ingratitude to charge him ; That never was
there servaunate to his soveraigne so villaynous , nor subiecte to
<P_67> his prince so trayterous as he ; ROPER-1555-E1-P1,67.80

For he , by his subtill synister sleyghtes moste vnnaturallie procuring
and provokinge him to sett forth a booke of the <font> Assertion of the
seuen sacramentes <$$font> and mainetaynaunce
{COM:preceding_word_"mainetaynaunce"_emended} of the Popes aucthorytie ,
had caused him , to his dishonour througheoute all Christendome , to put
a sword in to the Popes handes to fight against hime selfe .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,67.81

When they had thus layd forth all the terrors they coulde ymagine
againste him : " My lordes , " quothe he , " these terrours be
{COM:preceding_word_"be"_emended} argumentes for Children , and not for
me . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,67.82

But to aunswere that wherewith you doe chifly birden me , I beleave the
kinges highnes of his honour will neuer lay that to my charge ;
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,67.83

For none is there that can in that pointe say in my excuse more then his
highnes himself , who right well knoweth that I neuer was procurer nor
councelour of his maiestye thereunto ; But after it was finished , by
his graces apointment and consent of the makers of the same , only a
sorter out and placer of the principall matters therin contayned .
Wherein when I founde the Popes aucthority highly aduaunced , and with
stronge argumentes mightlye defended , I said vnto his grace : ' I must
put your highnes in remembraunce of one thinge , ROPER-1555-E1-P1,67.84

and that is this . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,67.85

<P_68>

The Pope , as your grace knowethe , is a prince as you are , and in
league with all other Christian princes . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,68.87

It may hereafter so fall owte that your grace and he may varye vppon
some pointes of the league , whereuppon may growe breach of amitye and
warre betweene you bothe . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,68.88

I thincke it best therefore that that place be amended , and his
aucthority more sclenderly touched . ' ROPER-1555-E1-P1,68.89

' Nay , ' quoth his grace , ' that shall it not .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,68.90

We are so muche bounden vnto the Sea of Room that we can@ @not doe to
muche Honor vnto it . ' ROPER-1555-E1-P1,68.91

Then did I further put him in remembraunce of the statute of Premunire ,
whereby a good parte of the Popes pastoral cure here was pared away .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,68.92

To that awneswered his highnes : ' Whatsoever impediment be to the
contrary , we will set forthe that aucthoritye to the vttermost .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,68.93

For we receaued from that Sea our crowne Imperiall ' ; which , till his
grace with his owne mouthe tould it me , I neuer heard of before . So
that I trust , when his grace shal@ @be once
{COM:preceding_word_"once"_emended} truly informed of this , and call to
his gratious remembraunce my doinge in that behalf , his highnes will
neuer speake of it more , but cleere me thoroughly therein himself . "
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,68.94

And thus displeasauntlye departed they . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,68.95

Then tooke Sir Thomas Moore his boate towardes his house at Chelsey ,
wherein by the waye he was very <P_69> merye , ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.96

and for that was I nothinge sorye , hopinge that he had gott himself
discharged out of the parliament bill . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.97

When he was landed {COM:preceding_word_"landed"_emended} and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} come home , then walked we twayne
alone into his garden together ; where I , desirous to knowe howe he had
sped , said : " I truste , Sir , that all is well because you be so
meerye . " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.98

" It is so indeede , sonne Roper , I thanck god , " quothe he .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.99

" Are you then put out of the parliament bill ? " said I .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.100

" By my trothe , sonne Roper , " quothe he , " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.101

I never remembred it . " " Neuer remembred it , Sir , " sayd I ,
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.102

" A case that toucheth your self so neere , and vs all for your sake .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.103

I am sory to heare it ; ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.104

For I veryly trusted , when I sawe you so meerye , that all had bine
well . " ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.105

Then said he : " Wilte thow knowe , sonne Roper , why I was so meery ?
" ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.106

" That wold I gladly , Sir , " quoth I . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,69.107

" In good faithe , I reioyced , sonne , " quothe he , " that I had geuen
the divell a fowle fall , and that with those Lordes I had gone so farre
, as without greate shame I could never goe back agayne . " <P_70> At
which wordes waxed I very sad , ROPER-1555-E1-P1,70.108

for thoughe himself liked it well , yet liked it me but a litle .
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,70.109

Nowe vppon the reporte made by the Lord Chauncelour and the other Lordes
to the kinge of all their whole discourse had with Sir Thomas Moore ,
The kinge was so higlye {COM:preceding_word_"higlye"_emended} offended
with him , that he plainely told them he was fully determined that th@
@aforesaid parliament bill should vndoubtedly proceede forth against him
. To whom the Lord Chauncelour and the rest of the Lords saide that
they perceaved the lordes of the vpper hous so precisely bente to heare
him , in his owne defence , make awneswere himself , that if he were not
put oute of the bill , it wold without faile be vtterlye an overthrow of
all . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,70.110

But , for all this , needes wold the kinge haue his owne will therein ;
ROPER-1555-E1-P1,70.111

or els he said that at the passinge thereof , he wold be personally
present himself . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,70.112

Then the Lord Awdelye and the rest , seing him so vehemently sett
therevppon , on their knees most humbly besought his grace to forbeare
the same , considering that if he should , in his owne presence ,
receave an over_throwe , it wold not only incourage his subiectes euer
after to contemne by hym , But allso throughout all christendome redound
to his dishonour for ever ; Addinge <P_71> therunto that they mistrusted
not in tyme against {COM:preceding_word_"against"_emended} him
{COM:preceding_word_"him"_emended} to find some meeter matter to serve
his turne better . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,71.113

For in this case of the Nonne , he was accompted , they said , so
innocent and cleare , that for his dealinge therein , men reckned him
farre worthier of prayse then reproof . Wherevppon at lengthe ,
throughe their ernest persuasion , he was content to condiscend to their
petition . ROPER-1555-E1-P1,71.114

