<BEGIN_roxinden-1607-e2-p1>

<P_1,5>

<heading:edcomment:I_RICHARD_OXINDEN_TO_HIS_BROTHER,_JAMES_OXINDEN>

Lovinge brother , I kindly recommend my love unto you .
ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,5.4

I can@ @not be so unthankfull as to leave you unsaluted in thes few
lines , you havinge given mee the first occasione by your kinde letter ;
with the acknowledgment of youre harty affectione and tender of youre
imployment , which I shal@ @be redy in as large and ample manner to
requite as it is by you frely offred , even with my best indeavoures in
any your occasiones ; with your desire of this muteall entterchange of
oure letteres , as the increase of oure never changable loves , the only
meanes absence affordes to well_affected mindes to shew there loving
dispositione . ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,5.5

Pray remember my humble dutie to my Father and my harty commendacione
unto my Lady Mother , my sister youre wife and all oure other lovinge
frendes at home , with those at Canterbury when you see them .
ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,5.6

So I bid you hartily farewell . ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,5.7

Your loving brother Richard Oxinden ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,5.8

<P_1,6>

Middle Temple , Londone ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,6.10

this 7 May 1607 ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,6.11

<heading:edcomment:III_RICHARD_OXINDEN_TO_JAMES_OXINDEN>

Lovinge brother , Youre frendly advice , least you might hereafter
desist from thes kinde corses , can@ @not let mee leave you unrequited
and go unthanked in this my letter , the only meanes that at this time
stirrs up my dull spirites , not used to many letteres , especially in
one day , which , least now I might offend , I have undertaken , in
which I will use brevitie rather than prove unmanarilly not to write at
all . ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,6.13

Were my inventione soe ripe and apt as youres , or at least so plentiful
as my inke and paper , I wold be more forward , and afforde volumes in
stedd <P_1,7> of letteres , ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,7.14

but I have other studies where in I now intend to spend my spirites ,
ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,7.15

and so have iust excuse to spare my writinge till that@ @s finished ;
ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,7.16

so commendinge myselfe to youre wife my sister I bid you hartely
fare_well . ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,7.17

Your everloving brother , Richard Oxinden ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,7.18

Middle Temple London ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,7.19

this 14 of May 1607 ROXINDEN-1607-E2-P1,1,7.20

