<BEGIN_rplumpt2-1502-e1-p1>

<P_154>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXI>

<font> To my right worshipfull master and brother , Sir Robart Plompton
, knyght . <$$font> RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,154.4

After lowly and all due recomendations , I recomend me unto your good
mastership and good brotherhode , praying the same , that yt will please
you to send me by this berer the Martynmese farme for such lands and
tenements as ye have by lease made betwixt you and me .
RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,154.5

And , Sir , as I suppose ; insomuch as ye pleased not to content me at
the untermost day limytted in the sayd lease , ye wyl@ @be agreable that
I enter to the sayd lands and tenements ; wherfore , so I pray you to
send me word in a byll by this berer , whether ye will that I enter to
the same lands and tenements , or that ye will hold them still , and
content according to the same lease . RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,154.6

And , Sir , in_so_much as this is the first day of breach of your
payments , I wyll nothing attempt therin , to I have word from you by
this bearer , if it may so please you . RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,154.7

And Almyghty <font> Jesu <$$font> preserve you in prosperouse lyffe ,
long to endure . RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,154.8

From Yorke RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,154.9

the xii=th= day of January . RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,154.10

Your servant , Robart Plompton , of Yorke . RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,154.11

<P_172>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXXVIII>

<font> To Sir Robart Plumpton , knight , being lodged at the Angell
behind St. Clement Kirk , without the Temple barr , at London , be
these delivered . <$$font> RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,172.14

After most harty and due recomendations , I recomend me unto your
mastership and brotherhode , and to my lady your wyfe , beseching
Allmyghty God evermore to preserve and prosper you .
RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,172.15

Sir , on munday last come a servant of sir John Roclyfs from Mr. Emson
to Brian Palmes , RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,172.16

and caused him forthwith to take his waye toward London ;
RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,172.17

and as I am enfirmed , the sayd servant shewed that at the comyng up of
Bryan Palmes , thei shold have an end with you , and if ye had any land
, that ye shold be charged with my brother William and me .
RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,172.18

Therfore , Sir if he and thei drawd to an end , as I besech allmyghty
<font> Jesu <$$font> to send you a good end after your pleasure and mynd
, see how ye shall stand charged anenst us , and whether ye shal@ @be
charged with the one , or with <P_173> both .
RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.19

And , Sir wher ye sent me word by Georg Barbor to search for the call of
the exigent in the castell of Yorke agayn you , my cousin your son , or
any other of your name , or servant ; Sir , on tewsday last was the
court in the Castell , RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.20

and then was ther none exegent called agaynst you , none of your
servants , nor of your name . RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.21

But ther are ix playnts by <font> Replegiare <$$font> by ix of your
tenaunts against you , my cousin your sonn , Sir Richard Plompton , and
dyverse of your servants . RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.22

But how many playntts , and how many defendants , as yet , I can not get
any knowledg ; RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.23

for the Schereffs clarck sayth , his master hath all the records and
notes , RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.24

and the playntyffs that day was essoined . RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.25

And thus almyghty <font> Jesu <$$font> , our Lady , Saint Mary Virgin ,
Mary Magdalene , with all the Saints in heven , as I shall dayly besech
, prosper and spede you in all your great besines .
RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.26

Scrybled in hast , the vi=th= day of February .
RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.27

Yours at prayer and power , Robart Plompton of yorke .
RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.28

<paren> 6 <font> Feb. <$$font> 1502-3 . <$$paren>
RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.29

{COM:Indorsement} Sir Thomas Granger of Yorke delivered this letter .
RPLUMPT2-1502-E1-P1,173.30

