<BEGIN_rplumpt-1536-e1-p1>

<P_233>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_XI>

<font> To his right worshipful mother bee this delivered with speed .
<$$font> RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,233.4

Right worshipfull mother , I humbly recomende me unto you , desiringe
Jesus longe to continewe your healthe to the pleasure of God .
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,233.5

Worshipfull mother , I am bounde to write to you , yea and you were not
my mother , because it hathe pleased God of his inestimable goodnes to
sende me some understandinge in the Scriptures ;
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,233.6

for everie man or woman that it shall please God to sende knowledge in
the Scriptures is bounde to instructe theire brethren in the lovinge of
the Gospell . Wherefore , it is my dutie to instructe you , most
principalle of all other , which hathe shewed to me so muche kindenes ,
besides all motherly kindenes . Wherefore , I desire you , moste deare
mother , that ye will take heede to the teachinge of the Gospell ,
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,233.7

for it is the thinge that all wee muste live by ;
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,233.8

for Christe lefte it that we shoulde altogether rule our livinge thereby
, RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,233.9

or els we can@ @not be in favour with God . Wherefore , I woulde desire
you for the love of God , that you woulde reade the Newe Testament ,
which is the trewe Gospell of God , spoken by the Holy Ghoste .
Wherefore , doubte not of it , dearly beloved mother in the Lorde ,
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,233.10

I write not this to bringe you into anie heresies , but to teache you
the cleare light of Goddes doctrine . Wherefore , I will never write
nothinge to you , nor saye nothinge to you , concerninge the Scriptures
, but will dye in the quarrell . RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,233.11

Mother , you have muche to thanke God that it woulde please him to geve
you licence to live untill this time , RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,233.12

for the gospell of Christe was never so trewly preached as it is nowe .
<P_234> Wherfore , I praye to God that he will geve you grace to have
knowledge of his Scriptures . RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,234.13

Ye shall heare perceive what the profession of our Baptisme is , which
profession we muste have written in our hartes . Which profession
standeth in twoe thinges ; RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,234.14

the one is the knowledge of the lawe of God , understandinge it
spiritually as Christe expoundeth it , Math. v. vi. and vii.
chapters ; so that the roote and life of all lawes is this , Love thy
Lorde God with all thy harte , all thy soule , all thy mighte , and all
thy power , and thy neighboure as thy selfe for Christes sake .
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,234.15

And love onely is the fulfillinge of the lawe , as saithe S. Paule ,
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,234.16

and that whatsoever we doe and not of that love , that same fullfilleth
not the lawe in the sighte of God . RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,234.17

And what the lawe doth meane ye shall finde in the prologue to the Rom:
in my fathers booke , called the Newe Testament .
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,234.18

I write unto you because that I knowe you have a fervent ...
RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,234.19

and his lawes ... RPLUMPT-1536-E1-P1,234.20

{COM:rest_missing;_no_signature}

