<BEGIN_smith-1591-e2-p1>

<P_1>

<heading>

A PREPARATIVE TO MARRIAGE . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,1.4

<$$heading>

You are come hether to bee contracted in the Lord , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,1.6

that is , of two to bee made one : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,1.7

for as God hath knit the bones and sinewes together for the
strengthening of the bodie , so he hath knit man and woman together for
the strengthening of this life , because two are stronger than one
<$$paren> {COM:sic} : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,1.8

and therefore when God made the Woman for Man , he sayd , <font> I will
make him a helpe : <$$font> shewing that man is stronger by his Wife .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,1.9

Euerie Marriage before it bee knit should bee contracted , as it is
shewed in <font> Exo. <$$font> 22.@ @16. and <font> Deut. <$$font>
22.@ @28. which stay between the Contract & the <P_2> Marriage , was
the time of longing for the affections to settle in , because the
deferring of that which wee loue doth kindle the desire , which if it
came easilie and speedilie to vs , would make vs set lesse by it .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,2.10

Therefore we reade how <font> Ioseph <$$font> and <font> Marie <$$font>
were contracted before they were married . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,2.11

In the Contract Christ was conceaued , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,2.12

and in the Mariage Christ was borne , that he might honour both estates
, Virginitie with his Conception , and Marriage with his Birth .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,2.13

You are contracted but to bee married , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,2.14

therefore I passe from Contracts to speake of Mariage , which is nothing
els but a communion of life between man and woman , ioyned together
according to the ordinance of God . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,2.15

First I will shewe the excellencie of Marriage : then the institution
<P_3> of it : then the causes of it : then the choise of it : then the
dueties of it : and lastly the diuorcement of it .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,3.16

Well might <font> Paule <$$font> say , <font> Mariage is honourable
<$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,3.17

for God hath honoured it himselfe . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,3.18

It is honourable for the author , honourable for the time , and
honorable for the place . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,3.19

Whereas all other ordinaunces were appoynted of God by the hands of men
, or the hands of Angells , Marriage was ordained by God himselfe ,
which can@ @not erre . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,3.20

No man nor Angell brought the Wife to the Husband but God himselfe :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,3.21

so Marriage hath more honour of God in this , than all other ordinances
of God beside , because he solemnized it himselfe .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,3.22

Then it is honourable for the time , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,3.23

for it was the first ordinance which God instituted , euen the <P_4>
first thing which he did after man and woman were created , & that in
the state of innocencie before either had sinned , like the finest
flower which will not thriue but in a cleane ground .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,4.24

Before man had any other calling he was called to be a Husband :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,4.25

therefore it hath the honour of antiquitie aboue all other ordinances ,
because it was ordained first , and is the ancientest calling of men .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,4.26

Then it is honourable for the place ; SMITH-1591-E2-P1,4.27

for whereas all other ordinances were instituted out of <font> Paradise
<$$font> , Marriage was instituted in <font> Paradise <$$font> in the
happiest place , to signifie howe happie they are which marrie in the
Lord , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,4.28

they doo not only marrie one another , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,4.29

but Christ is maried vnto them , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,4.30

& so Mariage hath the honor of the place aboue all other ordina~ces to ,
<P_5> because it was ordained in <font> Paradise <$$font> .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,5.31

As God the Father honored Mariage , so did God the Sonne , which is
called the seede of the woman : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,5.32

and therefore Mariage was so honored amongst women because of this seede
, that when <font> Elizabeth <$$font> brought foorth a soone , she said
, that God had taken away her rebukes ; counting it the honor of women
to beare children , and by consequence , the honour of women to be
maried ; SMITH-1591-E2-P1,5.33

for the children which are borne out of Mariage are the dishonor of
women , and called by the shamefull name of Bastards .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,5.34

As Christ honoured Mariage with his birth , so he honoured it with his
miracles : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,5.35

for the first miracle which Christe did , hee wrought at a Mariage in
<font> Chanaan <$$font> , where he turned their water into <P_6> wine :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.36

so , if Christ be at your Mariage , that is , if you marie in christ ,
your water shall bee turned into wine , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.37

that is , your peace , and your rest , and your ioy , and your happiness
shal begin with your Mariage ; SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.38

but if you marrie not in Christ , then your wine shall be turned into
water , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.39

that is , you shall liue worse hereafter than you did before .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.40

As he honoured it with miracles , so he honored it with praises :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.41

for hee compareth the kingdome of God to a Wedding ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.42

and he compareth holines to a Wedding garment . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.43

And in the 5. of <font> Canticles <$$font> he is wedded himselfe .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.44

We reade in Scripture of three Mariages of Christ .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.45

The first was when Christ and our nature met together .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.46

The second is , when Christ and our soule ioyne together .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,6.47

The third is , the vnion of <P_7> Christ and his Church .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,7.48

These are Christs 3. wiues . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,7.49

As Christ honoreth Mariage ; so doo Christs Disciples :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,7.50

for <font> Iohn <$$font> calleth the Coniunction of Christ and the
faithfull , <font> a Mariage <$$font> . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,7.51

And in <font> Reuel. <$$font> 21.@ @9. the Church hath the name of a
Bride , whereas Heresie is called a Harlot . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,7.52

Further , for the honour of Mariage , <font> Paule <$$font> sheweth how
by it the curse of the woman was turned into a blessing ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,7.53

for the womans curse was the paines which she should suffer in her
trauaile . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,7.54

Now by Mariage this curse is turned into a blessing ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,7.55

for children are the first blesing in al the Scripture .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,7.56

And therefore Christ saieth , that so soone as the mother seeth a man
child borne into the world , she forgetteth all her sorrowes , as though
her curse were turned into a blessing . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,7.57

And further , <font> Paule <$$font> <P_8> saith , that by bearing of
children , if she continue in faith and patience , she shall bee saued ,
as though one curse were turned into two blessings .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,8.58

For first she shall haue children , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,8.59

and after she shall haue saluation . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,8.60

What a mercifull God haue wee , whose curses are blessings ?
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,8.61

Who would haue thought that God had hid a blessing in his curse ?
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,8.62

So hee loued our parents when hee punished them , that hee could scarse
punish them for loue , and therefore a comfort was folded in his
iudgement . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,8.63

To honour Mariage more , it is said , that God tooke a rib out of <font>
Adams <$$font> side , and thereof built the woman .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,8.64

He is not saide to make man a wife , but to build him a wife ,
signifying , that man & wife make as it were one house together , & that
the building was not <P_9> perfect , vntil the woma~ was made as@ @well
as the man : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,9.65

therefore if the building bee not perfect now , it must be destroyed
againe . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,9.66

Before God made the woman , it is sayd , that he cast the man into a
sleepe , and in his sleepe he tooke a rib out of his side , and as he
made the man of earth , so he made the woman of bone , while <font> Adam
<$$font> was a sleepe . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,9.67

This doth teach vs two thinges : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,9.68

As the first <font> Adam <$$font> was a figure of the second <font> Adam
<$$font> , so the first <font> Adams <$$font> sleepe was a figure of the
second <font> Adams <$$font> sleepe , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,9.69

& the first <font> Adams <$$font> spouse was a figure of the second
<font> Adams <$$font> spouse . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,9.70

That is , as in the sleepe of <font> Adam , Eue <$$font> was borne ; so
in the sleepe of Christ the Church was borne : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,9.71

as a bone came out of the first <font> Adams <$$font> side , so bloud
came out of the second <font> Adams <$$font> side .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,9.72

As <font> Adams <$$font> <P_10> spouse receiued life in his sleep ; so
Christs spouse receiued life in his sleepe : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,10.73

that is , the death of Christ is the life of the Church ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,10.74

for the Apostle calleth Death a sleepe , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,10.75

but Christ which dyed is called Life , shewing that in his death we liue
. SMITH-1591-E2-P1,10.76

Secondly , this sleep which the ma~ was cast into , while his wife was
created , dooth teach vs that our affections , our lusts , & our
concupicenses , should sleepe while wee goe about this action .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,10.77

As the man slept while his wife was making , so our flesh should sleepe
while our wife is choosing , least as the loue of Venison wan <font>
Isaak <$$font> to blesse one for another , so the loue of gentrie , or
riches , or beautie make vs take one for another .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,10.78

To honour Mariage more yet , or rather to teach the maried how <P_11> to
honour one another , it is saide , that the wife was made of the
husbands rib : not of his head , for <font> Paule <$$font> calleth the
husbande the wiues head : nor of the foote , for he must not set her at
his foote : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,11.79

the seruant is appoynted to serue , and the wife to helpe .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,11.80

If she must not match with the head , nor stoope at the foote , where
shall he set her then ? SMITH-1591-E2-P1,11.81

He must set her at his heart , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,11.82

and therefore she which should lie in his bosome , was made in his
bosome , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,11.83

and should bee as close to him as his ribb of which she was fashioned .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,11.84

Lastly , in all Nations the day of Mariage was reputed the ioyfullest
day in all their life , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,11.85

and is reputed still of all , as though the Sunne of happines began that
day to shine vpon vs , when a good wife is brought vnto vs .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,11.86

Therfore one saith , that Mariage doth signifie <P_12> Merriage ,
because a playfellow is come to make our age merrie .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,12.87

<font> Salomon <$$font> considering al these excellencies , as though
wee were more indebted to God for this tha~ other temporall gifts ,
saith : <font> House and riches are the inheritance of the fathers :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,12.88

but a prudent wife commeth of the Lord . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,12.89

House and riches are giuen of God , and all things els ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,12.90

& yet hee saith , house and riches are giuen of parents , but a good
wife is giuen of God : as though a good wife were such a gift , as we
should account from God alone , and accept as if hee should send vs a
present from heauen , with this name written vpon it , <font> The gift
of God . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,12.91

Beasts are ordained for foode , and cloathes for warmth , and flowers
for pleasure , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,12.92

but the wife is ordained for man , like little <font> Zoar <$$font> , a
Citie of refuge to flie to in all his <P_13> troubles ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,13.93

& there is no peace comparable vnto her , but the peace of conscience .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,13.94

Now it must needes be , that Mariage , which was ordeined of such an
excellent Author , and in such a happie place , and of such an auncient
time , and after such a notable order , must likewise haue speciall
causes for the ordenance of it . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,13.95

Therefore the holie Ghost doth shewe vs three causes of this Vnion .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,13.96

One is , the propagation of children , signified in that when <font>
Moses <$$font> saith , <font> He created them male and female <$$font> ,
not both male , nor both female , but one male , and the other female ,
as if he created them fit to propagate other . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,13.97

And therefore when he had created them so , to shewe that propagation of
children is one ende of Mariage , he saide vnto them , <font> Increase
and <P_14> multiplie <$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,14.98

that is , bring forth children , as other creatures bring forth their
kinde . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,14.99

For this cause Marriage is called <font> Matrimonie <$$font> , which
signifieth Mothers , because it makes them Mothers , which were Virgins
before : and is the seminarie of the worlde , without which , all things
should be in vaine , for want of men to vse them ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,14.100

for God reserueth the great Citie to himselfe , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,14.101

and this suburbs he hath set out to vs , which are regents by sea and by
lande . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,14.102

If children be such a chiefe end of Marriage , then it seemes , that
where there can be no hope of children , for age or other causes , there
Marriage is not so lawfull , because it is maimed of one of his ends ,
and seemes rather to be sought for wealth , or for lust , than for this
blessing of children . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,14.103

It is not good <P_15> grafting of an olde head vppon young shoulders ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,15.104

for they will neuer beare it willingly but grudgingly .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,15.105

Twise the Wife is called , <font> the Wife of thy youth <$$font> , as
though when men are old , the time of Marrying were past .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,15.106

Therefore God makes such vnequall matches so ridiculous euery where ,
that they please none but the parties themselues , vntill the time of
their dotage be expired . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,15.107

The second cause is to auoide fornication : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,15.108

this <font> Paule <$$font> signifieth , when he saith , <font> For the
auoiding of fornication , let euery man haue his owne wife . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,15.109

He saith not for auoiding of adultery , but for auoiding of fornication
, shewing , that fornication is vnlawfull too , which the Papists make
lawfull , in mainteining their Stewes , as a stage for <P_16>
fornicators to play vppon , and a Sanctuary to defende them , like
<font> Absoloms <$$font> Tent , which was spread vpon the top of the
house , that all <font> Israel <$$font> might see how he defiled his
fathers concubines . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,16.110

For this cause , <font> Malachi <$$font> sayth , that God did create but
one Woman for the man , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,16.111

he had power to create moe , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,16.112

but to shewe that he woulde haue him sticke to one , therefore he
created of one ribbe but one wife for one husbande :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,16.113

and in the Arke , there were no moe women than men . But foure wiues
for four husbands , although it was in the beginning of the world , when
many wiues might seeme necessarie to multiply mankinde .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,16.114

If any might haue a dispensation heerein , it seemes the King might be
priuiledged before any other , be cause of succession to the <P_17>
Crowne , if his wife should happen to be barren .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,17.115

And yet the King is forbidden to take many wiues in <font> Deut.
<$$font> 17.@ @17. as well as the Minister
{COM:is_forbidden_to_take_many_wives} in 1. <font> Timo. <$$font> 3.@
@2. shewing , that the danger of the state , doth not counteruaile the
danger of fornication . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,17.116

For this cause we reade of none but wicked <font> Lamech <$$font> before
the Flood , that had moe wiues than one , whome <font> Iouinian <$$font>
calleth a monster , because he made 2. ribs of one .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,17.117

And another saith , that the name of his second wife doth signifie a
shadowe , because she was not a wife , but the shadowe of a wife :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,17.118

for this cause the Scripture neuer biddeth man to loue his wiues , but
to loue his Wife , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,17.119

and sayeth , <font> They shall be two in one fleshe <$$font> , not three
, nor foure , but onely two . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,17.120

For this cause , <font> Salomon <$$font> calleth the whorish <P_18>
woman a strange woman , to shew that she should be a stranger to vs ,
and we should be strange to her . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,18.121

For this cause , children which are borne in mariage , are called <font>
Liberi <$$font> , which signifieth free borne : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,18.122

and they which are borne out of marriage , are called Bastards , that is
, base borne , like the Mule which is ingendred of an Asse & a Mare .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,18.123

Therefore adulterers are likened to the Deuill , which sowed another
mans ground , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,18.124

other sowe for a Haruest , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,18.125

but they sowe that which they dare not reape . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,18.126

Therfore children borne in Wedlocke were counted Gods blessing , because
they come by vertue of that blessing , <font> Increase and multiplie .
<$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,18.127

But before <font> Adame <$$font> and <font> Eue <$$font> were married ,
God neuer sayd <font> Increase <$$font> , shewing that he did cursse and
not blesse such increase . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,18.128

Therefore <P_19> we reade not in all the Scripture of one Bastard that
came to any good , but onely <font> Iphtah <$$font> ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,19.129

and to shewe that no inheritance did belong to them in heauen , they had
no inheritance in earth , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,19.130

neyther were counted of the congregation , as other were . <font> Deut.
<$$font> 23.@ @2. SMITH-1591-E2-P1,19.131

Now , because Marriage was appointed , for a remedie against fornication
, therefore the lawe of God inflicted a sorer punishment vppon them
which did commit vncleannes after Marriage , than vppon him which was
not married , because he sinned , although he had the remedie of sinne ,
lyke a rich theefe which stealeth , and hath no neede .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,19.132

Now if Marriage be a remedie against the sinne of fornication , then
vnlesse Ministers may commit the sinne of fornication , it <P_20> seemes
that they may vse the remedie as well as other : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,20.133

for as it is better for one man to marrie than to burne , so it is
better for all men to marrie than to burne : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,20.134

and therefore <font> Paule <$$font> sayth , <font> Marriage is
honourable amongst all men . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,20.135

And againe , <font> for the auoiding of fornication , let euery man haue
his Wife . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,20.136

And although he did forsee , that some woulde excepte the Minister in
time to come , in the first of <font> Timo. <$$font> 3.@ @2. hee
speaketh more precisely of the Ministers wife , than of any other ,
saying , <font> Let him be the husband of one Wife : <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,20.137

and least ye should say that by one wife , he meaneth one Benefice like
the Papists . He expoundeth himself in the fourth verse ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,20.138

and saith , that he must be one that can rule his house well , and his
children . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,20.139

Sure God would not haue these children to be Bastards ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,20.140

<P_21>

and therefore it is like that he aloweth the Minister a Wife .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,21.142

Therefore <font> Paule <$$font> said well , that he had no commandement
for Virginitie , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,21.143

for Virginitie can@ @not be commaunded , because it is a speciall gift ,
but not a speciall gift to Ministers , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,21.144

& therfore they are not to be bound more tha~ other .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,21.145

A peculiar gift may not be made a general rule , because none can vse it
, but they which haue it . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,21.146

And therfore in 1. <font> Cor. <$$font> 7.@ @17. he saith , <font> As
God hath distributed to euery man , so let him walk . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,21.147

That is , if he haue not the gift of continencie , he is bound to marrie
: SMITH-1591-E2-P1,21.148

and therefore <font> Paule <$$font> commaundeth in the seuenth verse ,
whether he be Minister or other , <font> If they can@ @not abstaine ,
let them marrie <$$font> , as though they tempted God if they married
not . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,21.149

The Law was generall , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,21.150

<font> It is not good for man to be <P_22> alone <$$font> , exempting
one order of men no more than an other . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,22.151

And again Christ speaking of Chastity saith , <font> All men can@ @not
receiue this thing . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,22.152

Therefore vnlesse we knowe , that this order of men can receiue this
thing : Christ forbids to binde them more than other ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,22.153

and therefore as the Priests were maried that taught the Lawe , so
Christ chose Apostles which were married , to preach the Gospell .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,22.154

Therefore the doctrine of Papists , is the doctrine of Deuils ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,22.155

for <font> Paule <$$font> calleth the forbidding of mariage , the
doctrine of Deuils , a fit title for all their bookes .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,22.156

Lastly , if Mariage be a remedie against sinne , then Mariage it selfe
is no sinne : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,22.157

for if Mariage it selfe were a sinne , we might not marrie for any cause
, because we must not do the least euill that the greatest <P_23> good
may come of it : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,23.158

and if Mariage be not a sinne , then the dueties of Mariage are no sinne
, SMITH-1591-E2-P1,23.159

that is , the secreate of Mariage is not euill , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,23.160

and therefore <font> Paule <$$font> saith not only <font> Mariage is
honourable <$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,23.161

but the bed is honorable , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,23.162

that is , euen the action of Mariage is as lawfull , as Mariage .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,23.163

Besides <font> Paul <$$font> saith , <font> Let the husband giue vnto
the Wife due beneuolence : <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,23.164

heere is a commandement to yeeld this duety : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,23.165

that which is commanded , is lawfull ; SMITH-1591-E2-P1,23.166

and not to doe it , is a breach of the commandement .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,23.167

Therefore Mariage was instituted before any sinne was , to shew that
there is no sinne in it if it be not abused : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,23.168

but because this is rare , therefore after women were deliuered , God
appointed them to be purified , shewing , that some staine or other doth
creep into this action , which <P_24> had neede to be repented ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,24.169

and therefore when they prayed , <font> Paule <$$font> would not haue
them come together , least their prayers should be hindered .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,24.170

The third cause is , to auoid the inconuenience of solitarinesse ,
signified in these words , <font> It is not good for man to be alone
<$$font> , as though he had said , this life would be miserable and
irkesome , and vnpleasant to man , if the Lord had not giuen him a wife
to company his troubles . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,24.171

If it be not good for man to be alone , then it is good for man to haue
a fellow : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,24.172

therefore as God created a paire of all other kindes , so he created a
paire of this kinde . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,24.173

We say that one is none , because he can@ @not be fewer than one , he
can not be lesser than one , he can not be weaker than one ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,24.174

and therfore the Wise man saith , <font> Woe to <P_25> him which is
alone <$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,25.175

that is , he which is alone , shall haue woe . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,25.176

Thoughts and cares , and feares , will come to him , because he hath
none to co~fort him , as theeues steale in when the house is emptie ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,25.177

like a Turtle , which hath lost his mate , like one legge when the other
is cut off , like one wing when the other is clipt , so had the man bin
, if the woman had not bin ioyned to him : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,25.178

therefore for mutuall societie , God coupled two together , that the
infinite troubles which lye vppon vs in this world , might be eased ,
with the comfort and helpe one of an other , and that the poore in the
world might haue some comfort as well as the rich ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,25.179

<font> for the poore man <$$font> <paren> saith <font> Salomon <$$font>
<$$paren> <font> is forsaken of his owne brethren <$$font> ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,25.180

yet God hath prouided one comforter for him , like <font> Ionathans
<$$font> armour-bearer , <P_26> that shall neuer forsake him , that is
another selfe , which is the only commoditie as I may tearme it ,
wherein the poore doe match the rich , without which , some persons
should haue no helper , no comforter , no friend at all .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,26.181

But as it is not good to be alone , so <font> Salomon <$$font> sheweth ,
<font> That it is better to be alone , than to dwell with a froward Wife
<$$font> , which is like a quotidian ague , to keepe his patience in vre
. SMITH-1591-E2-P1,26.182

Such furies do haunt some men , like <font> Saules <$$font> spirit , as
though the Deuill had put a sword into their handes to kill themselues ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,26.183

therefore choose whome thou mayest enioy , or liue alone still , and
thou shalt not repent thy bargaine . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,26.184

That thou mayest take and kepe without repentance , now we will speake
of the choice , which some <P_27> call the way to good wiues dwelling ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,27.185

for these flowers grow not on euery ground : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,27.186

therefore they say , that in wiuing and striuing , a man should take
counsell of all the world . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,27.187

As <font> Moses <$$font> considered what spies he sent into <font>
Chanaan <$$font> , so thou must regarde whome thou sendest to spie out a
Wife for thee . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,27.188

Discretion is a warie spie , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,27.189

but fancie is a rash spie , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,27.190

and liketh whome she will mislike againe . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,27.191

In <font> Zacharie <$$font> , Sinne is called a woman , which sheweth ,
that women haue many faults , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,27.192

therefore he which chooseth of them , had neede haue iudgement , and
make an Anatomie of their bodies and minds by squire and rule , before
he say , This shall be mine . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,27.193

For the wisest man sayth , <font> I haue found one man of a_thousand ,
but a woman among them all haue I not found <$$font> , <P_28> as though
there were a dearth of good women ouer the worlde .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,28.194

For helpe hereof in 1. <font> Cor. <$$font> 7.@ @39. wee are taught
to marrie in the Lord , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,28.195

then we must choose in the Lord too : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,28.196

therefore we must begin our Mariage where <font> Salomon <$$font> began
his wisedome . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,28.197

<font> Giue vnto thy seruant an vnderstanding heart : <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,28.198

so giue vnto thy seruant an vndersta~ding wife .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,28.199

If <font> Abrahams <$$font> seruant praied the Lord to prosper his
businesse when hee went about to choose a wife for another , how
shouldst thou pray when thou goest about a wife for thy selfe , that
thou maiest say after , <font> My lot is fallen in a pleasant ground .
<$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,28.200

To direct thee to a right choice herein , the holie Ghost giues thee two
rules , <font> Godlines <$$font> and <font> Fitnes : <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,28.201

Godlines , because our Spouse must bee like Christs spouse , that is ,
graced with <P_29> gifts & imbrodered with vertues , as if wee did
marrie <font> Holinesse her selfe . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,29.202

For the mariage of man and woman , is resembled of the Apostle to the
Mariage of Christ and the Church . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,29.203

Now , the Church is called <font> Holie <$$font> , because she is holie
. SMITH-1591-E2-P1,29.204

In the <font> 6. Cantic. <$$font> she is called <font> Vndefiled
<$$font> , because she is vndefiled . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,29.205

In the 45. <font> Psalme <$$font> she is called <font> faire within
<$$font> , because her beautie is inwarde : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,29.206

so our Spouse should bee holie , vndefiled , and faire within .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,29.207

As God respecteth the heart , so we must respect the heart , because
that must loue , and not the face . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,29.208

Couetousnes hath euer been a suter to the richest , and pride to the
highest , and lightnesse to the fairest , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,29.209

and for reuenge hereof his ioye hath euer ended with his wiues youth ,
which tooke her beautie with it . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,29.210

The goods of the <P_30> world are good , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,30.211

and the goods of the bodie are good , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,30.212

but the goods of the minde are better . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,30.213

As <font> Paule <$$font> commendeth Faith , and Hope , & Charitie , but
saith the greatest of these is Charitie : so I may commend beauty , and
riches , and godlines , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,30.214

but the best of these is godlinesse , because it hath the thinges which
it wants , and makes euerie state alike with her gift of contentation .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,30.215

Secondly , the mate must be fit : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,30.216

it is not enough to bee vertuous , but to bee sutable ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,30.217

for diuers women haue many vertues , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,30.218

and yet doo not fit with some men ; SMITH-1591-E2-P1,30.219

& diuers men haue many vertues , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,30.220

and yet doo not fit to some women : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,30.221

and therefore we see many times , euen the godly couples to iarre when
they are married , because there is some vnfitnes betweene <P_31> them
which makes oddes . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,31.222

What is oddes but the contrary to euen ? SMITH-1591-E2-P1,31.223

Therefore make them euen <paren> saith one <$$paren> and there will be
no oddes . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,31.224

From hence came the first vse of the Ring in Weddings , to represe~t
this euennes : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,31.225

for if it be straighter than the finger it will pinch ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,31.226

& if it be wider than the finger it wil fall of ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,31.227

but if it bee fit , it neither pincheth nor slippeth :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,31.228

So they which are like striue not , but they which are vnlike ,
{COM:strive} as fire and water . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,31.229

Therefore one obserueth , that concord is nothing but likenesse , and
that all strife is for vnfitnes : as in things when they fit not
together , and in persons when they suite not one another .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,31.230

How was God pleased when he had found a King according to his owne heart
? SMITH-1591-E2-P1,31.231

So shall that man be pleased which findes a wife according <P_32> to his
owne heart , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,32.232

whether he be rich or poore , his peace shall affoord him a chearefull
life , and teach him to sing , <font> In loue is no lacke . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,32.233

Therefore a godly man in our time thanked the Lord that he had not onely
giuen him a godly wife , but a fit wife : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,32.234

for he sayd not that she was the wisest , nor the holiest , nor the
humblest , nor the modestest wife in the world , but the fitest wife for
him in the world , which euery man should thinke when that knot is tyed
, SMITH-1591-E2-P1,32.235

or els so often as he seeth a better , he will wish that his choyce were
to make againe . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,32.236

As hee did thanke God for sending him a fit wife , so the vnmaried
should pray God to send them a fit wife : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,32.237

for if they be not like , they will not like . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,32.238

This fitnesse is commended by the holy Ghost in two words :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,32.239

one <P_33> is in the 2. of <font> Gen. <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,33.240

and the other is in the 2. <font> Cor. 6. <$$font> 14 .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,33.241

That in <font> Gene. <$$font> is <font> Meete : <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,33.242

God saith , <font> I will make man a helpe meet for him . <$$font>
Shewing , that a wife can@ @not helpe well , vnles she be meete .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,33.243

Further , it sheweth that man is such an excellent creature , that no
creature was like vnto him , or meete for him till the woman was made .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,33.244

This meetnesse God sheweth againe in the 22. verse , where <font> Moses
<$$font> saieth , that of the ribbe which was taken out of man God built
the woman : signifying , that as one parte of the building dooth meete
and fit with another ; so the wife should meete and fit with the husband
, that as they are called couples , so they may be called paires ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,33.245

that is , like as a paire of gloues , or a paire of hose are like ; so
man and wife should be like , because they are a paire of <P_34> friends
. SMITH-1591-E2-P1,34.246

If thou be learned , chuse one that loueth knowledge :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,34.247

if thou bee Martiall , chuse one that loueth prowesse :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,34.248

if thou must liue by thy labour , chuse one that loueth husbandrie :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,34.249

for vnlesse her mind stande with thy vocation , thou shalt neither
inioye thy wife , nor thy calling . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,34.250

That other word in the 2. <font> Cor. 6. <$$font> 14. is <font> Yoke
<$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,34.251

there Mariage is called a Yoke . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,34.252

<font> Paule <$$font> saith , <font> Be not vnequally yoked . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,34.253

If Mariage be a yoke , then they which drawe in it must be fit , like
two Oxen which draw the yoke together , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,34.254

or els all the burden will lie vpon one . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,34.255

Therefore they are called yoke fellowes too , to shew that they which
draw this yoke must be fellowes . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,34.256

As he which soweth seede , chuseth a fit grou~d , because they say , it
is good grafting vppon a good stocke : so <P_35> he which wil haue godly
children must chuse a godly wife : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,35.257

for like Mother <paren> sayeth <font> Ezechiel <$$font> <$$paren> like
daughter . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,35.258

Now , as the Trauailer hath markes in his way that hee may proceed
aright : so the suiter hath markes in his way that hee may chuse right .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,35.259

There be certaine signes of this fitnes , and godlinesse , both in the
man and the woman . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,35.260

If thou wilt knowe a godly man , or a godly woman , thou must marke fiue
things ; the report , the lookes , the speach , the apparell , and the
companions , which are like the pulses that shewe whether we be well or
ill . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,35.261

The report , because as the market goeth , so they say the market men
talke . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,35.262

A good man co~monly hath a good name , because a good name is one of the
blessinges which God promiseth to good <P_36> men ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.263

but a good name is not to be praised from the wicked :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.264

& therfore Christ saieth , <font> Cursed are you when all men speake
well of you : <$$font> that is , when euill men speake well of you ,
bicause this is a signe that you are of the world ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.265

<font> for the world liketh and praiseth her owne . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.266

Yet as Christ said , <font> Who can accuse me of sin ? <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.267

So it should bee said of vs , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.268

not who can accuse me of sinne ? SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.269

but who can accuse me of this sinne , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.270

or who ca~ accuse me of that sinne ? SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.271

That is , who can accuse me of swearing ? SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.272

who ca~ accuse me of dissembling ? SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.273

who can accuse mee of fornication ? SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.274

No man can say this of his thought , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.275

but euery one should say it of the act , like <font> Zachariah <$$font>
& <font> Elizabeth <$$font> , which are called vnblameable before men ,
because none could accuse them of open sinnes . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.276

The next signe is the looke , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,36.277

for <P_37> <font> Salomon <$$font> saith , <font> Wisedome is in the
face of a man : <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,37.278

so godlines is in the face of a man , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,37.279

and so folly is in the face of a man , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,37.280

and so wickednesse is in the face of a man . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,37.281

And therefore it is sayd in <font> Esaiah <$$font> 3.@ @9. <font> The
triall of their countenance testifieth against them . <$$font> As
though their looks could speake . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,37.282

One saieth well , a modest man dwelles at the signe of a modest
countenance , and an honest woman dwelleth at the signe of an honest
face , which is like the gate of the temple that was called <font>
Beautifull : <$$font> shewing , that if the entrie be so beautifull ,
within is great beautie . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,37.283

To shewe how a modest countenance , and womanly shamefastnesse , doo
commend a chast wife , it is obserued that the word <font> Nuptiae
<$$font> , which signifieth the Marriage of the woman , dooth declare
the <P_38> manner of her Marriage : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,38.284

for it importeth a couering , because the Virgins which should be maried
, whe~ they came to their husbands , for modestie and shamefastnes did
couer their faces : as wee reade of <font> Rebeccah <$$font> , which so
soone as she saw <font> Isaac <$$font> , and knewe that hee should bee
her husband , she cast a vaile before her face , shewing that modestie
should be learned before Marriage , which is the dowrie that God addeth
to her portion . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,38.285

The third signe is her speach , or rather her silence ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,38.286

for the orname~t of a woman is silence : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,38.287

and therefore the law was giuen to the man rather than to the woman , to
shew that he should bee the teacher , and she the hearer .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,38.288

As the Eccho answereth but one word for manie which are spoken to her ;
so a maides answere should be a word , <P_39> as though she sold her
breath . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.289

The eye and the speach are the mindes Glasses ; SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.290

<font> for out of the abundance of the heart <$$font> <paren> saith
Christ <$$paren> <font> the mouth speaketh : <$$font> as though by the
speach we might know what aboundeth in the heart :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.291

and therfore he saith , <font> By thy words thou shalt bee iustified ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.292

and by thy wordes thou shalt bee condemned . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.293

That is , thou shalt be iustified to bee wise , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.294

or thou shalt be condemned to bee folish ; SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.295

thou shalt be iustified to be sober , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.296

or thou shalt bee condemned to bee rash ; SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.297

thou shalt bee iustified to bee humble , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.298

or thou shalt be condemned to be proud ; SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.299

thou shalt be iustified to be louing , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.300

or thou shalt be condemned to be enuious . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.301

Therefore <font> Salomon <$$font> saith , <font> A fooles lips are a
snare to his owne soule . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.302

Snares are made for other , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,39.303

but this snare catcheth a mans selfe , because it bewraieth <P_40> his
folly , and causeth his trouble , and bringeth him into discredite .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,40.304

Contrariwise , <font> The heart of the wise <$$font> <paren> saith
<font> Salomon <$$font> <$$paren> <font> guideth his mouth wisely ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,40.305

and the wordes of his mouth haue grace . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,40.306

Now , to shewe that this should bee one marke in the choyce of thy Wife
, <font> Salomon <$$font> describing a right Wife , saith , <font> She
openeth her mouth with wisedome , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,40.307

& the lawe of grace is in her tongue . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,40.308

As the open vessels were counted vncleane ; so account that the open
mouth hath much vncleannes . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,40.309

The fourth signe is the apparel : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,40.310

for as the pride of the Glutton is noted , in that he went in purple
euerie day ; so the humilitie of <font> Iohn <$$font> is noted in that
hee went in hairecloath euery day . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,40.311

A modest woman is known by her sober attire , as the Prophet <font>
Eliah <$$font> was knowne by his rough garment .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,40.312

Looke not <P_41> for better within , than thou seest without ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,41.313

for euery one seemeth better than hee is , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,41.314

if the face bee vanitie , the heart is pride . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,41.315

Hee which biddeth thee abstaine from the <font> shewe of euill <$$font>
, would haue thee to abstaine from~ those wiues which haue the shewes of
euill : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,41.316

for it is hard to come in the fashion , & not be in the abuse .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,41.317

And therefore <font> Paule <$$font> saieth , <font> Fashion not your
selues like vnto this world : <$$font> as though the fashions of me~ did
declare of what side they are . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,41.318

The fift signe is the companie : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,41.319

for birds of a feather will flie together , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,41.320

and fellowes in sinne will bee fellowes in league , as yong <font>
Rehoboam <$$font> chose young companions . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,41.321

The tame beastes will not keep with the wild , nor the cleane with the
leprous . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,41.322

If a man ca~ be known by nothing els , then he maye bee <P_42> knowne by
his companions ; SMITH-1591-E2-P1,42.323

for like will to like , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,42.324

as <font> Salomon <$$font> saieth , theeues call one another .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,42.325

Therefore when <font> Dauid <$$font> left iniquitie , he sayd , <font>
Away from me al ye that work iniquitie . <$$font> Shewing , that a man
neuer abandoneth euill , vntill hee abandon euill companie ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,42.326

for no good is concluded in this parliament . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,42.327

Therefore choose such a companio~ of thy life as hath chosen companie
like thee before : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,42.328

for they which did choose such as loued prophane companio~s before , in
a while were drawne to be prophane too , that their wiues might loue
them . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,42.329

When these rules are obserued , they may ioyne together and say , as
<font> Laban <$$font> and <font> Bethuel <$$font> said , <font> This
commeth of the Lord , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,42.330

therfore wee will not speake against it . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,42.331

How happie are those in whome Faith , and Loue , and Godlinesse <P_43>
are married together , before they marrie themselues ?
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,43.332

For none of these Martiall , and clowdie , and whining Marriages can
saye that Godlinesse was inuited to their Bridall ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,43.333

and therfore the blessings which are promised to godlinesse dooe flie
from them . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,43.334

Now in this choice , are two questions . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,43.335

First , whether children may marrie without their parents consent :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,43.336

and the second , whether they may marrie with Papists or Atheists , &c.
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,43.337

Touching the first , God saith , <font> Honour thy father and thy mother
. <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P1,43.338

Now , wherein canst thou honour them more , than {thou_canst_honor_them}
in this honourable action , to which they haue preserued thee , and
brought thee vp , which concerneth the state of thy whole life ?
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,43.339

Againe , in the first institution of Mariage , when there was no Father
to giue <P_44> consent , then our heauenly Father gaue his consent :
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,44.340

God supplied this place of the Father , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,44.341

& brought his Daughter vnto her Husband , SMITH-1591-E2-P1,44.342

and euer since , the Father after the same manner , hath offred hys
Daughter vnto the Husband . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,44.343

Beside , there is a Lawe , that if a man deflowre a Virgin , he shall
marrie her : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,44.344

but if the Father of the Virgin do not like of the Mariage , then he
shall pay vnto her the dowrie of Virgins , that is , so much as her
Virginitie is esteemed , so that the Father might alow the Mariage , or
forbid it . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,44.345

Againe , there is a Law , that if any free man , or free woma~ make a
vow , it must be kept . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,44.346

But if a Virgin make a vow , it should not be kept , vnlesse her Father
approue it , because she is not free : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,44.347

therefore if she did vow to marry , <P_45> yet the Father hath power by
this Lawe to breake it . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,45.348

Therefore the Lawe speaketh vnto the Father saying , <font> Thou shalt
not take a Wife for thy sonne of straungers . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,45.349

Therefore <font> Paule <$$font> speaketh to the Father , <font> If thou
giue thy daughter to mariage , thou doest well : <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,45.350

therefore <font> Iobs <$$font> children are counted part of <font> Iobs
<$$font> substance , shewing , that as a man hath the disposition of his
owne substance , so he hath the disposition of his owne children .
SMITH-1591-E2-P1,45.351

Therefore in <font> Math. <$$font> 22.@ @30. the Wife is sayd to be
bestowed in mariage , which signifieth , that some did giue her beside
her selfe : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,45.352

Therefore it is said , that <font> Iacob <$$font> serued <font> Laban
<$$font> , that <font> Laban <$$font> might giue him his daughter to
wife . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,45.353

Therefore <font> Saule <$$font> saith to <font> Dauid <$$font> , I will
giue thee my eldest daughter to wife : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,45.354

therefore it is said , that <font> Iudah <$$font> tooke a wife <P_46> to
<font> Er <$$font> his sonne . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,46.355

Therefore <font> Sichem <$$font> saith to his Father , Get me this maide
to Wife . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,46.356

Therefore in the mariage of <font> Isaak <$$font> , we see <font>
Abrahams <$$font> seruant in the place of <font> Isaak <$$font> , and
<font> Rebeccah <$$font> the maid and her parents , sitting in
parliament together : SMITH-1591-E2-P1,46.357

therefore <font> Sampson <$$font> , though he had found a maid to his
liking , yet he would not take her to wife , before he had tould his
parents , and craued their assent . SMITH-1591-E2-P1,46.358

