<BEGIN_southard-1686-e3-p1>

<P_37>

<heading:edcomment:18_FROM_SARAH,_JUNE_23_1686,_WITH_LETTER_18A>

For Mr John Pinney at his Logens in great Shep Stret in Dobelin in
Irland SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,37.4

{COM:endorsed_in_john_pinney's_writing}

June 22=d= 1686 SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,37.6

Sarah & her mother . SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,37.7

Dare & onred father youers I reseved for which I give {TEXT:gve} you
hombell & harty thanks that you ar plesed to writ one woord <P_38> of
comfard & that you ar willing to parmet me once more in to youer presenc
after So gret afence commeted the only thin I desired & have Long for
cold I have bin permeted youer writings my mother have
SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.8

& as for the writen of bettescom I gave you acount hou it was don & what
it cost whin it wos done SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.9

& my brother nat nu all of it before thare woose any thin don in it
SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.10

& consented to it SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.11

& as for youer wooch my brother John ose sister Rachell for one which he
gave to his mestres SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.12

& ose me for this which brother Clarke is witness to
SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.13

for he boft him SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.14

& I paid him for it SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.15

& never had afarden {COM:sic} for it againe so that if you ar plesed to
give him in gostes {COM:editor_adds_?} & oneste it belong to me
SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.16

& I hope thofe I have done evely in one thine you will not excemt me
fro~ bing a@ @child as wille as my brother ho never ofended you before
to my noleg nor wronged you of one farden that I no of
SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.17

thofe I have bine moch wrangd & aboused you will no I woos never woos
thin my woord to any one in my Life moch more woold i not to you hoping
I may find others so to me thof I have Letell Reson to bost of it yat
SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.18

for I find all ar against me thofe I have {SIC:have_have} boren the
borden & het of the day for all & ventred my one Life to save others
SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.19

yot now it tis Letell Consedred SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.20

I have none Letell elce bot trobell SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.21

the Lord give me sofren graces that I may bare up & bare out to the end
SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.22

it may bring me the narer to god SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.23

& thin it_t@ @will be will with me thof I am wich never so yett
SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,38.24

the <P_39> Lord bless & presarve & cape you & give you the oyle of goy
for the speret of heveness is the daile prayers of youer affected
pasecated {COM:preceding_word_"pasecated"_emended} hart_broken degected
obedent faithfull dutifull dafter Sarah Southard
SOUTHARD-1686-E3-P1,39.25

