<BEGIN_spencer-1708-e3-p1>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCCCI_LORD_SUNDERLAND_TO_THE_DUKE_OF_NEWCASTLE>

<heading:edcomment:THE_RESOLUTION_OF_CERTAIN_PEERS_TO_DECLARE_AGAINST_THE_COURT>

<heading:edcomment:THE_REMOVAL_OF_PRINCE_GEORGE_OF_DENMARK_FROM_HIS_OFFICE_OF_LORD_HIGH_ADMIRAL_PROJECTED>

My Lord , I give your Grace this trouble at the desire of the Duke of
Devonshire , the Duke of Bolton , Lord Dorchester , Lord Orford ; Lord
Wharton , Lord Townshend , Lord Sommers , and Lord Halifax , to give you
an account of what has passed between them and Lord Treasurer in
relation to the present posture of our <P_2.4,252> affairs , in which
they hope what steps they have made will meet with your approbation .
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,252.5

They have upon the best consideration among themselves come to this
resolution and opinion , that it was impossible for them , with any
reputation to themselves or safety to the public , to go on any longer
with the Court , upon the foot things are at present ; for that if one
looks round every part of the Administration , the management of the
Fleet , the condition of Ireland , the Proceedings in Scotland , the
management of the late Invasion , the disposal of Church Preferments ,
&c. they are all of a piece , as much tory , and as wrong as if Lord
Rochester and Lord Nottingham were at the head of every thing , under
the disguise of some considerable Whigs in some considerable places ,
but with so little credit , or to so little purpose , that they can
neither obtain any right thing to be done , nor prevent any wrong one .
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,252.6

They considered that the management of the fleet , as it is of the
greatest consequence , so it is under the most scandalous management of
all , and that this is never to be cured but by the Prince's quitting ;
for that whatever Council he has , George Churchill will in effect be
always Lord High Admiral ; so that they have in a body declared to Lord
Treasurer , that if this is not immediately done , they must let the
world and their friends see they have nothing more to do with the Court
. SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,252.7

The man they propose to be Lord High Admiral is Lord Pembroke <paren>
which would open a redress <P_2.4,253> for Ireland , and , what is so
much desired by all honest people , the President's place for Lord
Sommers <$$paren> . SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,253.8

My Lord Treasurer seemed to agree with them in opinion , <paren> as his
way always is in words , <$$paren> SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,253.9

but at the same time pretends great difficulties , and that when Lord
Marlborough comes all will be set right , which by the way can@ @not be
much before Christmas . SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,253.10

To this the Lords told him that they could no longer rely upon promises
and words , and that therefore they must take their measures , till this
thing was actually done , as if it never was to be done ;
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,253.11

and they told him therefore plainly that they would and must oppose the
Court in the choice of a Speaker , that being the first point to come on
, for that they had no other way left to let the world see , and all
their friends , that they were upon a different foot to this .
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,253.12

He was pleased to make a proposal , which was as ridiculous as it shewed
the uncertainty of their intentions to do any thing that was right ,
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,253.13

and that was that there should be an Act of Parliament obtained to allow
the Prince to continue Lord High Admiral , and to empower his Council to
act for him . SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,253.14

It would be tedious to repeat all the objections the Lords made to this
proposal , as absurd , ridiculous , and ineffectual , and what no
Parliament ever would hear of : SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,253.15

I will only mention one particular , which is very remarkable and pretty
extraordinary , that Lord Treasurer told them that he had mentioned this
proposal to Lord Chancellor , and that he had entirely <P_2.4,254>
approved of it : SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,254.16

Lord Chancellor since has been told what Lord Treasurer said ,
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,254.17

and he does positively affirm that he does not remember that ever Lord
Treasurer spoke to him , or he to Lord Treasurer of any such proposal .
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,254.18

This extraordinary proceeding has been a further confirmation to the
Lords of the reason they have to declare against the Court , which they
are resolved to do in this first point of the Speaker , by setting up
Sir Peter King ; SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,254.19

and I am confident when the Court see this , that the Whigs will no
longer be fooled ; SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,254.20

they will then do all reasonable things , which they will never do
whilst they hope that words and promises will pass .
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,254.21

I must not forget telling you that this day , unexpectedly , without any
body knowing any thing of it , Sir James Mountague has been made
Attorney General and Mr. Eyres Solicitor , which , I believe , has been
owing to the vigour with which those Lords spoke to Lord Treasurer , and
confirms them in their opinion that if they go on in their resolution
and stand together , the other more essential things will be also done .
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,254.22

My Lord Steward , to-morrow , is to speak to Lord Chancellor to acquaint
him with the resolutions they have taken , and to try to persuade him to
act , with spirit and vigour , with the rest of his friends .
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,254.23

I beg a_thousand pardons for this long long Letter ,
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,254.24

but as I have been forced to omit a great many particulars for fear of
being too tedious , so I was very desirous myself , as well as at the
command of these <P_2.4,255> Lords , to explain this whole affair to
your Grace as well as I could , hoping you will approve of what they
have done ; SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,255.25

for , in our present condition , all depends upon our acting of a piece
and in concert ; SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,255.26

and , if we do so , we must carry our point , and save our Country ,
which I think is in as great danger as ever I knew .
SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,255.27

I must add the request of all these Lords to your Grace , that you would
let them have your company and assistance here in town as soon as may be
. SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,255.28

I am ever , with the greatest respect , My Lord , Your Grace's most
obedient humble servant , Sunderland . SPENCER-1700-E3-P1,2.4,255.29

