<BEGIN_stat-1697-e3-p1>

<P_7,66>

<heading>

CHAPTER IX . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,66.4

AN ACT FOR REPAIRING THE HIGHWAYS BETWEENE THE CITY OF LONDON AND THE
TOWNE OF HARWICH IN THE COUNTY OF ESSEX . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,66.5

<$$heading>

Whereas the greatest Part of the Highways betweene Shenfeild &
Ingatestone Towne and between Kelvedon & Stannaway co~monly called
Domesey Road and from Stirwood to Harwich being Part of the Ancient
Highway and Post Road leading from London to Colchester and so to
Harwich aforesaid and also of the Road between Colchester aforesaid and
Langham called the Severalls and also the Road called Bulmer Tye and
Armsey Road in Bulmer leading to Ballingdon in the County of Essex by
reason of the great and many Load~ which are Weekly drawn through the
same are become very ruinous and almost impassable insomuch that it is
become very dangerous to all Persons that passe those Ways and for that
the ordinary Course appointed by the Laws and Statutes of this Realme is
not sufficient for the effectual repairing & amending the same neither
are the Inhabitant~ of the several and respective Parishes in which the
said ruinous Places of the said Road~ doe lie of Ability to repaire the
same without some other Provision of Monies to be raised toward~ the
putting the same into good and sufficient Repaire there being also noe
Stone Gravel or other Materials fitting for the mending thereof to be
had but att great distance from the said respective Places . For Remedy
whereof and to the intent the same may be forthwith effectually repaired
and amended and from time to time hereafter kept in good repaire may itt
please Your Majesty that it may be enacted And be it enacted by the
King~ most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Lord~ Spiritual and Temporal and the Co~mons in this present Parliament
assembled and by the Authority of the same That for the surveying
ordering repairing and keeping in repaire of the said ruinous Places in
the said Road~ the Justices of Peace att the Quarter Sessions to be
holden for the said County next after the passing of this Act shall and
may then and so from time to time in every Yeare nominate and appoint a
convenient Number of sufficient and able Persons residing and inhabiting
in or neare to the respective ruinous Places of the said Road~ so to be
amended as aforesaid to be the several & respective Surveyors of the
respective Places aforesaid for the Yeare from thence next ensuing and
that the said Justices shall cause Notice to be given to the several
Surveyors so chosen in Writing of their said Choice which said Surveyors
and every of them having no lawfull Impedim=t=. to be allowed by the
said Justices by whom they shall be chosen in manner aforesaid or any
Two of them within One Week next after such Notice to him or them given
of their Election shall and are hereby required respectively to meet in
some convenient Place within their several and respective Divisions for
the which they are respectively appointed Surveyors to the Intent to
view and survey the said respective ruinous Places and consider the
Deffect~ thereof and the best Method and Means that can be used for the
repairing and also the several Su~ms that will be necessary for making
good the same and make ther respective Certificates thereof to the
Justices of the Peace att the next Quarter Sessions to be held for the
said County who thereupon shall and may make such Order and Orders in
and about the same as to them shall seem good which said Order or Orders
so to be made shall be by the said respective Surveyors and all other
Persons concerned in putting this Act in Execution duely observed and
performed STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,66.7

And the said respective Surveyors are hereby impowered to appoint &
require such Cart~ and Persons who are liable to work in the Highways by
the Statutes already in force from time to time to come and work in the
said respective Places as they shall think needful and appoint for which
the said respective Surveyors shall pay unto such Labourers and to the
Owners of such Teams Cart~ and Wains according to the usual Rate of the
Country wherein if any difference happen the same to be settled by the
Two next Justices of the Peace which is to be conclusive to all Parties
. STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,66.8

Provided neverthelesse That no Person be compellable by this Act to
travel above Foure Miles from his Dwelling House nor to work above Two
Days in any one Week nor att any time in Seed Time Hay Time or Corne
Harvest . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,66.9

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That where there is
not sufficient Gravel Chalk Sand or Stones within any Parish Towne
Village or Hamlett wherein the said ruinous Places doe severally lye to
repaire the same itt shall and may be lawfull for the said Surveyors in
their several and respective places and such Person or Persons as they
shall appoint to digg take and carry away Gravel Chalk Sand or Stones or
of the Waste or Co~mon of any neigbouring Parish Towne Village or
Hamlett without paying any thing for the same for amending the same or
where there is not sufficient of such Materials in any Co~mon or Waste
Ground thereunto neare adjoyning to digg in the several Ground~ of any
Person or Persons <paren> not being an House Garden Orchard Yard Meadow
or Park stored with Deer Avenues and Planted Walk~ <$$paren> where any
such Materials are or may be found and from time to time to carry away
such and so much thereof as the Surveyors in their respective Places
shall adjudge necessary for the said Reparations without paying any
thing for such Materials save onely such reasonable Satisfaction to the
Owner or Occupier of the Ground where the same shall be so digged and
carried@ @away as for the Damage hee or they shall thereby sustaine to
be assessed and adjudged by the said Justices att the next or any other
Quarter Sessions for the said County in case of Difference concerning
the same and that the Pitt~ and Places where and from whence such
Materials shall be digged and carried away for the Reparations aforesaid
shall with all convenient Speed if adjudged by the said Justices of
Peace as aforesaid or desired by the Party owning such Ground be filled
upp and levelled with Earth or other Materials .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,66.10

<P_7,67>

And for defraying of the Charge in and about the Reparations to be done
in the places aforesaid Be it further enacted That the said Justices att
the Quarter Sessions aforesaid shall and may choose and appoint one or
more fitt Person or Persons to be Receiver or Receivers Collector or
Collectors of such Su~m or Su~ms of Money in the name of Toll or Custome
to be paid for all such Horses Cart~ Coaches Waggons Droves and Gang~ of
Cattle as in time to come shall passe be led or droven in or through the
said Way as are hereafter in this Act limitted <paren> that is to say
<$$paren> For every Horse One penny For every Stage Coach or Hackney
Coach Six pence For every other Coach Calash or Chariot Six pence For
every Waggon One shilling For every Cart Eight pence For every Score of
Sheep or Lambs One penny and so proportionably for every greater or
lesser Number For every Score of Calves Three pence For every Score of
Hogg~ Three pence and so for every greater or lesser Number of Calves or
Hogg~ proportionably not being under Five For every Score of Oxen or
Neat Cattle Six pence and so for every greater or lesser Number
proportionably And that from and after the passing of this Act all and
every Person and Persons who shall travel with Horse Coach Cart or
Waggon or shall lead or drive any Oxen Sheep or other Cattle before
mentioned in and through the Highway aforesaid shall and are hereby
required to pay unto the said Collector or Collectors Receiver or
Receivers of Toll in that behalfe from time to time to be appointed as
aforesaid after the Rates aforesaid the Place for collecting the said
Toll to be in some convenient Place upon the said Highway between
Brentwood and Ingatestone aforesaid by setting upp a Turnpike or
otherwise as the Justices of the Peace att the next Quarter Sessions to
be held for the said County next after the passing of this Act shall
direct and appoint STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,67.12

But in the meane time until the said Quarter Sessions shall happen Itt
is hereby enacted That Two Justices of the Peace who live neare to
Shenfeild aforesaid shall and may order a Turnpike to be sett upp att or
neare to Mountnessing and appoint one or more Person or P~sons to be
Receiver or Receivers Collector or Collectors of the said Toll there who
shall give in a Weekly Account thereof upon Oath to the said Justices of
Peace or one of them who shall truely returne the same to the next
Quarter Sessions STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,67.13

and all the Money so to be collected shall be paid for the purposes
appointed by this Act as the Justices of Peace att the said Quarter
Sessions shall direct STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,67.14

And further also That every Receiver or Collector to be afterward~
appointed by the Justices of the Peace att the Quarter Sessions for the
receiving of the said Toll shall give in a Weekly Account upon Oath unto
one or more Justices of the Peace that lives neare to Shenfeild
aforesaid <paren> which Oath they are hereby impowered to administer
<$$paren> which said Accompt shall be duely returned to the Justices of
Peace att the next Quarter Sessions who shall thereupon examine the same
and make such Orders therein as to them shall seem meet according to the
true meaning of this Act And in case any Person or Persons <paren> upon
Demand made of Toll aforesaid by the Collector or Receiver in that
behalfe to be appointed <$$paren> shall neglect or refuse to pay the
same That then it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said Collector
or Receiver appointed for Receipt of the said Toll upon such Refusal to
distraine and detaine such Horse Cart Coach Calash Charriott Waggon Oxen
or other Cattle before mentioned or any of them until the said Toll
shall be satisfied and paid according to the Tenor of this present Act
together with such Damages as the Party or Parties so distraining shall
sustaine in and about the making of the said Distresse or by the keeping
thereof which said Moneys so to be received shall be paid proportionably
to the said respective Surveyors for & toward~ the Amendment of the said
Ruinous Places in the said Highways according to the true Meaning hereof
and not elsewhere . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,67.15

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the said
Surveyors and every of them att the Quarter Sessions of the Peace for
the said County to be holden next after Easter in every Yeare shall make
and yeild upp unto the said Justices of Peace there to be assembled a
p~fect Account in Writing under their Hand~ of all the Moneys which they
or any of them have received from the said Collector or Receiver of Toll
and likewise of all their Disbursement~ in and about the said Highway or
otherwise by reason of their Offices and in case any Overplus of Money
so received remaine in theire Hand~ shall pay the same to the Surveyors
to be chosen for the Yeare ensuing to be disbursed and laid out in
mending the said Road~ according to the true Meaning of this Act and not
elsewhere which said Justices to whom such Account shall be given att
the said Quarter Sessions shall out of the Benefitt of the said Toll
make such Allowance unto the said Surveyors for and in Consideration of
their Care and Pains taken in Execution of their Offices and to such
other Person or Persons who have been or shal be assisting in and about
procuring the said Highways to be amended as aforesaid by advancing or
laying out any Moneys or otherwise relating thereto as to them shall
seem good STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,67.16

And in case the Collector or Receiver of the aforesaid Toll so to be
paid as aforesaid shall not upon Request duely pay the same unto the
said Surveyors for the time being so to be appointed as aforesaid or in
case the said Surveyors or any of them shall not make such Account and
Payment unto the several Person and Persons according to the Order
Direction and Appointment of the said Justices as aforesaid That then
the said Justices att any Quarter Sessions to be holden for the said
County shall make Enquiry concerning such Default as well by Confession
of the said Parties themselves as by Testimony of Two or more Credible
Witnesses upon Oath which Oath they are hereby impowered to administer
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,67.17

and if any Person or Persons shall be thereof convicted the said
Justices upon such Conviction shall co~mitt the Party or Parties so
convict to the Co~mon Gaol of the said County there to remaine without
Bail or Mainprize until hee or they shall have made a true and perfect
Account and Payment as aforesaid . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,67.18

And forasmuch as the Moneys so to be collected by such Receipt of the
said Toll will not at present raise such a Stock or Su~m of Money as may
be sufficient for the speedy repairing of the Premisses Itt is hereby
further enacted That the said Surveyors or the more part of them are
hereby enabled by Order of the said Justices to be made att the Quarter
Sessions and not otherwise to engage the Proffitt~ ariseing by the said
Toll for such Su~m or Su~ms of Money by them to be borrowed for that
purpose and by Indenture under the Hands and Seales of the said
Surveyors for the time being or the more part of them to transferr , the
said Proffitt~ of the said Toll and to <P_7,68> grant and convey the
same for any time or terme not exceeding Fifteene Yeares unto any Person
or Persons that shall or will upon that Security advance any present
Su~m or Su~ms of Money so lent with Interest for the same after the Rate
of Six Pound~ per_Cent~ per_Annum for every Hundred Pound~ which said
Money so to be advanced shall be distributed by the Justices att the
Quarter Sessions in the Proportions and for the Purposes aforesaid and
not otherwise . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.19

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if any Person
or Persons not having any lawfull Excuse to be allowed as aforesaid
shall neglect or refuse to take upon him or them the said Office of
Surveyor being thereunto nominated and chosen as by this Act is
appointed or to doe and performe his or their Duty in the due and speedy
Execution of this Act the said Justices att their Quarter Sessions shall
and may hereby have Power to impose on such Person or Persons so
refusing or neglecting such Fine or Fines not exceeding Five Pounds upon
each Person so refusing as to them shall seem meet and to cause the same
to be levied by Distresse and Sale of his or their Good~ rendring to the
Party the Overplus if any shall be STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.20

and then and in such Case or in Case of the Death of any of the said
Surveyors some other Person or Persons shall be appointed by Two or more
Justices of Peace that live nearest to the Party or Parties so dyeing
refusing or neglecting STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.21

and such other Person or Persons so to be appointed by the said Justices
are hereby required to execute their said Offices in such Manner and
under such Penalties as if they had been chosen by the Justices att
their Sessions of the Peace as aforesaid . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.22

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That all Fines and
Forfeitures to be imposed or incurred by virtue of this Act shall be
paid to the Surveyors for the time being for and towards the repairing
of the said ruinous Places in the said Highways according to the true
meaning of this Act and not to any other Person or Persons or to or for
any other Use or Uses Intent or Purpose whatsoever .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.23

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if any Suit
shall be co~menced against any Person for any thing done in pursuance of
this present Act that in every such Case the Action shall be laid in the
said County of Essex and not elsewhere and the Defendant in such Action
to be brought may plead the General Issue and give this Act and the
Special Matter in Evidence at any Tryal to be had thereupon and that the
same was done in pursuance and by the Authority of the said Act
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.24

And if it shall so appeare to be done or that such Action shall be
brought in any other County that then the Jury shall find for the
Defendant STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.25

And upon such Verdict or if the Plaintiffe shall be nonsuited or
discontinue his Action after the Defendant shall have appeared or if
upon Demurrer Judgement shall be given against the Plaintiffe the said
Defendant shall have and recover his Double Cost~ and have the like
Remedy for the same as any Defendant had , in other Cases by Law .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.26

Provided always That no Person or Persons having occasion to passe the
Place where the Toll is taken & returne the same Day before Eight of the
Clock att Night between the Months of September and February and before
Ten of the Clock att Night dureing the other Months of the Yeare with
the same Horse Coach Waggon or other Carriage or with Cattle shall be
compelled the same Day to pay the said Toll a Second time
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.27

And further also That all and every Person and Persons passing through
the Place appointed for the receiving the Toll aforesaid and coming from
any Parish next adjoining to the said Road shall have a liberty to carry
any quantityes of Stones Sand Lime or Gravel Dung Mould or Compost of
any Nature or Kind whatsoever Brick or Chalk or any Wood not goeing to
any Markett And that all Cart~ with Hay not goeing to any Markett or
Corne in the Straw att Hay time or Harvest Ploughs Harrows and other
Implement~ of Husbandry and all other thing~ whatsoever imployed in the
husbanding stocking & manuring of their several and respective Land~ in
the said several and respective Parishes shall passe to and fro through
the said Place where such Toll is to be received as aforesaid without
paying any thing for their respective passing through the same And that
it shall and may be lawfull also for all and every Soldier and Soldiers
upon their March and all Cart~ and Waggons attending them and all
Persons riding post to passe through the said Place where the said Toll
is to be collected without paying any thing for their passing Any thing
in this Act contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.28

Provided also That all and every Person and Persons who by Law are
chargeable toward~ repairing the said Highways shall still remaine so
chargeable and doe their respective Work~ in the said Highways as before
they used to doe therein Any thing aforesaid to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.29

Provided also That neither this Act nor any thing herein contained shall
extend to any further time or be of force any longer then the Terme of
Fifteene Yeares to be accounted from the passing of this Act And also
That if att any time before the Expiration of the Fifteene Yeares
aforesaid the ruinous Places in the said Highways shall be sufficiently
amended and repaired and so adjudged by the Justices of the Peace of the
said County att their Quarter Sessions That then from and after such
Adjudication made and Repayment of such Moneys as shall have been
borrowed the aforesaid Toll shall cease and determine Any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,68.30

<P_7,98>

<heading>

CHAPTER XXI . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,98.33

AN ACT FOR THE INCREASE AND ENCOURAGEMENT OF SEAMEN .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,98.34

<$$heading>

Forasmuch as the Strength and Safety of this and other His Majesties
Realmes and Dominions doe very much depend upon the furnishing and
supplying of His Majesties Royall Navy with a competent number of able
Mariners and Seamen which may bee in a Readiness att all tymes for that
Service . And whereas the Seamen of this Kingdome have for a long tyme
distinguished themselves throughout the World by their Industry and
Skilfullnesse in theire Imployments and by their Courage and Constancy
manifested in Engagements for the Defence and Honour of their Native
Countrey And for an Encouragement to continue this theire antient
Reputation and to invite greater Numbers of His Majesties Subjects to
betake themselves to the Sea itt is fitt and reasonable that some
competent Provision should bee made that Seamen who by Age Wounds or
other Accidents shall become disabled for future Service att Sea and
shall not bee in a Condition to maintayne themselves comfortably may not
fall under Hardshipps and Miseries and {TEXT:missing_"and"} may be
supported att the publick Charge and that the Children of such disabled
Seamen and alsoe the Widdowes and Children of such Seamen as shall
happen to bee slaine killed or drowned in Sea Service may in some
reasonable manner be provided for and educated STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,98.36

And whereas His Majesty and Her late Majesty the Queene of blessed
Memory reflecting upon the Premises determined with themselves that an
Hospitall should bee erected established and endowed for the purposes
aforesaid and in order thereunto by their Letters Patents under their
Great Seale of England beareing Date the Five_and_twentieth Day of
October last past did give and grant to certaine Persons named therein
theire Heires and Assignes a certaine Peice or Parcell of Ground
scituate and being within the Parish of East Greenwich in the County of
Kent Parcell or reputed Parcell of their Mannor of East Greenwich
aforesaid and in the said Leters Patents particularly described and the
capitall Mesuage commonly called by the Name of the Palace of Greenwich
standing upon the said Peice or Parcell of Ground and severall other
Edifices Buildings and other Things in the said Letters Patents
mentioned <paren> except as herein is excepted <$$paren> to the Intent
that the Premisses should bee converted and employed unto and for the
Use and Service of an Hospitall for the Reliefe of Seamen their Widdowes
and Children and an Encouragement of Navigation as therein is mentioned
. And whereas His Majesty in further Execution of His pious and
princely Intention for the founding and endowing of an Hospitall at
Greenwich for the Purposes aforesaid by His Letters Patents under the
Great Seale of England <P_7,99> bearing Date the Tenth day of September
One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_five hath constituted Commissioners
and granted an annuall Summe payable out of the Treasury and given
divers proper Directions Powers and Authorities for the carrying on and
perfecting of the said Hospitall and the Endowment and Maintenance
thereof and of the said Persons to bee placed therein And to the Intent
that such Mariners Watermen Seamen Fishermen Lightermen Bargemen and
Keelmen As shall voluntarily come in and register themselves in and for
His Majesties Sea Service as hereafter is mentioned may have and receive
the Priviledges Benefitts and Advantages following Bee itt enacted by
the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and Consent of
the Lords Spirituall and Temporall and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the same That all and every
able Mariners {COM:sic} Seaman Waterman Fisherman Lighterman Bargeman
Keelman or Seafaring man being a natural_borne Subject of this Realme or
any of His Majesties Dominions or being naturalized or made a Denizen in
England and above the age of Eighteene Yeares and under the Age of Fifty
Yeares and being capable of Sea Service who shall bee willing to enter
and register himselfe for the Service of His Majesty His Heires and
Successors in His or Theire Royall Fleete or Navy shall and may by
himselfe or by any other Person or Persons by him thereto <paren> in
Writeing <$$paren> authorized or employed deliver or give in his
Christian Name Sirname and proper Addition together with his Age and the
Place of his Abode and Habitation unto such Officer or Officers As shall
bee appointed for the Registring of Seamen as is herein after mentioned
And that such and soe many Publick Officers for the registring of the
said Persons for Sea Service shall bee kept att the Charge of His
Majesty His Heires or Successors att the Navy Office in London or other
Places STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,99.37

and such of the Principall Officers of the Navy or other Persons shall
be appointed thereunto and the makeing and keeping such Registers shall
bee performed in such forme and methods as His Majesty His Heires or
Successors or the Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High
Admirall of England or any Three or more of them now being or the Lord
High Admirall of England or any Three or more of the Commissioners for
executing the Office of Lord High Admirall of England for the tyme being
shall from tyme to tyme prescribe direct and appoint soe as that in the
said Register or Registers there shall bee truely and faithfully entred
downe and registered in order and course of Tyme as well the Names
Sirnames Additions Ages Places of Abode or Habitation of all and every
such Mariner Seaman Waterman Fisherman Lighterman Bargeman Keelman or
Seafaireingman as aforesaid and also the true Dayes and Tymes of such
Entry or Registring for all or any of which Entries or Registrings noe
Fee Reward or Gratuity whatsoever <paren> other than from His Majesty
His Heires and Successors <$$paren> shall be demanded or received
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,99.38

And if any Person or Persons whatsoever shall willingly and knowingly
make or cause or procure to bee made in any of the said Offices any
Entry or Registry of the Name of any Person or Persons whatsoever save
of the very true Person or Persons and according to the truth of the
matter contained in such Entry every Person soe offending and being
thereof convicted shall forfeite the Summe of One_hundred Pounds the
Moiety whereof shall bee to His Majesty His Heires and Successors and
the other Moiety to such Person or Persons as shall sue for the same by
Action of Debt Bill Plaint or Informac~on in any of His Majesties Courts
of Record wherein noe Essoigne Wager of Law or Protection shall be
allowed STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,99.39

And for the due and faithfull Execution of the said Offices or Places of
Registers the respective Registers soe to bee appointed as aforesaid
shall before his and their Entrance thereunto or intermeddling therewith
take an Oath before the Judge of the Admiralty for the tyme being or
before Two or more of His Majesties Justices of the Peace in or for that
County City Towne or Place wherein such Office shall bee for the true
and faithfull Execution thereof and for his and theire good Demeanour
therein Which Oath the said Judge of the Admiralty for the tyme being or
any Two such Justices of the Peace as aforesaid have hereby Power to
administer . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,99.40

And bee itt further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the said
Navy Office or such other Office as shall be appointed by His Majesty
His Heires and Successors shall bee and bee called the Head Office
whereunto and to the Register or Registers therein to bee appointed as
aforesaid all other the Registers of and in the other Sea Ports and
Maritime Townes and Places shall from tyme to tyme and without any Fee
or Reward for the same <paren> other than from His Majesty His Heires or
Successors <$$paren> make and give Certificates under their respective
Hands and Seales of the Number Names Places of Abode and Additions of
All Seamen Watermen Fishermen Lightermen Bargemen Keelmen and Seafareing
men that shall bee entred or registred within theire respective Offices
and of the true Dayes and Tymes when such Entryes or Registrings were
first made Which said Certificates shall from tyme to tyme bee
transmitted unto the said Register or Registers in the said Navy Office
or other Office as aforesaid and by him or them fyled in course of tyme
as they came in STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,99.41

And the Names of the Seamen Watermen Fishermen Lightermen Bargemen
Keelmen and Seafareing men therein mentioned shall bee in order of tyme
as they come in and without any undue Preference entred and registred
there alsoe soe that in that Office the Number Names and Places of
Habitation of all the Seamen Watermen Fishermen Lightermen Bargemen
Keelmen And Seafareing men registred throughout the Kingdome and their
respective tymes of their comeing in to bee registred may from tyme to
tyme appeare a true Account of all which shall once in every Yeare or
oftner <paren> if required <$$paren> bee made and given in Writeing by
the said Officer or Officers att the Navy Office or other Office as
aforesaid unto the Commissioners for executeing the Office of Lord High
Admirall of England and to the Lord High Admirall of England for the
tyme being who are to take effectuall Care and give such tymely and
necessary orders and Directions that such and soe many of them as they
shall find most proper for His Majesties Service may from tyme to tyme
in each Yeare bee ordered and disposed for Service of the Fleete .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,99.42

<P_7,100>

And bee itt further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That in every or
any Yeare computeing the Yeare to beginne from the First day of January
dureing which the whole Number of registred Seamen there alive or in
being shall not exceed Thirty_thousand every {SIC:and_every} such Seaman
entred and {TEXT:missing_"and"} registred as aforesaid shall have paid
and allowed to him from His Majesty His Heires and Successors <paren>
whether hee bee in actuall Service or not <$$paren> the yearely Summe or
Bounty of Forty Shillings over and besides such other Pay and Allowances
which hee shall bee intituled unto by being in His Majesties actuall
Service STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,100.44

And in every or any Yeare dureing which the whole Number of registred
Seamen then alive or in being shall exceed Thirty_thousand there shall
bee in the like manner allowed and paid a Bounty of Forty Shillings a
peice to Thirty_thousand of the Number last mentioned for every such
Yeare respectively <paren> to witt <$$paren> to such of them as by the
Bookes of the said Registers shall appeare to be longest entred in or
for His Majesties Sea Service STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,100.45

And moreover none but such registred Mariners Watermen Fishermen
Lightermen Bargemen Keelmen and Seafareing men shall bee capable of
being preferred to any Commission or Warrant Offices in the Royall Navy
of His Majesty His Heires and Successors STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,100.46

And that every such registred Seaman being in Service upon any Shipp or
Vessell of His Majesties His Heires or Successors in any Foreigne Voyage
or designed for any Foreigne Voyage shall from tyme to tyme or att any
tyme have Power and is hereby authorized to signe or appoint to his Wife
or any other Person or Persons any part or proportion of the Pay due or
to bee due to him for his Service not exceeding Two Months Pay in every
Six Months Pay which shall bee due to him which Assignements shall bee
duely satisfied and complyed with upon due Proofe to bee made of the Six
Moneths Service by Returne of Musters according to the Practice of His
Majesties Navy STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,100.47

And that upon the like Proofe of such Seamans Death in the said Service
the Moneys which shall bee due or remaineing due to him for his Wages
shall bee paid to his Executors or Administrators without tarrying for
the Shipps Returne or her generall Pay STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,100.48

And alsoe every Seaman registred as aforesaid shall have and receive for
and as his Share and Dividend out of and for all Prizes taken att Sea
wherein hee shall bee concerned in the takeing or whereunto hee shall
bee intituled to have any Part or Share a double Part or Share in every
such Prize more than any other Seaman of like Quality in the Shipp with
himselfe whoe shall not bee registred as aforesaid Any Law or Statute to
the contrary notwithstanding STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,100.49

And that every such registred Seaman upon produceing a Certificate under
the Hand and Seale of the Register or Registers in the said Navy Office
or other Office as aforesaid that hee stands there soe registred as
aforesaid shall bee from tyme to tyme freed and exempted from serveing
upon any Juryes or Inquests or in the Militia or in or about the
assessing or collecting of any publick Taxes or Assessments or in the
Offices of Constables Tithingmen Borsholder Churchwarden Overseer or
Collector for the Poore or any other Parish Officer whatsoever except
such registred Seaman shall declare himselfe willing to serve in such
Office for which Certificate noe Fee or Reward shall bee demanded or
received STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,100.50

And every Election and Appointments of any such registred Seaman or
Seafareing man <paren> soe long as hee continues soe registred <$$paren>
to any of the said Offices Places or Employments aforesaid shall bee and
is hereby declared to bee voyd unlesse hee shall declare his Consent as
aforesaid . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,100.51

And for the Releife Benefitt or Advantage of such the said registered
Mariners or Seamen Watermen Fishermen Lightermen Bargemen Keelmen or
Seafareing men who by Age Wounds or other Accidents shall bee disabled
for future Service att Sea and shall not bee in a Condition to maintaine
themselves comfortably and the Children of such disabled Seamen and the
Widdowes and Children of such of them as shall happen to bee slaine
killed or drowned in Sea-service soe farr forth as the Hospitall herein
before mentioned shall bee capable to receive them and Revenue thereof
will extend for or towards theire Releife or Support and according to
the Rules Orders and Constitutions to bee settled and provided for the
said Hospitall and the Government and Regulation thereof Bee it further
enacted by the Authority aforesaid That every such Seaman Waterman
Fisherman Lighterman Bargeman Keelman or Seafareing man registred and
disabled as aforesaid shall upon Certificate thereof from the Captaine
Master Surgeon and Purser or soe many of them as were in the said Shipp
for the tyme being under his or theire Hand and Seale unto the Governour
or Governours of the said Hospitall att Greenwich for the tyme being bee
admitted and placed in the said Hospitall and shall have provided and
allowed unto him dureing his Life att the Charges of the said Hospitall
and out of the Revenues thereof according to the Rules , Orders and
Constitutions to bee provided and settled for the said Hospitall and the
Government and Regulation thereof fitting and convenient Lodging Meate
Drinke Clothing and other Necessaries and Conveniencies
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,100.52

And alsoe the Widdowes of such Seamen Watermen Fishermen Lightermen
Bargemen Keelmen and Seafareing-men whoe shall bee slaine killed or
drowned in the Sea-Service and the Children of such Seamen Watermen
Fishermen Lightermen Bargemen Keelmen or Seafareing-men soe slaine
killed or drowned and {COM:sic} not of Ability to maintaine or provide
comfortably for themselves shall bee received into the said Hospitall
and there bee provided for STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,100.53

And the said Children shall bee educated att the Charges of the said
Hospitall till they are fitt to be putt out or of Ability to maintaine
themselves All which shall bee done soe farr forth as the said Hospitall
shall bee capable to receive such disabled Seamen and such Widdowes and
Children as aforesaid and as the Revenues thereof will extend for the
Purposes aforesaid and according to the Rules Orders and Constitutions
to bee provided and settled for the said Hospitall and the Government
and Regulation thereof . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,100.54

Provided allwayes and be itt further enacted by the Authority aforesaid
That if any such Mariner Seaman Waterman Fisherman Bargeman Keelman or
Seafareing-man registred as aforesaid shall dureing the tyme of actuall
Warre withdraw or absent himselfe from the Service of His Majesty His
Heires or Successors in His or Theire Shipps or Navy and shall not
within Thirty Dayes next after due Summons or Warneing from the
Commissioners <P_7,101> for executing the Office of Lord High Admirall
of England or any Three or more of them now being or the Lord High
Admirall of England or the Commissioners for the executing the Office of
Lord High Admirall for the tyme being or any Three of them or the
Commissioners of the Navy for the tyme being or any Three of them or
such Persons as shall bee appointed by the King for keeping the said
Register or any Three of them or by the Vice-Admiralls of the severall
Counties or theire Deputies , repaire on board such of His Majesties
Shipps whereunto hee shall bee directed not being detained by Sicknesse
or other bodily Infirmity attested by the Oath of Twoe credible
Witnesses to bee allowed by the Commissioners for executing the Office
of Lord High Admirall of England or any Three or more of them now being
or by the Lord High Admirall of England or the Commissioners for
executing the Office of Lord High Admirall of England for the tyme being
or the Commissioners of the Navy for the tyme being or any Three of them
or such Persons as shall bee appointed by the King for keeping the said
Register or any Three of them or by the Vice_Admiralls of the severall
Counties or theire Deputies or if any such registred Mariner Seaman
Waterman Fisherman Lighterman Bargeman Keelman or Seafareing man shall
absent him or themselves or relinquish the Sea Service of His said
Majesty His Heires or Successors without the consent of the
Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High Admirall of England
or any Three or more of them now being or the Lord High Admirall of
England or Commissioners for executing the office of Lord High Admiral
for the tyme being or any Three of them first had and obtained in
Writeing for that purpose that then every such Mariner Seaman Waterman
Fisherman Lighterman Bargeman Keelman or Seafareing-man soe neglecting
or refuseing to appeare on board upon such Notice as aforesaid or who
shall absent him or themselves or relinquish the said Service without
such Consent as aforesaid shall for ever loose the Benefitt of this Act
and serve in His Majesties Navy Six Moneths without any Pay
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,101.55

but such Person for such Offence onely shall not suffer as a Deserter .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,101.56

Provided neverthelesse That nothing in this Act contained shall extend
to take away or alter the Punishment appointed by an Act made in the
Thirteenth Yeare of the Reigne of King Charles for such Captaines
Officers or Mariners as shall desert the Service of His Majesty His
Heires or Successors in his Shipps or shall run away from the s~d Shipps
or entice any others soe to doe . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,101.57

And bee it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That when and
after Five_and_twenty Yeares to bee reckoned from the Five_and_twentieth
day of March One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_and_six shall be expired
noe Person or Persons whatsoever shall bee capable of being a Brother of
Trinity House of Deptford Strond but onely such as att the tyme of his
or theire Election or before shall bee or shall have beene a Seaman or
Seamen Watermen Fishermen Lightermen Bargemen Keelmen registred in
pursuance of this Act And that every Seamen whatsoever that shall serve
His Majesty His Heires or Successors or any other Person or Persons
whatsoever in any of His Majesties Shipps or in any Shipp or Vessell
whatsoever belonging or to belong to any the Subjects of England or any
other His Majesties Dominions shall allow and there shall bee paid out
of the Wages of every such Seaman to grow due for such his Service Six
pence per Mensem for the better support of the said Hospitall and to
augment the Revenues thereof for the purposes aforesaid which Monthly
Allowance shall and may bee collected levyed and recovered by such
Officers and according to such Rules and Methods as shall in that
behalfe bee appointed by the said Commissioners for executing the Office
of Lord High Admirall of England or any Three or more of them or by the
Lord High Admirall of England for the tyme being .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,101.58

Provided alwayes and itt is hereby enacted That every Seaman att the
tyme of his being registred as aforesaid shall bring or cause to bee
brought a Certificate of his Place of Abode under the Hands of Two
Justices of the Peace of the County or Place where hee lives
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,101.59

And when and as often as any such Seaman shall change his Place of Abode
hee shall bring or cause to bee brought a new Certificate thereof to the
said Register under the Penalty of looseing the Benefitt of his being
registred as aforesaid STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,101.60

Provided also That every registred Seaman or Seafareing-man being under
the Age of Eighteene Yeares or above the Age of Five_and_Fifty Yeares
shall bee exempted from Service on Board His Majesties Shipps upon such
Summons as aforesaid unlesse hee or they will voluntarily enter himselfe
or themselves to serve on board the same . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,101.61

Provided also That where any Registred Seaman shall bee preferred to bee
a Commission or Warrant Officer in His Majesties Service or Master Mate
Boatswaine Gunner Carpenter Purser or Surgeon hee shall not bee
intituled to the said Bounty of Fourty Shillings a Yeare or other
Benefitts hereby intended for Seamen in respect of theire being
registred as aforesaid or be lyable to incurre the Penalties or
Disabilities whereunto Seamen not registred or not serveing as this Act
directs are hereby intended to bee subjected . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,101.62

Provided also and itt is hereby enacted That itt shall and may bee
lawfull to and for the said Commissioners for executing the Office of
Lord High Admirall of England or any Three or more of them or the Lord
High Admirall of England for the tyme being to discharge any Seaman who
shall have beene registred as aforesaid from <P_7,102> the said Register
upon any Cause for which itt shall be desired or for any Offence to
dismisse and expunge any Seaman from the said Register and thereby
deprive him of the Benefitt thereof according to the best of theire
Judgements and Discretions Any thing in this Act before mentioned to the
contrary notwithstanding . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,102.63

<P_7,118>

<heading>

CHAPTER XXVIII . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,118.66

AN ACT FOR THE MORE EFFC~UAL PREVENTING THE EXPORTAC~ON OF WOOLL AND FOR
THE {COM:preceding_word_"THE"_emended} INCOURAGING THE IMPORTATION
THEREOF FROM IRELAND . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,118.67

<$$heading>

Whereas several Laws have been made to prevent the Exportac~on of Wooll
yet neverthelesse the said Exportac~on is still continued whereby dayly
Mischiefs and Evils doe happen and a Correspondence with France is
maintained to the great Prejudice of the Government and Discouragement
of the Manufacture of this Kingdom . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,118.69

And whereas in the First yeare of the Reigne of King William and Queene
Mary there passed an Act intituled An Act for the better preventing the
Exportac~on of Wooll and incouraging the Woollen Manufactures of this
Kingdom which Act was continued by an Act made in the Fourth and Fifth
yeares of King William and Queen Mary intituled An Act for reviving
continuing and explaining several Laws therein menc~oed which are
expired and neare expiring and will now soon expire And whereas for
preventing the said Mischiefs it is necessary the said Act should be
continued Be it therefore enacted by the King~ most Excellent Majesty by
and with the Advice and Consent of the Lord~ Spiritual & Temporal and
Co~mons in this present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the
same That the said Act and every Clause Matter and Thing therein
contained <paren> except what is hereafter otherwise altered explained
or repealed <$$paren> shall continue and remaine in full Force as if the
same were herein and hereby particularly recited and mentioned .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,118.70

And whereas the Statute of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth of King Charles
the Second made against the Exportac~on of Wooll among other thing~ in
the said Act mentioned doth enact the same to bee deemed Felony by the
Severity of which Penalty the Prosecution of Offenders hath not been soe
effectually put in Execuc~on Be it therefore enacted by the Authority
aforesaid That soe much of the said Act which relates to the making the
said Offence Felony be repealed and made void .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,118.71

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That for the better
Incouragement of the Importation of Wooll from Ireland that it shall and
may be lawfull for any Person or Persons whatsoever from the Place or
Places in the said Act limited to import into England from Ireland any
Quantity or Quantities of Wool to any the ports hereafter mentioned
<paren> that is to say <$$paren> Whitehaven in the County of Cumberland
Leverpoole Chester Bristoll Bridgewater Minehead Barnstaple and
Biddiford and to noe other Any thing in this Act to the contrary thereof
in any wise notwithstanding . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,118.72

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the
Co~missioners or Farmers of the Customs in the Kingdom of Ireland for
the time being shall from time to time and att all times hereafter once
every Six Months transmitt or cause to bee transmitted unto the
Commissioners of His Majesties Customs in England a true Account of all
such Wooll as shall bee from time to time exported from any of the
Places within the said Kingdome of Ireland from whence the same may be
exported the Quantity and Weight thereof and by whom and in what Ships
exported and where consigned and the Names of the Persons signing the
Certificates of the Landing the same in England and the Date of the said
Certificates and where the same was landed as alsoe the Quantity and
Weight contained in the said Certificates in order that the same may be
compared with the Account by the said Act appointed to be kept by the
Co~missioners of the Customs of this Kingdome .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,118.73

And for preventing the Mischief~ of razing obliterating or interlining
such Certificates as aforesaid Be it further enacted That all
Certificates given for the landing of Wooll from Ireland or from one
Port to another in England shall bee written upon Paper and not
Parchment and that the Quantities therein expressed shall not be
obliterated or interlined upon any Pretence whatsoever .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,118.74

And whereas the several Inhabitant~ of the several Counties and Shires
of this Realme next adjoyning to the Kingdome of Scotland and to the Sea
Coast~ doe reap great Profit & Advantage by the carrying out of Wooll
Wooll Fells Mortling~ Shortling~ Yarn made of Wooll Wooll Flock~ Fullers
Earth & Scouring Clay into the said Kingdome of Scotland and exporting
of them into France and other Part~ beyond the Seas to the great
prejudice and decay of the Woollen Manufacture of this Realme Bee it
further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That from and after the First
day of May in the Yeare of our Lord One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_six
no Wooll or any other of the Co~modities aforesaid shall be laid or
loaden on any Horse or other Carriage whatsoever or shall bee carried or
conveyed by Land to or from any Place or Places within the said Counties
next adjoyning to the said Kingdome of Scotland or within Five Miles of
the Sea Cost as aforesaid but between Sun riseing and Sun setting under
the Penalty and Forfeiture of the said Co~modities and of the said
Horses and other Cattle and Carriages imployed in carrying the same And
that no Shipp or Vessell shall export or carry the same into any Part
beyond the Seas under the Penalty and Forfeiture of the said Co~modities
Shipp and Vessell and Treble the Value thereof with Treble Cost~ of Suit
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,118.75

And the Inhabitant~ of the respective Hundred Port or Place exempt next
adjoyning to the said Kingdom of Scotland or to the Sea Coast~ out of or
through which any Wooll or any other of the Co~modities aforesaid shall
be so carried or exported shall forfeit Twenty Pound~ if the said Wooll
so carried out or exported shall bee under the Value of Ten Pound~
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,118.76

but if it shall be of greater Value then Treble the Value thereof so
exported or carried out of the said Kingdom as also Treble Cost~ of Suit
all which <P_7,119> said Forfeitures Penalties and Cost~ of Suit are to
be recovered and received by him or them that shall sue for the same and
to be prosecuted by any Action of Debt Bill Suit Plaint or Information
against the Inhabitant~ of such Hundred Port or Place exempt out of or
through which the said Wooll or other Comodities shall be exported in
any of His Majesties Court~ of Record at Westminster where noe Essoign
Protection or Wager of Law shall bee allowed nor any more then one
Imparlance . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,119.77

And bee itt further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the
Execution for the Informer shall and may bee had against Two or more of
the said Inhabitant~ And that after Execution had by Force of this Act
it shall and may be lawfull <paren> upon Complaint made by the Party or
Parties so charged <$$paren> to and for the Justices of the Peace of the
same County or Place where any such Execution shall be had att their
General Quarter Sessions to be held for the said County or Place to
assess and tax rateably and proportionably according to their
Discretions all and every the Townes Parishes Villages and Hamlett~ in
the said Hundred Port or Place exempt in the same Manner and Forme as
any Hundred ought to bee charged in case of Robbery co~mitted for the
Persons against whom Execuc~on shall bee had for the person so robbed
pursuant to an Act made in the Seaven_and_twentieth Yeare of Queen
Elizabeth intituled An Act for the following of the Hue and Cry And that
the Justices of the Peace of the said County or Place where such Fact
shall be committed shall and are hereby impowered and required att their
General Quarter Sessions to be held for the said County or Place to levy
the Penalties hereby charged upon the said Inhabitant~ by an equal
Assessment upon the said Inhabitant~ and reimburse such Person or
Persons Inhabitant~ within the said Hundred Port or Place exempt
adjacent to the Kingdom of Scotland or the Sea Coast from whence the
said Wooll or other the said Co~modities shall be transported in the
same manner as if there had been a Judgment att Law against the said
Hundred Port or Place exempt . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,119.78

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That all Persons
who shall be aiding abetting or assisting in carrying or exporting any
of the said Co~modities out of this Realme as aforesaid <paren> being
legally convicted thereof <$$paren> shall suffer Three Yeares
Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize and the Owner of the said Wooll
or of any other of the Co~modities aforesaid and all and every Person or
Persons who shall be aiding abetting or assisting in carrying or
exporting of them or any of them out of this Kingdom shall answer and
satisfie Treble the Value of all such Forfeitures and Penalties which
such Inhabitant~ shall be so charged with and be {TEXT:missing_"be"}
liable to as alsoe Treble Cost~ of Suit which shall and may be recovered
by Action of Debt Suit Bill Plaint or Information in any of His
Majesties Court~ of Record att Westminster wherein noe Essoigne
Protection or Wager of Law shall bee allowed nor any more than one
Imparlance by and in the Name of the Clerk of the Peace for the time
being of or for every such County or Place without naming the Christian
Name or Sirname of the said Clerk of the Peace which Treble Value and
Treble Cost~ of Suit shall be to the onely use and behoofe of the said
Inhabitant~ And that notwithstanding the Death or Removal of any such
Clerk of the Peace after such Action of Debt Suit Bill Plaint or
Information sued comenced or p~ferred the same shall be prosecuted and
pursued to Judgment and Execution , in such Manner and Forme to all
Intent~ and Purposes as that Clerk of the Peace might have done which
first co~menced or preferred the said Action of Debt Suit Bill Plaint or
Information . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,119.79

And for the better and more impartial Tryals of all such Actions and
Informations which shall be co~menced or prosecuted by virtue of this
Act be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That such Actions and
Informations shall be tryed in any of His Majesties Court~ of Record by
a Jury of good and lawfull Freeholders to bee su~moned out of any other
County than that wherein the Fact shall bee co~mitted
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,119.80

And to encourage Persons to discover the said Crime the first Three
Persons who have been aiding abetting or assisting in carrying out or
Exportation of Wooll or any other of the Co~modities as aforesaid that
shall informe thereof any Justice of the Peace in either of the said
several Counties as aforesaid whereby the Punishment and Penalties
appointed by this Act may be inflicted and recovered the Party or
Parties so discovering <paren> not being Owner or part Owners of the
said Wooll or other Co~modities aforesaid <$$paren> shall not suffer any
of the said Penalties or Punishment . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,119.81

Provided always and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if any
Action or Suit shall bee brought and prosecuted by any Person or Persons
against any Justice of Peace or other Person imployed by them or any of
them in the Execuc~on of this Act for any Matter Cause or Thing by them
or either of them done co~mitted or executed by virtue or reason of this
Act or any Clause or Article therein contained That then and in every
such Case the Action shall be layd in the proper County where the Fact
was done and co~mitted and not elsewhere STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,119.82

And the Defendant or Defendant~ may plead the General Issue and give the
Special Matter in Evidence at the Tryal That the same was done in
pursuance and by Authority of this Act STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,119.83

And if upon Examination it shall so happen to be done the Jury shall
find for the Defendant or Defendant~ STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,119.84

And in such Case or if the Plaintiff shall be nonsuit or discontinue his
Action after the Defendant or Defendaunt~ hath or have appeared the
Defendant or Defendant~ shall have and recover their Treble Cost~ which
hee or they shall sustaine or be put unto by reason of his or their
wrongfull Vexation in Defence of the said Action or Suit
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,119.85

And that every Action Suit Bill Plaint or Information by virtue of this
Act shall bee commenced and prosecuted within One yeare after the Fact
co~mitted . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,119.86

Provided always that if any Person who is intituled to the Penalties and
Forfeitures by this Act given shall compound with any Hundred Port or
Place exempt hereby liable to pay the same for any lesser Su~m then what
is hereby given That it shall att any time hereafter be lawfull for any
other Person to sue for and recover the <P_7,120> same in Manner and
Forme as aforesaid as if no such Composition had been made and the
Person so compounding shall for such his Offence suffer Five yeares
Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,120.87

And this Act to continue in force for Three yeares and from thence to
the end of the next Session of Parliament . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,120.88

And for the better preventing the Exportation of Wooll and
Correspondence with France Be it further enacted by the Authority
aforesaid That the Lord High Admiral of England or Co~missioners for
executing the Office of Lord High Admiral for the time being shall from
time to time direct and appoint One Shipp of the Fifth Rate & Two Shipps
of the Sixth Rate and Foure Armed Sloops constantly to cruize from off
the North-foreland to the Isle of Wight with Orders for taking and
seizeing all Shipps Vessells or Boats which shall export any Wooll or
carry or bring any prohibited Good~ or any suspected Persons .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,120.89

<P_7,462>

<heading>

CHAPTER VI . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,462.92

AN ACT TO ENLARGE THE TRADE TO RUSSIA . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,462.93

<$$heading>

Whereas King Philip and Queene Mary by their Letters Patents dated at
Westminster the Sixth Day of February in the First and Second Yeares of
their Reigne being willing to animate advance and further the Persons in
the said Letters Patents named in their good Purpose and profitable
Adventure for the discovering discrying and finding out Isles Lands and
Territories unknowne lying to the Northward and by English Subjects
before then not commonly frequented by Sea as well for the Glory of God
as for illustrating the Royall Dignity in the Increase of the Revenues
of the Crowne and the generall Wealth of this Realme and of the Subjects
of the same <paren> as in the said Letters Patents is particularly
expressed <$$paren> did incorporate the said Persons by the Name of
Merchants Adventurers for the Discovery of Lands Territories Isles and
Seigniorities unknowne and not by the Seas and Navigations before their
said late Adventure or Enterprize by Sea or Navigation commonly
frequented with Power to make Statutes Acts and Ordinances for the good
Government of the said Fellowship and alsoe to admitt unto the said
Fellowship Persons to be free of the same and that every Person or
Persons soe to be admitted should from the time of his or their
Admittances be free of the said Fellowship and that the said Fellowship
should have and enjoy the sole Trade to all the main_Lands Isles Ports
Havens Creeks and Rivers of the Emperor of Russia and to all and
singular other Lands Dominions Territories Ports Creekes and Armes of
the Sea whatsoever in the said <P_7,463> Letters Patents particularly
mentioned and described as by the said Letters Patents <paren> among
other Things therein contained <$$paren> more at large may and doth
appeare And whereas the Liberties Powers and Priviledges granted by the
said Letters Patents were afterwards by an Act of Parliament made in the
Eighth Yeare of the Reigne of Queen Elizabeth ratified and confirmed to
the said Fellowship and their Successors by the Name of the Fellowship
of English Merchants for Discovery of new Trades with Power to have and
enjoy all and singular the Liberties Priviledges Jurisdictions Powers
and Authorities as well in the said Letters Patents as {COM:in_the} Act
of Parliament mentioned or contained with a Prohibition that no Subject
or Denizon of this Realme should traffick to visitt or frequent any of
the Places granted by the said Act to the said Fellowship to trade in
but by Order Agreement or Consent of the Governour Consulls and
Assistants of the said Fellowship for the time being or the major Part
of them upon Paine that every Person and Persons offending in that
behalfe should forfeite and loose <paren> ipso facto <$$paren> every
such Ship and Ships with the Appurtenances and all such Goods and Things
whatsoever as by any such Persons should be by any Meanes directly or
indirectly carried conducted brought or exchanged in at or to through or
from any of the Places prohibited contrary to the true Intent of the
said Act One Moiety thereof to the Queens Majesty Her Heires and
Successors and the other Moiety thereof to the said Fellowship and their
Successors as by the said Act of Parliament <paren> amongst other Things
therein contained <$$paren> more at large may and doth appeare And
whereas the easie Admission of Persons into the said Company or
Fellowship will in all probability tend very much to the enlarging the
said Trade for the publick Good and for that there is no mention made
either in the said Letters Patents or Act of Parliament upon what Termes
Persons shall be admitted or what certaine Fine shall be taken by the
said Fellowship for the admitting Persons to be free thereof the
ascertaining whereof would very much tend to the encreasing the Number
of Traders to the said Places therefore for the ascertaining hereafter
what Fine shall be taken by the said Fellowship for the said Admissions
and For enlarging and encouraging the Trade to Russia and other the
Places in the said Charter and Act of Parliament mentioned and described
Be it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall and of the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the same That
from and after the Five_and_twentieth Day of March which shall be in the
Yeare of our Lord One_thousand_six_hundred_ninety_nine every Subject of
the Realme desireing Admission into the said Fellowship of English
Merchants for Discovery of new Trades commonly called or knowne by the
Name of the Russia Company on Request in that Behalfe to be made to the
Governour Consuls and Assistants for the time being of the said
Fellowship or any Three or more of them shall be admitted into the said
Fellowship and shall have use and enjoy all the Liberties Priviledges
Jurisdictions Franchises Powers and Authorities granted to the said
Fellowship either by the said Letters Patents or Act of Parliament as
largely fully and amply to all Intents Constructions and Purposes as any
other Member of the said Fellowship could can or may have use or enjoy
the same by virtue of the said Letters Patents and Act of Parliament or
either of them such Subject paying for such his Admission for the use of
the said Fellowship only the sum of Five Pounds and no more
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,463.95

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That from And after
the said Five_and_twentieth Day of March the Sum of Five Pounds only and
no more shall be demanded taken or accepted by the said Fellowship for
any Admission to the Freedom thereof Any By-Law Statute or Ordinance of
the said Fellowship made or to be made to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,463.96

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That where any
Person or Persons residing in any Out-port or any other Place within
this Realme the Dominion of Wales or Towne of Berwick upon Tweed shall
make Request to be admitted into the said Fellowship as aforesaid by his
Agent or Deputy making Tender of Five Pounds for his Admission the said
Governour Consuls and Asistants shall under the Common Seale of the said
Fellowship within Ten Daies after such Request appoint one or more
Person or Persons to admitt such Person or Persons into the Freedome of
the said Fellowship and to administer to him and them the Oath to be
taken by the Freemen of the said Fellowship which Oath they are hereby
impowered to administer which Admission and Administration of the said
Oath shall be as good and effectuall as if the same were actually done
by the said Governour Consulls and Assistants STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,463.97

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the
Commissioners of His Majesties Customs shall at every Session of
Parliament lay before both Houses a true Account in Writing under their
Hands of what Navall Stores shall have been imported into this Kingdome
by any Persons trading to Russia . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,463.98

<P_7,598>

<heading>

CHAPTER X . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.101

AN ACT FOR THE MORE EFFECTUALL IMPLOYING THE POOR BY INCOURAGEING THE
MANUFACTURES OF THIS KINGDOM . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.102

<$$heading>

Whereas it is most Evident That the Continuance of the Trade to the
East-Indies in the same Manner and Proportions as it hath been for Two
Yeares last past must inevitably be to the great Detriment of this
Kingdom by exhausting the Treasure thereof and melting downe the Coine
and takeing away the labour of the People whereby very many of the
Manufacturers of this Nation are become excessively burdensome and
chargeable to their respective Parishes and others are thereby compelled
to seeke for Employment in Forreigne Parts For Remedy whereof Be it
enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the same That from
and after the Twenty_ninth Day of September
One_thousand_seaven_hundred_and_one All Wrought Silks Bengalls and
Stuffs mixed with Silk or Herba of the Manufacture of Persia China or
East_India and all Callicoes painted dyed printed or stained there which
are or shall be imported into this Kingdom shall not be worn or
otherwise used within this Kingdom of England Dominion of Wales or Town
of Berwick upon Tweed but under such Limitations as are hereinafter
mentioned and expressed STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.104

And for the better effecting the same Be it enacted by the Authority
aforesaid That from and after the said Twenty_ninth Day of September
One_thousand_seaven_hundred_and_one all such Wrought Silks Bengalls and
Stuffs mixed with Silk or Herba of the Manufacture of Persia China or
East_India as aforesaid and all Callicoes painted dyed printed or
stained there which are or shall be imported into this Kingdom of
England Dominion of Wales or Towne of Berwick upon Tweed shall after
Entry thereof be forthwith carried and putt into such Warehouse or
Warehouses as shall be for that Purpose approved of by the Commissioners
of His Majesties Customs for the Time being soe as none of them shall be
taken or carried out thence upon any Account whatsoever other than in
order for Exportation and not untill sufficient Security be first given
to the Kings Majesty His Heires and Successors <paren> which the said
Commissioners are hereby required and impowered to take <$$paren> that
the same and every Part thereof shall be exported and not landed again
in any Part of this Kingdom of England Dominion of Wales and Towne of
Berwick upon Tweed which said Securities shall be discharged without any
Fee or Reward upon Certificate returned under the Common Seale of the
Chiefe Magistrate in any Place or Places beyond the Seas or under the
Hands and Seales of Two knowne English Merchants upon the Place that
such Goods were there landed or upon Proofe by credible Persons that
such Goods were taken by Enemies or perished in the Seas The Examination
and Proofe thereof being left to the Judgment of the said Commissioners
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.105

And all such of the aforesaid Goods whether the same shall be mixed
sewed or made up together for Sale with any other Goods or Materials or
otherwise which shall be found in any House Shopp or Ware-house or other
Place whatsoever <paren> other than in such Ware-houses as shall be
approved of by the said Commissioners as aforesaid <$$paren> shall be
forfeited and subject and liable to be searched for and seized in like
Manner as prohibited and uncustomed Goods are by an Act <paren>
intituled An Act for preventing Frauds and regulating Abuses in His
Majesties Customs <$$paren> made in the Fourteenth Yeare of the Reigne
of our late Sovereigne Lord King Charles the Second
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.106

And all such Goods soe forfeited as aforesaid shall upon Seizure thereof
be carried to the next Custome-house STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.107

and after Condemnation shall be sold to the best Advantage for
Exportation at Publick Sale by the Candle The Buyer and Buyers giveing
Security for the Exportation thereof in Manner as aforesaid
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.108

And One Third Part of the Moneys to be raised by such Sale shall be paid
to the Kings Majesty His Heires and Successors and the other Two Third
Parts thereof to him her or them that shall seize or prosecute for the
same STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.109

And over and above the Losse of the said Goods the Person or Persons in
whose Custody knowing thereof the forfeite shall be found or seized or
that shall sell or dispose thereof to any Person or Persons whatsoever
shall forfeite and loose the Summe of Two_hundred Pounds
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.110

One Third Part thereof to the Kings Majesty His Heires and Successors
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.111

and the other Two Third Parts thereof to such Person or Persons that
shall sue for the same to be recovered by Action of Debt Bill Plaint
Suite or Information in any of His Majesties Courts of Record at
Westminster wherein no Essoigne Protection or Wager of Law shall be
allowed or any more than one Imparlance STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.112

And for preventing all Clandestine importing or bringing into this
Kingdome of England Dominion of Wales or Towne of Berwick upon Tweed any
of the aforesaid Goods hereby prohibited or intended to be prohibited
from being worne or used in England Be it further enacted by the
Authority aforesaid That if any Person or Persons or Bodies Corporate
from and after the said Twenty_ninth Day of September
One_thousand_seaven_hundred_and_one shall import or bring into any Port
of or in this Kingdome of England Dominion of Wales or Towne of Berwick
upon Tweed other than the Port of London any of the aforesaid prohibited
Goods or into the Port of London and shall not make due Entries of such
Goods soe imported or brought in , the same shall be and is hereby
adjudged deemed accounted and taken to be Clandestine running thereof
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.113

and such Person or Persons or Bodies Corporate soe offending therein and
their Abettors shall not only forfeite and loose the said Goods soe
clandestinely run as aforesaid but alsoe the Summe of Five_hundred
Pounds to be recovered and divided in such Manner as aforesaid
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,598.114

<P_7,599>

And be it further enacted That if any Question or Doubt shall arise
where the said Goods were manufactured the Proof shall lie upon the
Owner or Owners thereof and not upon the Prosecutor any Law Usage or
Custome to the contrary notwithstanding STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,599.116

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if any Action
Bill Plaint Suite or Information shall be commenced or prosecuted
against any Person or Persons for any Seizure or other thing to be made
or done in pursuance or in execution of any thing before in this Act
contained such Person or Persons soe sued in any Court whatsoever may
plead the Generall Issue and give this Act and the speciall Matter in
Evidence for their Excuse or Justification STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,599.117

And if the Plaintiffe or Plaintiffs or Prosecutor or Prosecutors shall
become Nonsuit or forbeare Prosecution or suffer Discontinuance or if a
Verdict passe against him her or them in any such Action Bill Plaint
Suite or Information as aforesaid the Defendant or Defendants shall have
Treble Costs for which they shall have the like Remedy as in any Case
where Costs by Law are given to the Defendant STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,599.118

And for preventing clandestinely carrying out of the said Ware-houses
any of the said Goods hereby prohibited and by this Act intended for
Exportation as aforesaid Be it further enacted by the Authority
aforesaid That the Warehouse-keeper or Warehouse-keepers shall keepe one
or more Book or Books wherein he or they shall fairly enter or write
downe an exact particular and true Account of all and every Chest Bail
and Number of Pieces therein contained of such of the aforesaid Goods
only which shall be brought into and carried out of his or their said
Ware-house or Ware-houses and the Daies and Times when the same shall be
soe brought in and carried out and shall every six Months in the Yeare
transmitt in Writing an exact Account thereof upon Oath to the said
Commissioners together with an exact Account how much shall be remaining
in his or their said Ware-house or Ware-houses respectively
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,599.119

And the said Commissioners are hereby impowered and enjoyned within one
Month after the same shall be transmitted to them as aforesaid to
appoint one or more Person or Persons to inspect the said Booke or Books
Warehouse or Warehouses and examine the said Accounts and to lay a true
Account of the same before the Parliament within the First Weeke of
every Sessions thereof STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,599.120

And if upon Examination it shall appeare That any of the aforesaid Goods
were carried out unlesse for Exportation or before sufficient Security
given for their Exportation as aforesaid that then the Ware-house-keeper
or Ware-house-keepers so offending therein shall not onely forfeite and
loose the Value of the said Goods soe carried out as aforesaid and be
for ever disabled from any publick Employment for the future but shall
alsoe forfeite the Summe of Five_hundred Pounds for every such Offence
to be recovered and divided in manner as aforesaid
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,599.121

Provided alwaies and it is hereby enacted That this Act shall not extend
to any Silks Bengalls Stuffs mixed with Silke or Herba or painted dyed
printed or stained Callicoes manufactured in Persia China or East-India
which shall have been made up and used in any sort of Apparell or
Furniture before the said Twenty_ninth of September
One_thousand_seaven_hundred_and_one STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,599.122

Provided alwaies and be it further enacted That it shall and may be
lawfull to and for the Proprietor or Proprietors of the said Goods so
lodged in any Warehouse or Warehouses as aforesaid to affix one Lock to
every such Warehouse or Warehouses the Key of which shall remaine in the
Custody of the said Proprietor or Proprietors and that he or they may
view sort or deliver the said Goods in order for Exportation as
aforesaid in the presence of the said Warehouse-keeper or
Warehouse-keepers who is and are hereby obliged at seasonable times to
give Attendance for that purpose STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,599.123

Provided alsoe and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That every
Person or Persons or Bodies Corporate who shall on or before the said
Twenty_ninth Day of September One_thousand_seaven_hundred_and_one import
into this Kingdom Dominion of Wales or Towne of Berwick upon Tweed any
of the Comodities aforesaid and shall within the space of Three Years
from such Importation export the same again shall be allowed and paid
the severall Duties payable upon the Exportation thereof as fully as if
the same had been exported within Twelve Months after the Importation
thereof STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,599.124

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That from and after
the said Twenty_ninth Day of September which shall be in the Yeare of
our Lord One_thousand_seaven_hundred_and_one there shall be no Customs
or Duties whatsoever paid or secured to be paid for any of the said
Goods or Commodities which shall be imported at any time from and after
the said Twenty_ninth Day of September
One_thousand_seaven_hundred_and_one other than and except the Halfe
Subsidy which is to remain by Law after the Goods are exported But that
all other Customs and Duties now chargeable upon or payable for the said
Goods shall from that time cease and determine .
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,599.125

<P_7,607>

<heading>

CHAPTER XVIII . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,607.128

AN ACT FOR THE MORE EFFECTUALL PUNISHMENT OF VAGRANTS AND SENDING THEM
WHITHER BY LAW THEY OUGHT TO BE SENT . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,607.129

<$$heading>

Whereas many Parts of this Kingdom are extremely oppressed by the usuall
Method of conveying Vagabonds or Beggers from Parish to Parish in a
dilatory Manner whereby such Vagabonds or Beggers in hopes of Releife
from every Parish through which they are conducted are encouraged to
spend their Lives in wandring from one Part of this Kingdom to another
and to elude divers charitable and well-disposed Persons very frequently
to {TEXT:missing_"to"} forge or counterfeite Passes Testimonialls or
Characters whereby the charitable Intentions of such Persons are often
abused For Remedy whereof Bee it enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spirituall and
Temporall and Commons in this present Parliament assembled That from and
after the Four_and_twentieth Day of June One_thousand_seaven_hundred if
any Vagabond Beggar or any other Person whatsoever shall be brought to
any Constable Headborough Tythingman or other Officer thereof with any
Passe Testimoniall Letter of Request or other Writing whatsoever
pretending thereby either to be relieved or conveyed that all and every
such Person and Persons shall by such Constable or other Officer or some
other sufficient Person or Persons whom he shall order or depute be
taken before some Justice of the Peace of every such County wherein they
shall arrive who inhabites or resides nearest the Towne or Place where
such Persons shall first come appear or be brought before the Constable
or other Officer which said Justice of the Peace shall carefully and
diligently examine them STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,607.131

and if he finds them such Persons as ought by Law to be punished he is
then required to send them to the House of Correction and take such
further Course with them as the Law in such Case directs
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,607.132

or if they are not such Persons then to order them immediately to be
conveyed out of the said County to each Towne of the next County unto or
through which such Person or Persons are to passe or be conveyed as such
Justice shall think most proper STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,607.133

And every Constable or other Officer is hereby required accordingly to
convey them either to the House of Correction or to such Towne as
aforesaid of the next County without Delay STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,607.134

and the said Justice of Peace is hereby further required to give the
said Constable a Certificate without Fee of the Number of such Persons
whom he shall so order to be punished or conveyed as also the Manner how
when and from whence such Persons are to be conveyed whether by Cart
Horse or Foot and what Number of Persons any such Constable or Officer
had Occasion to employ to bring such Persons before him or for conveying
any such Person or Persons to the House of Correction or next County as
aforesaid STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,607.135

And to the Intent that every such Constable or other Officer may be
fully paid and satisfied for his Losse of Time and his Expences in
Execution of this Act Be it enacted That the said Justices of Peace
shall tax on the Backside of such Certificate such Constable a
reasonable and sufficient Allowance for his Trouble and Expence which
Certificate the said Constable shall deliver to the Chiefe Constable of
that Divison who is hereby ordered forthwith out of the Summs of the
Goal and Marshalsea Money he shall receive to pay such Constable the
Summ soe taxed upon each Certificate and take a Receipt of such
Constables for the same which Receipt the said Chiefe Constable shall
deliver to the Treasurer of the County at the next Quarter Sessions who
shall discount the same with the said Chiefe Constable takeing in the
said Receipts and Certificates which shall alsoe be allowed him upon the
generall Account of the said Treasurer STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,607.136

And in case the said Goal and Marshalsea Money be not sufficient after
having discharged the Purposes for which it is raised to reimburse the
Expence and satisfie the Allowance as is hereby required It is hereby
further enacted That the Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions
shall have Power to raise Moneys upon their respective Counties Ridings
and Divisions in which they are impowered to act by their respective
Commissions in such Manner as they raise it for County Goals and Bridges
to satisfie the said Expences STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,607.137

and Allowances soe raised shall Quarterly be paid to the Chief Constable
of each Division soe as the said Chief Constables shall have a Quarters
Payment in their Hands before hand STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,607.138

And as often as the said Petty Constables or Deputies shall produce
<P_7,608> the said Certificates of his or their Expences and Allowance
of the Chief Constable of their Division under the Hand and Seale of the
said Justice of Peace the said Constable is hereby required to pay the
said Charges according to the said Certificate which he must take in and
account for at the next Quarter Sessions as aforesaid
STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,608.139

And it is hereby further enacted That the said Petty Constables shall
not charge the Inhabitants of his Constablery with any Summ or Summs of
Money or any Provision towards the Releife or Conveyance for such Rogues
and Vagabonds STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,608.140

And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That any Constable or other
Officer neglecting to apprehend such Vagabond or wandring Beggars or be
{COM:sic} remisse or negligent in doing his Duty by the Act required
shall for every such Offence forfeit the Summ of Twenty Shillings One
Fourth Part whereof shall go to the Informer and the other Three Parts
to the Use of the Poor of the Parish or Place where the said Offence
shall be committed the same to be levied by Distresse and Sale of the
Goods of such Offender by Warrant under the Hand and Seale of any
Justice of the Peace of the said County who is hereby impowered and
required to hear and determine the said Offence by the Oath of one
Witnesse STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,608.141

Provided alsoe and be it further enacted That this Act shall continue
for the Space of Three Yeares to be commenced from the
Four_and_twentieth {TEXT:Four_and_and_twentieth} Day of June
One_thousand_seaven_hundred and from thence to the End of the next
Session of Parliament and no longer STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,608.142

Provided alwaies and be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid
That whereas there are in some Counties severall Ridings or Divisions
Liberties and Towns Corporate wherein the Justices of the Peace for the
said Counties do keep separate or distinct Quarter Sessions and have
severall Treasurers for their County Stocks that all such Rideings and
Divisions of Counties Liberties and Townes Corporate shall be taken and
deemed as Counties for the severall Purposes and Provisions in this Act
mentioned And that the Justices of the Peace Treasurers Chief Constables
Petty Constables and other Officers residing therein shall in the
certifying and conveying of Passengers and raising and paying of Money
act in such Ridings and Divisions as they are by this Act impowered and
directed to doe in Counties at large Any thing herein contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,608.143

And whereas there is an ancient Hospitall or Corporation in the Towne of
Kingston upon Hull called or knowne by the Name of the Guild or
Brotherhood of Masters and Pilotts Seamen of the Trinity House in
Kingston upon Hull founded upon the Incouragement of Navigation and for
the Releife of poor distressed Seamen their Widows and Children within
the said Towne of Kingston upon Hull And whereas an Act passed in the
Third Sessions of the last Parliament holden in the Ninth and Tenth
Yeares of His now Majesties Reigne intituled An Act for erecting
Workhouses and Houses of Correction in the Towne of Kingston upon Hull
for the Imployment and Maintenance of the Poor there wherein there is
contained a Clause to this Effect that all Charitable Gifts Devises and
Dispositions that shall hereafter be given devised or disposed to or for
the Use of the said Towne or of any Place within the same shall be paid
to and be had received and enjoyed by the Corporation in the said Act
made to and for the Use of the Poor of the same Towne by which Clause
all Gifts made by Seafaring Men or others well-disposed for the
Endowment of the said Hospitall of the Trinity House in Kingston upon
Hull for the better and further Maintenance of the said distressed
Seamen their Widows and Children are or may be prevented or discouraged
to bestow any Charitable Benefaction thereon least the same should be or
be claimed to be applied to the Use of the Poor of the said Towne in
generall contrary to the Intention of such Benefactor by Meanes whereof
the said Hospitall is likely to be greatly prejudiced by the Clause
aforesaid and other Clauses in the said Act contrary to the Intent
thereof Be it therefore declared and enacted by the Authority aforesaid
That the said recited Clause in the said Act shall stand absolutely
repealed And that neither the said recited Clause or any other Thing in
the said Act contained shall extend or be construed to affect or extend
to the said Hospitall or Corporation of Trinity House in Kingston upon
Hull nor to the Prejudice of the Poor belonging thereunto but shall
<paren> as to them and every of them <$$paren> stand repealed and void
and that the said Hospitall or Corporation of the Trinity House
aforesaid and all the Poor belonging and to be belonging thereunto shall
in all respects stand and be in the same Freedome Plight and Condition
as they were before the making the said Act and as if the said Act had
never been made . STAT-1697-E3-P1,7,608.144

