<BEGIN_stat-1533-e1-p1>

<P_3,327>

<heading>

CHAPTER X . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,327.4

An Acte conc~nyng Egypsyans . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,327.5

<$$heading>

For as mouch as afore this tyme dyv~se and many outlandysshe People
callynge themselfes Egyptians usyng no crafte nor faicte of marchaundyse
have co~men into this Realme , and gone from Shire to Shire and from
{TEXT:missing_"from"} Place to Place in greate company and used greate
subtyll and crafty meanes to deceyve the people , beryng them in hande ,
that they by Palmestre coulde telle menne and womens fortunes , and so
many tymes by crafte and subtyltie have deceyved the people of theyr
money , and also hath co~mytted many and haynous felonyes and robberies
to the greate hurte and deceyte of the people that they have comyn
amonge : Be it therfore , by the Kynge our Sov~eign Lorde the Lordes
Spirituall and Temporall and by the Co~mons in thys p~sente parliament
assembled , and by the auctorytie of the same , ordeyned establysshed
and enacted that from hensforth no suche p~sones be suffred to come
within this the Kynges Realme , STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,327.7

And yf they do than {COM:preceding_word_"than"_emended} they and ev~y of
them so doynge shall forfayte to the Kynge our Sov~eign Lorde all theyr
goodes and catalls and then to be co~maunded to avoyde the Realme wythin
xv. dayes next after the co~maundement upon payne of imprisonament :
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,327.8

And it shal@ @be laufull to ev~y Sheryff Justice of Peace and Eschetour
to sease to the use of our Sov~eign Lorde his Heyres and Successours all
suche Goodes as they or any of them shall have , and therof to accompte
to our said Sov~eign Lord in his Exchequer ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,327.9

and yf it shall happen any suche Straunger hereafter to co~mytte wythin
this Realme any murder robbery or any other felonye and therof be
indicted and arayned , and to plede not giltie or any other plee triable
by the co~ntrie , that then th@ @enqueste that shall passe betwene the
Kyng and any suche partie shall be all together of Englysshemen , albeit
that the partie so indicted pray mediatem
{COM:preceding_word_"mediatem"_emended} lingue according to the Statute
of Anno viij Henrici vj or of any other Statute therof made .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,327.10

Provyded alwaye that the Egyptians now beynge in thys Realme have
monycyon to departe within xvj dayes after proclamacyon of thys estatute
among them shal@ @be made , upon payne of imprisonament and forfeyture
of theyr goodes and catalls , and yf they then so departe that then they
shall not forfayte theyr goodes nor any parte therof ; thys p~sente
Estatute not_wythstondyng . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,327.11

Provyded alwaye that ev~y suche p~sone or p~sons which canne p~ve by ij
credable p~sones before the same partie that seaseth suche money goodes
or catalls of the same Egyptians , that any parte of the same goodes
money or catalls were craftely or felonously taken or stolne from hym ,
shal@ @be incontynent restored unto the same goodes money or catalls
wherof he maketh suche p~ve before the same partie that so seaseth the
same money goodes or catalles upon payne to forfayte to the same partie
that make such prove the double value of the same by accyon of Dette
Bill , or otherwyse in any of the Kynges Courtes to be sued , upon which
accyon and sute he shall not be admytted to wage hys Lawe , nor any
p~teccion or essoyne to be alowed ; any thyng in the acte to the
cont=a=ry not_wythstondyng . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,327.12

Provyded alwaye and be it farther enacted that yf any Justice of Peace ,
Sheryff or Eschetour which by auctorytie of this Acte have power to take
or cease any goodes or catels of any Egyptians , at any tyme hereafter
do sease or take the goodes or cattels of any suche Egyptians , that
then ev~y such Justice Sheryff or Eschetour doyng the same shall have
kepe and retayne to his owen use the moyte of all suche goodes so by hym
seased , and of the other moytie so by hym seased or taken shall make
answere and accompte to the Kyng in his Escheker accordyng to the tenour
of this p~sent acte ; any thynge in the same Acte conteyned to the
cont=a=ry herof notwithstondyng ; and that upon any accounte hereafter
to be made for the said other moytie of the same goodes , the accountant
shall paye no man~ of fees or other charges for his accounte or
discharge to be hadd in the Kynges Eschequer nor els where .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,327.13

<P_3,328>

<heading>

CHAPTER XII . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,328.16

An Acte conc~nyng punysshement of Beggers & Vacabund~ .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,328.17

<$$heading>

Where in all places throughe_out this Realme of Englande , Vacabundes &
Beggers have of longe tyme increased & dayly do increase in great &
excessyve nombres by the occasyon of ydelnes , mother & rote of all
vyces , wherby hathe insurged & spronge & dayly insurgethe & spryngeth
contynuall theftes murders & other haynous offences & great enormytes to
the high displeasure of God the inquyetac~on & damage of the Kyng~
People & to the marvaylous disturbance of the Comon Weale of this Realme
. And whereas many & sondry goode lawes , streyte statut~ & orden=a=nc~
have ben before this tyme devysed & made as well by the Kyng our
Sov~eign Lorde as also by divers his most noble p~genytours Kyng~ of
Englande for the most necessary & due reformation of the p~mysses , yet
that notwythstondyng the sayde nombers of vacabundes & beggers be not
sene in any p~tie to be mynysshed , but rather dayly augmentyd &
encreased into greate routes & companyes as evydently & manyfestly yt
dothe & maye appere ; Be it therfore enacted by the Kyng oure Sov~eign
Lorde & by the Lordes Sp~uall & Temporall & the Co~mons in this p~sent
p~liament assembled & by aucthoryte of the same ; That the Justices of
the Peace of all & synguler the Shires of England wythin the lymytt~ of
theyr Co~myssions & all other Justyces of Peace Mayres Sheryff~ Baylyff~
& other Offycers of all & ev~y Cytie Borough Ryddyng~ or Franches wythin
the Realme of England wythin the lymytes of theyre aucthorytes , shall
from tyme to tyme as often as nede shall requyre by theyre discrescions
devyde themselfes wythin the sayde Shires Cites Boroughes Ryddyng~ or
Frauncheses wherof they be Justic~ of Peace Mayres Sheryff~ Baylyff~ or
Offycers & so beyng devyded shall make dylygent serche & inquyre of all
aged poore & impotent p~sones whiche lyve or of necessyte be compelled
to lyve by Almes of the charyte of the people that be or shal@ @be
herafter abydyng wythyn ev~y Hundrede Rape Wapentake Citie Boroughe
Parysshe Lib~tie or Fraunches wythin the lymytt~ of theyre dyvysion
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,328.19

& after & upon suche serche made the sayde Justic~ of Peace Mayres
Shireff~ Baylyff~ & other officers that ys to saye , ev~y of them wythin
theire lymytt~ of theire aucthorytes wherunto they be devyded shall have
power & aucthoryte by theyre dyscrecions to enable to begge wythin suche
Hundrede Rape Wapentake Cytie Towne Parysshe or other lymytt~ as they
shall apoynte suche of the sayde impotent p~sones whiche they shall
fynde & thynke most convenyent wythyn the lymytt~ of theyre dyvision to
lyve of the charyte & almes of the People & to gyve in co~maundement to
ev~y suche aged & ympotent begger <paren> by them enabled <$$paren> that
none of them shall begge wythout the lymytt~ to them so apoynted
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,328.20

& shall also regester & wryte the names of ev~y suche ympotent begger
<paren> by them apoynted <$$paren> in a bill or rolle indented
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,328.21

the one parte therof to remayn wyth them selfe STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,328.22

& the other parte by them to be c~tefyed before the Justic~ of Peace att
the next Sessions , after suche serche had , to be holden wythin the
sayde Shires Cyties Townes or Frankcheses there to remayne under the
kepyng of the Custos Rotulo~ : STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,328.23

And that the sayde Justyces of Peace Mayres Sheryff~ Baylyff~ & other
Officers , that ys to saye , as they be devyded , shall have power &
aucthoryte to make suche & so many scales to be engraved wyth the names
of the Hundred~ Rapes Wapentakes Cyties Boroughes Townes or Places
wythin the whyche they shall apoynte & lymytt ev~y suche ympotent p~son
to begge , & co~mytte the sayde Seales to the custody of suche of them
or to the custody of suche other as they shall thynke convenyent , &
shall make & delyv~ to ev~y suche ympotent p~son by them enhabyled to
begge , a letter conteynyng the name of suche ympotent p~son & wytnsseng
that he ys authorysed to begge & the lymytt~ wythin whiche he ys
apoynted to begge , the same Letter to be sealed wyth suche of the sayde
Seales as shal@ @be engraved with the name of the lymytte wherin suche
ympotent p~son shal@ @be apoynted to begge in , & to be subscrybed wyth
the name of one of the sayde Justic~ or Offyc~s abovesayde .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,328.24

And yf any suche impotent p~son so authorysed to begge , do begge in any
other place than wythin suche lymytt~ that he shal@ @be assigned unto ,
that then the Justic~ of Peace Mayres Shireff~ Baylyff~ Constables & all
other the Kyng~ Offycers & Mynysters shall by theyre dyscrescions
punysshe all suche p~sones by imprysonament in the Stockes by the space
of ij dayes & ij nyghtes , gyvyng them but onely breade & water , &
after that , cause ev~y suche ympotent p~son to be sworne to retourne
ageyn wythout delaye to the Hundrede Rape Wapentake Cytie Boroughe Towne
Parysshe or Franches where they be aucthorysed to begge in .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,328.25

<P_3,329>

And yt ys enacted That no suche ympotent p~son <paren> as ys above sayde
<$$paren> after the Feast of the Natyvyte of Seynt John the Baptyst next
co~myng shall begge wythin any parte of this Realme , excepte he be
authorised by wrytyng under Seale as ys above sayde .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.27

And yf any suche ympotent p~son after the sayde Feast of Seynt John , be
vagarant & goo abeggyng havyng no such letter under seale as ys above
specefyed , that than {COM:preceding_word_"than"_emended} the Constables
& all other ynhabytaunt~ wythin such Towns or Paryshe where suche p~son
shall begge , shall cause ev~y suche begger to be taken & brought to the
next Justyce of Peace or Highe Constable of the Hundrede ;
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.28

and therupon the sayde Justyce of Peace or Highe Constable shall
co~maunde the sayde Constables & other inhabytaunt~ of the Towne or
Parysshe whiche shall bryng before hym any suche begger , that they
shall strype hym naked from the myddel upwarde & cause hym to be whypped
wythin the Towne where he was taken or wythin some other towne where the
same Justice or Highe Constable shall apoynte if it shall seme to the
discretion of the sayde Justice of Peace or Highe Constable that yt be
convenyent so to punysshe suche begger to hym brought : And yf not ,
than to co~maunde suche begger to be sette in the Stock~ in the same
Towne or Paryshe where he was taken by the space of iij dayes & iij
night~ there to have onely breade & water ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.29

and therupon the sayde Justyce or Highe Constable afore whom suche
beggar shal@ @be brought , shall lymytt to hym a place to begge in , &
gyve to hym a letter under seale in forme above remembred & swere hym to
departe & repayre thither ym~edyatly after his punysshement to hym
executed . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.30

And be yt farther enacted by the aucthoryte aforsayde that yf any p~son
or p~sones beyng hole & myghtie in body & able to laboure , at any tyme
after the sayde feast of Seynt John be taken in beggyng in any parte of
this Realme , or yf any Man or Woman beyng hole & myghty in body & able
to laboure havyng no Lande Master {COM:preceding_word_"Master"_emended}
nor usyng any lawful marchaundyse crafte or mystery , wherby he myght
gette his lyvyng after the same feast , be vagarant & can gyve none
rekenyng howe he dothe lefully gett his lyvyng , that than yt shal@ @be
lefull to the Constables & all other the Kyng~ Offycers Mynysters &
Subjects of ev~y Towne Paryshe & Hamlet to arest the sayde Vacabound~ &
ydell p~sons & them bryng to any of the Justic~ of Peace of the same
Shyre or Lib~tie , or els to the Highe Constable of the Hundrede Rape or
Wapentake wythin whyche suche p~sones shal@ @be taken ;
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.31

and yf he be taken wythin any Cyte or Towen Corporate , than to be
brought before the Mayre , Shireff~ or Baylyff~ of e~y suche Towne
Corporate ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.32

and that ev~y suche Justyce of Peace Highe Constable , Mayres , Shireff~
& Bayleff~ by their dyscretions shall cause ev~y suche ydell p~son so to
hym brought to be had to the next market Towne or other place , where
the sayde Justic~ of Peace , Highe Constable , Mayres , Baylyff~ or
other Officers shall thynke most convenyent by his or there discretions
& there to be tyed to the end of a Carte naked and be beten wyth Whyppes
thoroughe oute the same Market Towne or other place tyll his Body be
blody by reason of suche whyppyng ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.33

and after suche punysshement & whyppyng had , the p~son so punysshed by
the dyscretion of the Justice of Peace , Highe Constable , Mayre ,
Sheryff~ , Baylyff~ & other Officers , afore whom suche p~son shal@ @be
brought , shal@ @be enyoyned upon his othe to retourne forthewyth
wythout delaye in the nexte & streyght waye to the place where he was
borne , or where he last dwelled before the same punysshement by the
space of iij yeres & there put hym selfe to laboure , lyke as a trewe
man oweth to doo ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.34

and after that done ev~y suche p~son so punysshed & ordered shall have a
letter sealed wyth the Seale of the Hundrede Rape Wapentake , Cyte ,
Boroughe , Towne , Lib~tie , or Fraunches , wherin he shal@ @be
punysshed wytnessyng , that he hath bene punysshed accordyng to this
estatute & conteynyng the daye and place of his punysshement & the place
wherunto he ys lymytted to goo & by what tyme he is lymytted to come
thither , wythin whiche tyme he may lawfully begge by the waye , shewyng
the same letter , & otherwyse not : STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.35

And yf he do not accomplysshe the order to hym apoynted by the sayde
letter , than to be eftsones taken & whypped STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.36

& so as often as any defaute shall be founde in hym cont=a=ry to the
order of this Estatute , in ev~y place to be taken & whypped tyll he be
repayred where he was borne or where he last dwelled by the space of
three yere and there put his body to laboure for his lyvyng or otherwyse
trewly gett his lyvyng wythout beggyng as long as he ys able so to doo ;
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.37

& yf the p~son so whypped be an ydell p~son & no co~men begger than
{COM:preceding_word_"than"_emended} after suche whippyng he shall be
kepte in the Stock~ till he hathe founde suertie to goo to servyce or
ell~ to laboure after the dyscretion of the sayde Justice of Peace ,
Mayres , Shireff~ , Baylyff~ , Highe Constables or other suche Offycers
afore whome any suche ydell p~son beyng no comen begger shal@ @be
brought , yf by the dyscretion of the same Justice of Peace , Mayer ,
Shyreff , Bayly , Highe Constable , or other suche hedde offycer , yt be
so thought convenyent STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.38

& that the partie so punysshed be able to fynde suretye
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.39

or ell~ to be ordered & sworne to repayer to the place where he was
borne or where he last dwelled by the space of three yeres & to have
lyke letter & suche further punysshement yf he eftsones offends this
Estatue as ys above apoynted to & for the comen strong and able beggers
, and so from tyme to tyme to be ordered & punysshed tyll he put his
body to laboure or otherwyse gette his lyvyng trewly accordyng to the
Lawe : STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.40

And that the Justices of the Peace of ev~y Shire Ryddyng , Cyte , Towne
& Lib~tie shall have power & aucthoryte wythin the lymytt~ of theyre
Co~myssions to enquyre of all Mayres , Baylyff~ , Constables & other
Offycers & p~sones that shal@ @be neglygent in executyng of this Acte :
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.41

And if the Constables & Inhabytaunt~ within any Towne or Parysshe where
any suche ympotent p~son or stronge begger dothe happen to begge
cont=a=ry to the fourme of this estatute be neglygent & take nat ev~y
suche ympotent & stronge begger that so shall begge agayne the forme of
this estate {COM:preceding_word_"estate"_emended} & order , & punysshe
ev~y suche begger as is above lymytted , that than the Townshyp or
parysshe where such defaute shal@ @be , shall lose & forfayte for ev~y
suche ympotent begger that shal@ @be suffred to begge wythin the sayde
Townshyp or Parysshe not beyng taken ordered & punysshed accordyng to
the fourme of this Estatute , iij s. iiij d. & for ev~y stronge begger
that shall happen to begge wythin any suche Township or Parysshe not
beyng taken & ordered as ys above lymytted by this Estatute , vj s.
viij d. the one halfe of all which forfaytures to be to the Kyng oure
So~eign Lorde & the other halfe to hym that wyll sue for the same by any
byll of information afore the Kyng~ Justices of his peace in theyre
gen~all Sessions to be holden in the Shire or wythin any lib~tye where
suche defaute shall happen ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,329.42

And that all Justices of Peace wythin any Shire , Cytie , Boroughe or
Libertye shall have full power & aucthoryte as well to here & determyne
ev~y <P_3,330> suche defaute by p~sentment as by suche byll of
information , & upon ev~y p~sentment afore them & upon ev~y suche bylle
of information to make p~cesse by dystres agaynst the inhabytaunt~ of
ev~y suche Towne & Parysshe where any defaute shal@ @be p~sentyd or
supposed by any suche information ; by auctoryte of whiche dystres the
Sheryff or other Officer to whom by the lawe suche dystres shal@ @be
made , shall dystreyne the good~ & catalles of such one or two of the
sayde inhabytaunt~ as he may have knowlege where
{COM:preceding_word_"where"_emended} most neglygent and in defaute in
the execuc~on of this acte , STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,330.43

& the sayde dystres retayne tyll they fynde suretye to appere at the
Sessions lymytted in the sayde dystres : STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,330.44

And in case they appere & confesse the defaute , or ell~ yf they travers
the p~sentment & yt be tryed agayne them by v~dyte , or denye the
informacion & yt be proved ageyne them by suffycyent wytnes , than
{COM:preceding_word_"than"_emended} the sayde Justices of Peace in
theire Sessions shall have auctoryte to assesse the fynes as bee~ above
lymytted after the Rates above sayde & to make p~cesse for the levyeng
of the same by dystres of the inhabytaunt~ of suche Townes or Parisshes
where suche defaute shal@ @be tryed or p~ved : STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,330.45

And that ev~y suche Fyne yf it growe by p~sentment to be onely to the
Kyng~ use STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,330.46

& yf yt growe by information than the moyte therof to be to hym that
pursuethe the informacion for the same & the other moyte therof to the
Kyng~ use as ys aforsayde . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,330.47

And yff any suche p~son or p~sonnes dystreyned appere not at the daye
and place conteyned , in suche dystres , then upon the retourne of the
Sheryff or other Offycer , to whom the Dystres was delyv~ed to execute ,
that suche p~son or p~sonnes were distreyned , that ev~y suche p~son &
p~sonnes so distreyned , at the furst distres shall lose xl d. & at the
second vj s. viij d. & so to be doubled upon ev~y dystres in suche
cases to be awarded tyll apparaunce may be had by one of the
inhabitaunt~ of suche Towne or Parysshe to denye , travers or confesse
the p~sentment of informacion exhibyted ageyne any suche Towne or
Parysshe , to th@ @entent that upon tryall or proffe therof the fynes
above lymytted may be assessed & levyed of the inhabytaunt~ of every
suche Towne or Parysshe as ys above rehersed . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,330.48

<P_3,457>

<heading>

CHAPTER XVII . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,457.51

An Acte for shotyng in crosbowes & handgonnes .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,457.52

<$$heading>

Where before this tyme dyvers and sondre good Statutes and p~vysions
have byn made and ordyned for the avoydyng and eschewyng of shotyng in
crose_bowes and handgonnes ; which seid holsome statutes and p~vysions
notwithstondyug , many wylfoll and lyght_disposed persones frome tyme to
tyme have attempted the breche or vyolacion of the same estatutes : In
consideracion wherof be it enacted ordyned and establisshed by the
auctoritie of this present parliament that no p~son or persons of what
Estate or degree he or they be , except he or they in theire owne right
or in the right of hys or theire wyfes to hys or theire owne uses , or
any other to the use of any suche person or persons , have land~
tenement~ fees annuyties or offices to the yerely value of an_hundred
poundes , frome the furst day of June next co~myng shall shote in any
hangonne {COM:preceding_word_"hangonne"_emended} or crosse_bowe , or use
or kepe in hys or theire houses or els where any crose_bowe or handgonne
; upon payne to forfayte for every tyme that he or they soo offende
contrary to this acte x {COM:preceding_word_"x"_emended} li.
{COM:preceding_word_"li."_emended} And that it shal@ @be lefull to every
person that may use and kepe any crose_bowe or handgonne or that may
shote in the same notwithstondyng this Acte , to sease and take every
suche crosse_bowe and handgonne or any of theyme frome the kepyng or
possession of every suche offender , STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,457.54

and the same to kepe or retayne to hys or theire owne use .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,457.55

And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforseid that noo Lordes or
Owners of any Lett~ beare or maynteyne any of theire ten=a=nt~ or
servantes within the precincte or jurisdiction of ther Lett~ to doo or
offende cont=a=ry to this Acte , uppon payne to forfayte for every tyme
soo offendyng x {COM:preceding_word_"x"_emended} li.
{COM:preceding_word_"li."_emended} ; the one moytie of all the same
forfaytures to be to the Kynges Highnes hys heires or successours , and
the other moytie to the partie that woll pursue for the same by byll
playnt accion of dett or informacion in any of the Kynges Courtes , in
which sute no essoyne or protection shal@ @be allowed nor the defendaunt
receyved to wage hys lawe . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,457.56

Be it also further enacted by the auctoritie aforseid that it shal@ @be
lefull to the Justices of Peax in theire Cessions and to all Stuard~ and
Baylyffes in theire severall Lett~ to enquyre here and det~myne every
suche offence herafter to be co~mytted or don cont=a=ry to the fourme of
this estatute ; Soo that alway noo lesse fyne than x
{COM:preceding_word_"x"_emended} li. {COM:preceding_word_"li."_emended}
be assessed uppon every suche p~sentment and convyccion accordyng to the
due course of the lawe ; The same fyne soo by the Justices of the pease
uppon every presentment or co~vyccion made before theym , to be payd and
levyed only to the Kynges use ; And the moytie of every fyne to be
assessed by the Stuard~ or Baylyffes of every Lette uppon every
p~sentment and convyccion before theym to be made to be payde and levyed
to the use of the Owner of the same Lette by distres or accion of dett ,
and the other moytie of the same fyne to be to the partie that woll
pursue for the same in any of the Kynges Courtes by byll playnt
information or accion of dett in which noo essoyne nor protection shal@
@be allowed nor the defendaunt shal@ @be receyved to the wager of hys
lawe . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,457.57

Provided alway yf {COM:preceding_word_"yf"_emended} any offender
contrary to the forme of this estatute by any maner of p~cesse or meane
fyrst ayenst hym conceyved or presented , shal@ @be compelled or
constrayned to pay or content any suche forfayture or penalitie as is
aforseid for hys seid offence contrary to this Acte , that then every
suche offender after payment or satisfaccion made therof shal@ @be
clerely acquyted and discharged ayenst every other p~son for the same
forfayture or penaltie in ev~ey sute proces or presentment ayenst hym to
be pursued for the recovery of the seid penaltie .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,457.58

<P_3,458>

Be it also further enacted by the auctoritie aforseid that all lycences
letters placardes geven or graunted , or here after before the seid
fyrste day of June nexte co~myng {TEXT:co~mynyng} to be geven had or
graunted , to any person or persons by the Kynges Highnes for the
shotyng in crose_bowes or handgonnes or for the usyng or kepyng of the
same contrary to the forme of this Acte , shal@ @be utterly voyde and of
none effecte . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,458.60

Be it also further enacted by the auctorytie aforseid that all former
Statutes made and provyded of and for avoydyng and restraynt of shotyng
in crossebowes or handegunnes , or of and for any of theym , or for the
usyng and kepyng of the same , be frome henseforth , utterly voyde and
of none effecte . Provyded alway that every proces suyte or informacion
conceyved co~mensed and nowe dependyng for any offence don contrary to
the forme of any estatute made or provyded for the shotyng in
crose_bowes and handegunnes not repeled , and for the kepyng of the same
, shal@ @be good and effectuall to the parties that have co~mensed the
same in suche forme effecte degree or condition as yf this Acte had
never byn made . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,458.61

Provided alway that this Acte or any thyng therin conteyned be not in
any wise hurtfull or prejudiciall to any person or persons now being
that here after shal@ @be appoynted by the Kynges Highnes to
{COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} keep
{COM:preceding_word_"keep"_emended} receyve or take any crose_bowes or
handgunnes that shal@ @be forfayte or takyn within the precyncte or
lib~tie of the Kynges forestes parkes or chases ;
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,458.62

but he or they may lawfully kepe and reteyne the same crose_bowes or
handgunnes frome tyme to tyme unto suche tyme as the further pleasure of
the Kynges Highnes in that behalf be to every p~son shewed and declared
. STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,458.63

Provided alway that this Acte extend not to the makers of crosebowes or
handegonnes but that they may lawfully kepe crosebowes and handgunnes in
there howses and shote in crosebowes or handgonnes only for provyng and
assaying of them . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,458.64

Provyded alwayes that in all walled townes within seven myles of the See
and other townes or holdes standyng uppon the see cost or apon
{COM:preceding_word_"apon"_emended} any of the Englisshe marches for
ayenst Scotland , it shal@ @be lefull to ev~y man dwellyng in any suche
townes and holdes to kepe in theire houses being within the same townes
or holdes , crosse_bowes & hand gunnes for the only defence of the seid
townes holdes and houses , & as@ @well to exercise and use theym in and
for the defence of the seid townes and houses being in the same townes
as for to carye theym to theire shippes there to kepe and exercise theym
for defence of theire shippes and for theire good~ in the same shippes
and fore {COM:preceding_word_"fore"_emended} none other cause ; any
thyng comprised or expressed in this pr~ent Acte to the cont=a=ry
not_w'stondyng . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,458.65

Provyded also that yf any person or persones hereafter in any parte doo
offende or doo contrary to the purvew and remedy of this Acte , where
{COM:preceding_word_"where"_emended} apon
{COM:preceding_word_"apon"_emended} there is cause of accion for the
same geven to the Kynge hys heires or successours or to any other p~son
or persons that wyll sue by vertue of this acte for the punyshement of
the seid offence or forfaytis , that yf the Kyng our Soveraigne Lorde
hys heires or successours , within one yere next ymmedyatly after suche
offences and forfaytes had and made , doo not pursue theire accion or
accions soo geven by this seid acte or cause of examynacion uppon suche
defautes and offences to be hade and made before theire counsell or
other presentment~ therof to be had accordyng to the meanyng of the same
acte , And every other p~son which hereafter may have accion or accions
upon this Statute within half a yere next and immedyatly after suche
offences and forfaytis had and made doo not comense theire sutes
informacion or presentment~ of and apon
{COM:preceding_word_"apon"_emended} the sayd forffayt~ by accyon or
otherwyse as of and upon suche forfaytes as be declared and expressed in
this present acte , that then as well the Kyng our Soveraigne Lorde hys
heires and successours after one yere next after suche offences and
forfayties had and made , yf none sute in hys or theire name be taken by
accion or otherwyse as is before expressed before the same yere ended
and det~myned , as every other p~son after half a yere next after lyke
offenses and forfayties had and made in forme aforeseid yf none sute
there {COM:preceding_word_"there"_emended} apon
{COM:preceding_word_"apon"_emended} be taken by none of theyme in forme
above declared , be@ @utterly excluded and barred of theire seid suett~
actions and examynacions to theyme geven by vertue of this seid acte ;
And the parties and ev~y of theym soo offendyng be of all suche offences
and forfayties clerely discharged and quyte ; any thyng in this Acte
comprised to the contrary notwithstondyng , and as though this Acte had
never byn had nor made . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,458.66

Provyded also that this acte or any thynge therin conteyned extende not
or be prejudiciall to any marchaunt~ the which have or shall have any
crose_bowes or handgones to sell within this Realme and to none other
use . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,458.67

Provyded alway that no maner of person rene in any daunger or take hurte
by reason of any penalitie or forfayture conteyned in this acte tyll
suche tyme as proclamacion be made of the same acte , nor by the space
of xx=ti= dayes nexte after the seid p~clamacion be made within the
Countie where the partie that shall or may offende contrary to this acte
dwellith . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,458.68

Provyded also that yf any maner of person bryng or cause to be brought
with hym into hys lodgyng or into any other mannes house any crosebowe
or handegonne , that then the penalitie and forfayture yf any suche be
or hereafter shal@ @be forfayted by reason of this acte to renne and be
only apon {COM:preceding_word_"apon"_emended} the brynger of the seid
crosebowe and handgonne and not to the awner
{COM:preceding_word_"awner"_emended} of the same lodgyng or house , yf
the seid owner of the seid lodgyng cause the brynger therof to take and
recary away the seid crossebowe or handgonne agayne with hym at hys
departyng ; any thyng in this acte made to the contrary notw=t=stondyng
. STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,458.69

Provyded alway that this acte conc~nyng crossebowes and handgonnes ne
any thyng therin conteyned extend or in any wyse be hurtfull to any
person or persones to whome it shall please the Kynge our Soveraigne
Lorde hys heires or successours to geve lycence by hys letters patentes
under hys greate seals to shott in crossebowes or handgonnes or in every
of theym , or to have and keppe the same crossebowes and handgonnes in
hys or their_e howses for the defence of the same .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,458.70

<P_3,459>

Be it also enacted by the auctoritie of this present parliament that yf
any person or persons hereafter from the fyrst day of June next co~myng
se or fynde any p~son or persones offendyng or doing contrary to the
forme and effecte of this acte , that then it shal@ @be lefull to every
suche p~son or persones persayvyng fyndyng or seing any suche p~son or
persons soo offendyng cont=a=ry to the fourme of this acte , to arrest
and attach every suche offender or offenders , and to brynge or convey
the same offender or offenders to the next Justice of the pease of the
same Countie where the seid offender or offenders shal@ @be founde soo
offendyng , and that the same Justice of pease upon a due examynacion
and prove therof before hym had or made by hys discression shall have
full power and auctorytie to sende or co~mytte the same offender or
offenders to the next gaole , there to remayne tyll suche tyme as the
seid penalitie or forfayture shal@ @be truly contented and payde by the
seid offender , the one moytie of the same penalitie to be payde to the
Kynges Highnes and the other moytie therof to the fyrst brynger or
conveyer of the seid offender to the same Justice of pease .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,459.72

Provyded alway that this acte or any thyng therin conteyned be not in
any wyse hurtfull or prejudiciall to any servant or person that here
after frome the seid fyrst day of June shall bend beare use or assay any
crosse_bowe or handgonne by the co~maundement of hys Lorde or Maister ,
soo that the seid serv=a=nt or person doo not shote at any fowls Dere or
other game what kynde or nature soo ever they be ; nor also to any suche
servant person or persons that shall after the seid fyrst day of June
beare or convey any crosebowe or handgunne to any place or places by the
co~maundement of hys Lorde or Maister that may shote by the auctorytie
of this acte , so that the seid s~vant or other person so brynging or
conveying the seid crose_bowe or handgonne have redy to shewe to every
person requyryng the sight therof one licence in wrytyng sealed or
subscribyd by hys seid Lorde or Maisters hande to cary and convey the
same crosebowe or handgonne to th@ @entent to be amended repayred or
assayed as is aforseid . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,459.73

Provided also that this acte nor any thynge therin {SIC:therin_therin}
conteyned be hurtfull or prejudiciall to any gonners being in the Kynges
wages only for shotyng in handgonnes beryng or kepyng of the same
handgonnes in theire houses , soo always that they with the same do not
shote unto any beaste or foule upon the paynes before expressed .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,459.74

Provyded alway that it shal@ @be lawfull for the inhabytaunt~ of the
countrees of Northumberland Durisme Westmerlande and Cumberland to kepe
in theire houses crosbowes and handgonnes , and shote in the same for
defence of theire persones goodes and houses ageynste Thefes Scottes and
other the Kynges ennemyes , and for clensing and scouryng of the same
only and for none other purpose ; this acte or any thyng comprysed
within the same not_withstondyng . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,459.75

<P_3,492>

<heading>

CHAPTER I . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,492.78

An Acte conc~nynge the Kynges Highnes to be supreme heed of the Churche
of Englande & to have auctoryte to refourme & redresse all errours
heresyes & abuses yn the same . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,492.79

<$$heading>

Albeit the Kynges Majestie justely and rightfully is & oweth to be the
supreme heed of the Churche of England , and so is recognysed by the
Clergy of this Realme in theyr convocacions ; yet neverthelesse for
corroboracion & confirmacion therof , and for increase of vertue in
Cristis Religion within this Realme of England , and to represse &
extirpe all errours heresies and other enormyties & abuses heretofore
used in the same , Be it enacted by auctorite of this p~sent Parliament
that the Kyng our Sov~aign Lorde his heires and successours Kynges of
this Realme shal@ @be takyn acceptyd & reputed the onely supreme heed
{COM:preceding_word_"heed"_emended} in erthe of the Churche of England
callyd Anglicana Ecclesia , and shall have & enjoye annexed and unyted
to the Ymperyall Crowne of this Realme as@ @well the title and style
therof , as all Honours Dignyties p~hemynences jurisdiccions privileges
auctorities ymunyties profitis and co~modities to the said dignytie of
supreme heed of the same Churche belongyng and apperteynyng : And that
our said Sov~aigne Lorde his heires and successours Kynges of this
Realme shall have full power & auctorite frome tyme to tyme to visite
represse redresse reforme ordre correct restrayne and amende all suche
errours heresies abuses offences contemptes and enormyties what so ever
they be , whiche by any maner spirituall auctoryte or jurisdicco~n ought
or maie lawfullye be reformyd repressyd ordred redressyd correctyd
restrayned or amendyd , moste to the pleasure of Almyghtie God the
encrease of vertue yn Chrystis Religion and for the conservacy of the
peace unyte and tranquylyte of this Realme : any usage custome foreyne
lawes foreyne auctoryte prescripcion or anye other thinge or thinges to
the contrarie hereof notwithstandinge . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,492.81

<heading>

CHAPTER II . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,492.83

An Acte ratyfienge the othe that everie of the Kynges Subjectes hath
taken and shall hereaft=r= be bounde to take for due obs~vacyon of the
acte made for the suretie of the successyon of the Kynges Highnes in the
Crowne of the Realme . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,492.84

<$$heading>

Where at the laste Sessyon of this p~sent p~liament yn the acte then
made for the establyshment of the Successyon of the heyres of the Kynges
Highnes yn the imperiall Crowne of this Realme , it ys conteyned amonges
other thinges that all and singler {COM:sic} the Kynges subjectes as
well the nobles spirituall and temporall as other shulde make and take a
corporall othe , whan so ever hit shulde please the Kynges Majestie or
hys heires to appoynt , that they shulde truely fyrmely and constantly
without fraude or gyle observe fulfille mayntayne defende and kepe to
their connynge wytt and uttermoste of theyr powers the hole effectes and
contentes of the said acte , as yn the same acte amonge other thynges
<P_3,493> more playnly apperithe ; And at the daye of the laste
prorogaco~n of this present p~lyament as@ @well the nobles spirituall
and {SIC:as} temporall as other the Comons of this present p~liament
then assembled yn the highe house of p~lyament moste lovyngly acceptyd
and toke suche othe as then was devysed yn wrytinge for maynten=a=nce
and defence of the said Acte , and mente and intendyd at that tyme that
ev~y other the Kyng~ Subject~ shulde be bounde to accepte and take the
same uppon the paynes conteyned in the said acte , the tenour of whiche
othe hereafter ensueth : STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,493.86

Ye shall swere to beare faith truth and obedyence alonely to the Kynges
Majestye and to his heires of his body of his moost dere and entierly
belovyd laufull wyfe Quene Anne begotten & to be begotten , And further
to the heires of oure said Sov~aign Lorde accordyng to the lymytacion in
the Statute made for suretie of hys succession in the crowne of this
Realme mencioned and conteyned , and not to any other within this Realme
nor foreyn auctorite or Potentate ; And in case any othe be made or
hathe be made by you to any p~sone or p~sones , that then ye to repute
the same as vayne and adnychillate ; And that to your connynge wytte and
utter_moste of your power without gyle fraude or other undue meane you
shall observe kepe maynteyne & defende the saide acte of successyon ,
and all the hole effectes & contentes therof , and all other actes and
statutes made yn confirmac~on or for execuc~on of the same or of any
thynge therin conteyned ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,493.87

and this ye shall do ayenst all maner of p~sones of what estate dignyte
degree or condition so ev~ they be , And in no wyse do or attempte , nor
to your power suffre to be done or attemptid , directly or indirectly
any thinge or thinges prively or appartlye to the lette hindraunce
damage or derogation therof or of any parte of the same by any maner of
meanes or for any maner of pretence ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,493.88

So helpe you God all Sayntes and the Holye Evangelystes .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,493.89

And for_asmoche as yt is convenyent for the sure maynten=a=nce and
defence of the same acte that the said othe shulde not onely be
auctorysed by auctoryte of p~lyamente , but also be ynterprete &
expowned by the hole assent of this p~sent p~liament that it was mente
and entended by the Kinges Majestie the Lordes & Commons of the
p~lyament , at the saide daye of the saide laste p~rogacion , that
everie subject shulde be bounden to take the same othe accordinge to the
tenour and effect therof uppon the peynes & penalities conteyned in the
said acte ; Therfore be hyt enacted by auctoryte of this p~sent
p~liament that the said othe above rehersyd shal@ @be interprete
expowned reputed acceptyd and adjuged the verie othe that the Kinges
Highnesse the Lordes spirytualle & temporalle and the Commons of this
present p~lyament mente & entended that everie subjecte of this realme
shulde be oblyged and bounden to take and accepte , for maynten=a=nce &
defence of the same acte , uppon the peynes conteyned yn the sayd acte ,
and that everie of the Kinges subjectes uppon the said peynes shal@ @be
obliged to accepte and take the said othe . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,493.90

And be yt further enacted by auctoryte aforesaid that the Commyssyoners
that hereafter shal@ @be appoynted to receyve suche othe of the Kinges
subjectes , or two of theyme at the leste , shall have power and
auctoryte to certifie ynto {COM:sic} the Kinges Benche by writinge under
their seales everie refusell that hereafter shal@ @be made afore theym
of the same othe by any person or persons commynge afore theym to take
the same othe ; And that everie suche certificat to be made by suche
Commyssyoners as is aforesaide shal@ @be taken as stronge & as available
yn the lawe as an ynditement of xij men laufully founden of the said
refusell ; So that the person and persons ayenste whome any suche
Certificat shal@ @be made shal@ @be compellyd to answere there unto as
yf they were endyted ; and that suche p~cesse judgement execusyon and
everie other thinge shal@ @be hadde used and mynystred of and uppon
everie suche certificat ayenste the offendours as yf they had ben
lawfully endyted of suche offences by the due course & order of the
commen lawes of this Realme . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,493.91

<P_3,558>

<heading>

CHAPTER XXV . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,558.94

An Acte for punysshement of sturdy vacabundes and beggers .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,558.95

<$$heading>

Where in an Acte made at Westmynster in the xxij. yere of the reigne of
our Sov~aigne Lorde Kinge Henry the viij=th= amonge other thinges it was
ordeyned establisshed and enacted , that ev~y strong and valeante begger
and vacabounde after he were whipped for his vacabundcy and idelnes
should deperte frome the place where he was whipped directely unto suche
Towne Hundred and Countie where he was borne , or where he had dwelled
by the space of three {SIC:there} yeres nexte before , there to contynue
and abid , And also that aged poore and impotent people shuld in
likewise repayre into ev~y hundred within the said Counties there to
remayne and contynue according to the menyng and purport of the said
Acte , upon peynes limited as {COM:preceding_word_"as"_emended} in the
same acte more pleynlye appereth : And forasmoche as it was not p~vided
in the said acte howe and in what wise the said pore people and sturdie
vacabundes shuld be ordered at thir repaire and at theyr comyng into
thir countreis , nor howe th@ @inhabitauntes of ev~y hundred shuld be
charged for the reliefe of the same pore people , nor yet for the
setting and keping in worke and labour of the aforesaid valiaunt
vacabundes at theyr said repaire into ev~y hundred of this Realme , It
is therefore nowe ordeyned and establisshed and enacted by the King our
Sov~aigne Lorde the Lordes sp~uall and temporall and the Co~mons in this
p~sent parliament assembled and by th@ @auctoritie of the same , that
all and ev~y the Maiers Aldermen Shireffes Bailiffes Constables
Householders , and all other hede Officers and Ministers of ev~y Citie
Shire Townes and Parisshes of this Realme , at the repaire and co~myng
thider of suche poore creature or sturdie vacabund as is conteyned in
the said acte , shall moost charitably receyve the same and order the
same in man~ and forme followyng , STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,558.97

that is to sey ; That all the Gov~nours and Ministres of ev~y of the
same Cities Shires Townes Hundred~ Wapentakes Lathes Rapes Rydinges
Tythinges Hamlettes and Parisshes as@ @well within lib~ties as without ,
shall not oonly socour fynde and kepe all and ev~y of the same poore
people by way of voluntarie and charitable almes , within ev~y of the
same Cities Shires Townes Hundred~ Wapentak~ Lathes Rapes Tythinges
Hamlettes and Parisshes as well within lib~ties as without , to be
socoured relived and holpen with such and convenient and necessarie
almes as shal@ @be thought meete by their discrecions , in suche wise as
none of them of verie necessitie shal@ @be compelled to wander idelly
and go openly in begging to aske almes in any of the same Cities Shires
Townes and Parisshes ; but also to cause and to compell all and ev~y the
said sturdie vacabund~ and valeant beggers to be sett and kepte to
continuall labour , in suche wise as by their seid labours they and ev~y
of them may gette their owne living~ with the contynuall labour of their
owne handes ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,558.98

And ev~y Maier Alderman Shireffe Bailiffe Constable and all other hed
officers and Ministers of ev~y Countie Citie Towne and Parisshe within
this Realme , or within any the Kinges Dominions as well within lib~ties
as without , and all other p~sonnes inhabitauntes {COM:sic} within any
of the same , shall endevour them selfes to order and directe the poor
people valiaunt beggers and sturdy vacaboundes in such wise as the
effecte of this p~sent acte shal@ @be duely observed and putt in due
execution ; upon peyne that ev~y parysshe shall lose {TEXT:losse} and
forfaite twentie shillinges for ev~y monethe in whiche it is omitted and
undone ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,558.99

And that to be enquired of at e~y Quarter Sessions and to be duely
p~sented and founde by the verdicte of xij men STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,558.100

Item , it is further enacted by th@ @auctoritie aforesaid that all and
ev~y p~sonne or p~sonnes being whipped or sentt unto thir Countreis in
fourme aforesaid , at the ende of ev~y tenne myles shall repaire unto
the Constable of any parisshe , beyng directly in his waye towardes the
Countie and Place wherunto he is so appoynted , and upon sight of his
l~res gyven unto hym at the tyme of his whipping and sending of hym into
the same his Countrey , ev~y of the said Constables and others the
Kinges Subjectes shall and may furnyshe hym with competent meate drinke
and lodging for one nyght onely or for one meale ,
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,558.101

and so he shall continue his daily journey of tenne myles until suche
tyme as he shall co~me unto the hundred and place wherunto he is
assigned to goo . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,558.102

<P_3,559>

Item , it is enacted by auctoritie aforesaid that all and ev~y idell
p~sonne , and p~sonnes ruffelers {COM:sic} calling themselffes s~vyngmen
, as well within the Citie of London as within all other Cities Shires
Townes Parisshes and Hamlettes of this Realme , havyng no Maisters ,
shal@ @be entreated used and ordered in ev~y behalff and to all intentes
as is conteyned and especified as@ @well in the aforesaid formar acte as
in this p~sent acte , upon the peyne aforesaid to be loste and forfaited
by the Maier Aldermen Shireffes Bailiffes Burgesses Ministres and
inhabitauntes of ev~y of the same Cities Borowes and Townes corporate ,
where any suche ruffeler shall be suffered to be resiaunt {COM:sic} and
abiding by the space of two dayes and not punysshed in forme hereafter
declared . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,559.104

Item , it is ordeyned and enacted by th@ @auctoritie aforesaid that all
and ev~y the Maiers Gov~nours and hede officers of ev~y Citie Borough &
Towne corporate and the Churche Wardens or two others of ev~y Parisshe
of this Realme shall in good and charitable wise take suche discrete and
convenient order , by gathering and p~curing of suche charitable and
voluntarie almes of the good christen people within the same with boxes
ev~y sonday holy day and other festivall day or otherwise amonge them
selffes , in such good and discrete wise as the pore impotent lame feble
syke and disseased people , beyng not able to worke , may be p~vided
holpen and relieved , so that in no wise they nor none of them be
suffered to go openly in begging ; And that suche as be lustie or havyng
their lymmes stronge ynough to labour may be daily kepte in contynuall
labour , wherby ev~y one of them may gette theyr owne substaunce and
lyving with their owne handes ; uppon peyne that all and ev~y the Maiers
Gov~nors Aldermen hede officers and others the Kinges officers and
Ministers of ev~y of the said Cities Borowghes Townes corporate
Hundredes Parisshes and Hamlettes shall lesse and forfaite for ev~y
moneth that yt is omitted and undon , the some of twentie shillinges .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,559.105

Item , it is enacted by th@ @auctoritie aforesaid that all leprouse and
poore bedred creatures what so ev~ they be may at thir owne lib~tie
remayne and continue in suche place where they be , and shall not be
compelled to repaire into their Countres according to the tenour and
purporte of th@ @aforsaid formar acte ; any thing conteyned in the same
acte or in this p~sent acte to the cont=a=ry notwithstanding .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,559.106

Item , it is also enacted by th@ @auctoritie aforesaid that the said
Governours Aldermen Justices of the Peace and hede Officers Baylifes and
Constables of ev~y Citie Borowe Towne Hundred and Parisshe of this
Realme shall have auctoritie by v~tue of this p~sent acte to take upp
all and singuler children in ev~y parisshe within their limites , that
be not greved with any notable dissease or syknes , and beyng under the
age of xiiij yeres and above the age of fyve yeres in begging or idelnes
, and to appoynte them to maisters of Husbondrie or other craftes or
labours to be taughte , by the whiche they may gette their livinges whan
they shall come to age ; geving to theym of the said charitable
Collections as it may conveniently be susteyned and borne , a rayment to
entre into suche s~vice ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,559.107

And if any above the age of twelve yeres and under the age of syxtene
yeres refuce {COM:sic} suche s~vice or departe frome the same without
cause resonable , than they to be arested and app~hended by any of the
said officers , and to be brought before the Maier Aldermen Justices of
the Peace Bailiffes Gov~nours Constables or other Officers & Ministers
of that limite and circuite where they be taken ;
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,559.108

And if it shall appere by his or thir confession or other sufficient
testimonye before the same Officers and Ministers , that he or they have
refuced to s~ve or have departed frome thir s~vice without cause
resonable , he shall then in the parisshe where he was app~hended be
openly whipped with roddes by the discretion of the said Gov~nours or
Bailiffes , And thirupon to be sent agayne unto his s~vice , and so to
be s~ved as often as he shal@ @be app~hended and convicted in forme
aforesaid ; STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,559.109

And if any p~sone or p~sonnes do refuce to execute and to do the said
punysshement at the co~maundement of any of the said Gov~nours Aldermen
Justices of Peace and others the said Officers and Ministers , then he
or they so refusing the same shal@ @be sette in the stokkes by the space
of two dayes without havyng of any other sustenaunce savyng onelye
breade and water . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,559.110

Item , it is also enacted by the auctoritie aforesaid that all and ev~y
the forsaid Maiers Governours Aldermen and ev~y the Justices of the
peace as well within lib~ties as without , shall ones in e~y moneth or
oftener if nede shall require , comaunde a privie or secrete serche to
be made within e~y Citie and Warde Towne Hundred Parisshe and Hamlete of
this Realme , in suche tyme of the nyght and day as they shall thinke
conveniente , to th@ @entente that all ruffelars sturdie vacaboundes and
valiaunte beggers and other suspecte p~sones may be by suche meanes
app~hended taken and ordered according to the purporte and meanyng of
this p~sent acte , and otherwise to be used according to the Lawes of
this Realme ; And that all and e~y p~sone and p~sones obey aide assiste
and mayntene frome tyme to tyme all and ev~y the co~maundementes of the
said Justices of Peace and others hede officers aforesaid , for and
conc~nyng the making of all the said serches and the app~hending of all
and ev~y the suspecte p~sonnes aforesaid , upon peyne to make fynne for
not doyng of the same at the nexte Quarter Sessions as it shal@ @be
thought by the discrecion of the Maiers Gov~nours Aldermen and Justices
of peace . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,559.111

Item , it is enacted by th@ @auctoritie aforsaid that no p~sonne nor
p~sonnes at any tyme after the feaste of Seint John Baptiste nexte
co~myng , shall use kepe {SIC:kepte} and mayntene any open playeng House
, or place for co~men bowling dysyng carding closhe tenys or other
unlawfull games , taking money for the same or other gayne , in any
place of this Realme , upon peyne to forfaite fyve markes for ev~y
moneth that any such unlawfull Howses or Games shall so be openly kepte
used and mayntened in any place within this Realme , be it within
lib~tie or without , any graunte heretofore made to any p~sonne or
p~sonnes in any wise notwithstanding . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,559.112

Item , it is enacted by auctoritie aforesaid that ev~y preacher p~sone
Vicare Curate of this Realme , as well in all and ev~y their s~mons
collacions biddynges of the beades as in tyme of all confessions and at
the making of the willes or testamentes of any p~sonnes at all tymes of
the yere , shall exhorte move stirre and p~voke people to be lib~all &
bountefully to extende their good and charitable almes and contribucions
frome tyme to tyme for and toward the <P_3,560> comforte & reliefe of
the said pore impotent decrepite indigent and nedie people , as for the
setting and keping to continuall worke and labour of the forsaid
ruffelers sturdie vacabundes and valiaunt beggers in ev~y Citie Warde
Towne Hundred and Parisshe of this Realme as@ @well within lib~ties as
without . STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,560.113

Item , it is enacted by th@ @auctoritie aforesaid that if any of the
aforesaid ruffelers sturdy vacabundes and valiaunt beggers , after suche
tyme as they have ben ones app~hended taken whipped and sent unto any
Citie Warde Towne Hundrede or Parysshe by any Justice of peace Maier
Constable Bailiffe or any other the Kinges officers and Ministers ,
happen to wandre loytre or idelly to use them selfes and playe the
vacaboundes and willingly absent themselfes frome suche labour and
occupation as he or they shall be appoynted unto , within any Citie
Warde Towne Hamlett Hundreth or parisshe wherunto he or they have ben
appoynted in man~ and forme aforesaid , that than he or they being
eftsoones app~hended and taken of suspicions of idelnes in any privie
serches aforesaid or otherwise , shal@ @be brought before the nexte
Justice of Peace , and upon due examinacions and p~fe of the
continuaunce of his seid loytering wandering in idelnes or vacabundcie
shal@ @be eftsones not onely whipped ageyne and sent into the Citie
Warde Towne Hundred or parisshe wherunto he was first appoynted , but
also shall have the upper parte of the gristell of his right eare clene
cutt of , so as it may appere for a p~petuall token after that tyme ,
that he hath ben a contemmour of the good order of the Co~mon welth :
And that ev~y Constable of the Parisshe with the assistence of the moost
substanciall of ev~y suche parisshe where any suche ruffeler or
vacabonde shall happen thus to be taken , shall do or cause to be don
this p~sent execution as well in whipping as in cutting off the said
upper gristell of the eare of ev~y suche ruffeler or sturdie vacabounde
or valiant beggar , upon peyne to lesse and forfaite fyve markes for
ev~y tyme that he shall refuce to do or cause to be don the same
execucion ; and all and singular the inhibitauntes of the seid Citie
Warde Towne Hundred or Parisshe shall assiste and aide the said
Constables in execution of the p~misses to the best of their power with
good diligence and without contradiccion upon the peyne aforesaid .
STAT-1533-E1-P1,3,560.114

