<BEGIN_stat-1572-e2-p1>

<P_4,542>

<heading>

CHAPTER VIII . STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,542.4

AN ACTE AGAINST USURIE . STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,542.5

<$$heading>

Whereas in the Parliament holden the seven_and_thyrtey yere of the
Raigne of our late Soveraigne Lord Kyng Henrye the Eight of famos Memory
, there was then made and established one good Act for the Reformation
of Usurie ; by which Act the Vice of Usurie was well repressed , and
specially the corrupt Chevisaunce and bargaynyng by way of Sale of Wares
and Shift of Interest ; And where since that tyme by one other Acte made
in the fyft & sixe yeres of the Raigne of our late Sov~aine Lord Kynge
Edward the Syxte the said former Acte was repelled , and newe Provisoes
for repressing of Usurie devised and enacted ; w=ch= said latter Acte
hathe not done so muche good as was hoped it shoulde , but rather the
said Vyce of Usurye , and specially by waye of Sale of Wares and Shiftes
of Interest hathe much more excedingly abounded , to the utter undoinge
of many Gentlemen Marchauntes Occupiers and other , and to the
importable Hurte of the Co~mon wealth , as@ @well for that in the said
latter Acte there is no p~vysion agaynst such corrupt Shyftes and Sales
of Wares , as also for that there is no difference of payne forfayture
or punyshement uppon the greater or lesser exactions and oppressions by
reason of Lones upon Usurie : Bee yt therefore enacted , That the said
latter Statute made in the fyfte and syxe yeres of the Raigne of Kyng
Edward the Syxte , and every Braunch and Article of the same , from and
after the fyve_and_twenty daye of June next comming , shal@ @be utterly
abrogated repelled and made voyde ; and that the sayd Acte made in the
said seven_and_thyrtey yere of Kyng Henry the Eight , from and after the
said fyve_and_twentey daye of June next commyng , shal@ @be revived and
stand in full Force Strengh and Effecte . STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,542.7

And bee yt further enacted , That all Bondes Cantractes and Assuraunces
, collaterall or other , to be made for payment of any Principall or
Mony to be lent , or Covenaunt to be p~formed upon or for anye Usurie in
lendynge or doyng of any Thinge agaynste the said Acte nowe revyved ,
upon or by w=ch= Loane or Doinge there shal@ @be reserved or taken above
the Rate of Tenne Pound~ for the Hundred for one yere , shal@ @be
utterly voyde . STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,542.8

And bee yt further enacted , That all Brokers Solicitors and Drivers of
Bargaynes for Contractes or other Doinges agaynst the said Statute nowe
revyved , whereupon shal@ @be reserved or taken more then
{shall_be_taken} after the Rate of Tenne Poundes for the Loane of
a_Hundred Poundes for a yere , shal@ @be to all Intentes and Purposes
judged punyshed and used as Counsellours Atturneys or Advocates in any
case of Premunire . STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,542.9

And forasmuch as all Usurie being forbydden by the Lawe of God is synne
and detestable ; Bee it enacted , That all Usurie Loane and forbearing
of Monye , or gevyng Dayes for forbearing of Monye by way of Loane
Chevysaunce Shyftes Sale of Wares Contracte or other Doynges whatsoever
for Gayne mentioned in the said Statute w=ch= is now revyved ,
whereuppon is not reserved or taken or covenaunted to be reserved payde
or geven to the Lender Contracter Shyfter Forbearer or Deliverer above
the Summe of Tenne Poundes for the Loane or Forbearinge of a_Hundred
Poundes for one yere , or after that Rate for a more or lesser summe or
tyme , shal@ @be from the fyve_and_twentey daye of June next coming ,
punished in fourme folowinge , STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,542.10

that is to saye ; That every suche Offendor agaynst this Braunche of
this present Statute shall forfayte so muche as shal@ @be reserved by
way of Usurie above the Principall for any Money so to be lent or
forborne ; All such Forfaytures to be recovered and imployed as is
lymited for Forfaytures by the saide former Statute nowe revyved .
STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,542.11

And bee it further enacted , That Justices of Oyer and Terminer and
Justices of Assise in theyr Circuites , Justices of Peace in theyr
Sessions Maiors Sheryffes and Bayliffes of Cyties , shall also have full
Powre & Aucthorytie to enquyre heare and determyne of all and singul=r=
Offences commytted agaynst the sayd Statute now revyved .
STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,542.12

And be yt further enacted , That the sayde Statute nowe revyved shal@
@be most largely and strongly construed for the repressing of Usurie ,
and against all p~sons that shall offend agaynste the true meaning of
the said Statute by any Way or Device dyrectly or indyrectly .
STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,542.13

Provyded alway , That this Statute doth not extend nor shal@ @be
expounded to extend unto any Allowaunces or Paymentes for the finding of
Orphanes accordinge to the auncient Rates or Customes of the Citie of
London or any other Citie where lyke Order is for the Custodye of
Orphanes and theyr Goodes , as is in the said Citye of London .
STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,542.14

Provided alwayes , and be it further enacted by th@ @aucthoritie
aforesaid , That yf anye p~son or p~sons shall from and after the said
fyve_and_twentey daye of June offend contrary to the saide Statute
revyved by this present Acte made in the seven_and_thyrtey yere of the
Raigne of the said late Kyng Henry the Eight , that then all and every
suche Offendour & Offendours shall and maye also be punished & corrected
according to the Ecclesiasticall Lawes heretofore made agaynst Usurie ;
And that all and every person and p~sons offendinge in Usurie Shyftes or
Chevysaunce agaynst this present Acte , and not taking or receyvinge but
onely after the Rate of Tenne Poundes in the Hundred <P_4,543> or und=r=
for a yeare , shal@ @be onely punyshed by the Paynes and Forfaytures
provyded and appoynted by this Acte agaynst suche as shall not take or
receave over and above the Rate of Tenne Poundes in the Hundred for a
yere , and not otherwyse . STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,543.15

Thys Acte to contynue and endure for and during the space of fyve yeres
next after th@ @end of this present Parliament and from thence unto th@
@end of the fyrst Session of the Parliament then next ensuinge ;
STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,543.16

And bee yt further enacted by th@ @aucthoritie aforesayd , That yf this
present Act shall not be contynued in the fyrst Session of the
Parliament next ensuing the said tearme of fyve yeres , and then in the
same Session no other Statute or P~vysion made agaynste Usurie or
corrupt Chevysaunce , that then all and every the Lawes and Statutes
repelled by this Acte shall remayne and be of such lyke Force and Effect
as yf this present Acte had never ben had ne made .
STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,543.17

<P_4,588>

<heading>

CHAPTER I . STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,588.20

AN ACTE FOR THE PUNYSHEMENT OF SUCHE AS SHALL REBELLYOUSLY TAKE OR
DETEYNE , OR CONSPIRE TO TAKE OR DETEYNE FROM THE QUEENS MA=TIE= , ANY
OF HER CASTELLES TOWERS FORTRESSES HOLDES , &C .
STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,588.21

<$$heading>

For the better avoyding of all suche unlawfull Practises secret
Conspiracies and Devises , as latelye have been stirred and moved by
some evell_disposed p~sons againste our moste gratiouse Soveraigne Ladye
the Queene , in seeking by false Conspiracyes and undue Meanes to
surpryse and take from her Majestie some of her Castelles Towres
Fortresses Shippes Ordinances Artillerye & other Munitions of Warre :
Bee yt enacted by the Queenes moste Excellent Majestye , with Th@
@assent of the Lordes Spirituall and Temporall , and the Commons in this
p~sent Parliament assembled , and by Aucthorytye of the same , That yf
any p~son or p~sons whatsoever at any Tyme hereafter doe , within this
Realme or elswhere , unlawfully and of his or their owne Aucthorytie ,
compasse imagine conspire practyse or devyse by any Wayes or Meanes with
Force or by any Crafte Devyse or Sleight , maliciously and rebellyously
to take , or to deteyne or keep from our said Soveraigne Ladye the
Queene , anny of her Castelles Towres Fortresses or Holdes , or
malytyously and rebellyously to rase burne or destroye any Castell
Bulwercke or Forte , or any parte of them , having any Munic~on or
Ordinance of the Queenes Ma=ties= therein , or appoincted to bee garded
with any Souldiours for Defence thereof , within this Realme or within
any of her Ma=ties= Dominions or Countreis or the Marches of the same ,
and the same Compasses Imaginac~ons Practises Conspiracyes or Devices or
any of them , shall and doe advisedly by any express Woordes Speache
Acte Deed or Wryting expresse utter or declare for any the malytiouse
and rebelliouse Intentes aforesaid , that then everye suche p~son and
p~sons so hereafter offendinge in any the p~misses , their Aydours
Councellours Comforters Consentours and Abettours knowing thereof ,
being thereof lawfully convicted according to the Lawes of this Realme ,
shal@ @be judged a Felon and Felons , and that every suche Offence shal@
@be judged to bee Felony , and the Offendoure and Offendours therein ,
their said Aydours Comforters Counsellours and Abettours , being thereof
lawfullye convicted , shall have and suffer paynes of Deaths as in cases
of Felonye , without having any Benefyte of Cleargye or Sainctuarye ,
and also shall forfayte and lose all his Goodes and Cattelles Landes &
Ten~tes as in other cases of Felonye hathe been used and accustomed .
STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,588.23

And bee yt further enacted by th@ @aucthorytye aforesaid , That yf any
person or persons doe at any tyme hereafter with Force malyciouslye and
rebellyouslye deteyne keepe or w=th=hold from the Queenes Ma=tie= , any
of her Castelles Towres Fortresses or Holdes , within this Realme or
within any her Ma=ties= Domynions or Countreis or Marches of the same ,
or do malytiously rebellyouslye and with Force deteyne keepe or withhold
from her Ma=tie= any of her Shippes Ordinaunce Artyllerye or other
Munitions or Fortyfycaco~ns of Warres , and doe not rendre and give up
the same to our said Soveraigne Ladye , or to suche person as her
Ma=tie= shall appointe to receave the same to her Ma=ties= use , within
syxe dayes next after hee or they so offending shal@ @be co~maunded by
our said Soveraigne Ladye the Queene , by open Proclamations under the
Greate Seale of England to bee made in any Place or Markett Towne within
the Countye where any suche Offence shal@ @be committed , Or shall
wyllfullye malytiously and rebellyously burne or destroye , or cause to
be burned or destroyed , any of the Queens Shippes , Or malytiouslye and
rebellyouslye barre or cause to bee barred any Haven within any of the
Queenes Ma=ties= Domynions , That then everye suche person and persons
so offending , their Aydours Councellours and Abettours , being thereof
lawfully convicte according to the Lawes of this Realme , shal@ @be
adjudged Traytou=rs= , and their Offences in any of the Premysses ,
shal@ @be accepted judged and taken for Highe Treason , and the
Offendours therein , their Aydours Councellours and Abettours , being
thereof lawfullye convycte according to the Lawes of this Realme , shall
have and suffer suche paynes of Deathe , and also shall forfayte and
lose , as in Cases of Highe Treason is lymyted and accustomed .
STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,588.24

This Acte to endure during the Queenes Ma=ties= Lyef that nowe is onlye
. STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,588.25

<P_4,589>

<heading>

CHAPTER II . STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,589.28

AN ACTE AGAINSTE SUCHE AS SHALL CONSPYRE OR PRACTYSE THE ENLARGEMENT OF
ANY PRISONER COMMITTED FOR HIGHE TREASON . STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,589.29

<$$heading>

Forasmuch as greate Daunger maye ensue to the Queens Ma=ties= Person ,
and great trouble to the State of the Realme , by unlawfull Conspiracyes
Devyces and Imaginac~ons , to enlarge and sett at lybertye suche p~sons
as bee or shal@ @be coomytted {COM:sic} to any Pryson Gard or Custodye
for any Treason touching the Royall Person of our said Soveraigne Ladye
: againste whiche Devyces Conspiracyes and Imaginations sufficyent
Remedye by the Lawes of this Realme hathe not been heeretofore had ne
provided , unles the same Conspiracyes Imaginations and Devyces were
executed and brought to Effecte : Bee yt therefore enacted by our said
Soveraigne Ladye the Queen , the Lordes Sp~uall and Temporall and the
Commons in this Parlyament assembled and by the Aucthorytye of the same
, That yf any person or persons , at any tyme after the Ende of this
p~sent Session of Parlyament , shall imagine conspyre devyse invent or
goe about unlawfully and maliciouslye to enlardge or sett at Lybertye
anny person or persons co~mytted or to be co~mytted to any Pryson Garde
or Custodye by her Highnes especyall Co~maundement , for any Treason or
suspition of Treason concerning the person of our said Soveraigne Ladye
the Queene , before any Indyctament of suche person so sought or
intended to bee sett at Large or Lybertye as ys aforesaid ; And the same
Conspiracies Imaginac~ons Devyses or Inventions , shall by expresse
Woordes Wryting or other Matter or Acte expressely or manyfestly set
forthe utter or declare , That then every person so offending shall
incurre the Penaltye & Forfayture of myspryssion of Treason , and that
all and every Offence and Offences to bee commytted and donne as is
aforesaid shal@ @be deemed and taken for mysprysion of Treason .
STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,589.31

And bee yt also enacted by the Aucthorytee aforesaid , That yf any
person or persons , at any tyme after th@ @end of this p~sent Session of
Parlyament , shall imagyne conspyre devyse invent or goe aboute
unlawfullye and malytiouslye to enlarge or set at Lyb~tie any person or
persons co~mytted or to bee co~mytted to any Pryson Garde or Custodye ,
being or which hereafter shal@ @be indycted of any Treason in any wyse
concerning the person of our said Soveraigne Ladye the Queene , and the
same Conspyracies Imaginac~ons Devyses or Inventions shal@ @by expresse
Woordes Wryting or other Matter or Acte expressely or manyfestly sett
forthe utter or declare , that then every suche person so offending ,
shal@ @be deemed & adjudged a Felon , and suffer losse and forfayture as
in cases of Felonye by the due course of the Lawe of this Realme .
STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,589.32

And bee yt further enacted by th@ @aucthorytye aforesaid , That yf any
person or persons , at any tyme after th@ @end of this p~sent Session of
Parlyament , shall imagine conspyre devyse invent or goe about
unlawfully and malitiouslye to enlardge or sett at Lybertye any p~son or
p~sons being co~mytted to any Pryson Garde or Custodye , after the same
person or persons ys or shal@ @be attaincted or convicted of anny
Treason in anny wyse conc~ning the Royall Person of our said Soveraigne
Ladye the Queene , and the same Conspiracyes Imaginations Devyses or
Inventions shal@ @by expresse Woordes Writing Matter or Acte , as is
aforesaid , sett forthe utter or declare , that then everye suche person
so offending shal@ @be deemed and adjudged an Highe Traytour and shall
suffer losse and forfayte as in cases of Highe Treason by the Lawe and
Statutes of this Realme . STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,589.33

This Acte to endure during the Queenes Majesties Lyef that nowe ys
onelye . STAT-1572-E2-P1,4,589.34

