<BEGIN_stat-1543-e1-p1>

<P_3,755>

<heading>

CHAPTER XI . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,755.4

An Acte conc~nyng stelyng of Hauk~ egg~ Conyes & Deere .
STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,755.5

<$$heading>

Forasmuche as Justice and equity requier that every inheritour and
possessour of manours landis or tenementis within the realme of England
, shulde according to their estatis or possessions , peaseably and
quietly have take and enjoye the profittes revenues and commodities of
the same , as@ @well in thinges of pleasure as in thinges co~munly
valueable , without injury rapyne or other extorte wronge to be
co~mitted or doon to any of them within or uppon the same ; And where in
the p~lament holden at Westm~ in xi=th= yere of the reigne of the noble
prince of famouse memory King Henry the seventh it was ordeynid and
amongest other thinges enacted that no man of what condition or degree
soever he be shulde take or cause to be taken the egges of any fawcon
Goshawke or lanerd out of the nest uppon payne of imprisonment by one
yere and further to fyne at the Kinges will : The p~misses
notwithstanding divers ydell and evill_disposid p~sonnes have not
desisted nor forborne to take egges of faucons goshaukes and lanerd~ out
of the neestis , nor to take and steale deere conyes and rabbitt~ by day
and by night , wherof manny tymes have ensued manslaughters and other
greate hurtes and inconveniences , and the increasis of the Kinges hauk~
within this realme been in maner destroyed , and the prices of the said
conyes and rabett~ which be one of the commodiouse vitals of this realme
much enhaunced , to the comon hurt and p~judice of all the Kinges
subjectis of the same : Be it therefore ordeynid and enactid by
auctoritie of this present p~lament that if any p~sonne or p~sonnes
after the feast of the Nativitie of our Lady Sainct Mary next comyng
unlaufully or wrongfully take or cause to be taken any egge or eggis of
any fawcon or goshauke or lanerd , or the birdes of any fawcon goshawke
or lanerd , out or from any nest or nestis of any fawcon goshauke or
lanerd within any wood ground or place of any other p~sonne or p~sones
within this realme , That the same offence and offences and every of
them shal@ @be adjudged and taken to be felony , And th@ @offendour and
offendours therein being therof laufully convictid and attaynted shal@
@have and suffre suche paynes of death and shall lose and forfaite their
good~ and cattall~ landis and tenementis as in cases of felonye by the
course of the co~mon lawes of this realme . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,755.7

Be it also enactid by auctoritie of this p~sent p~lament that if any
p~son or p~sonnes , after the said feast of the Nativitie of our Lady
next comyng , at anny tyme of the day , that is to say betwene the tyme
of the arrising of the sonne and going down of the same , with his face
hid or coverid with hoode or visar or with his face paintid or himself
otherwise disguysid , to th@ @intent that he wold not be knowen ,
wrongefully take kill or slee any Deere within anny parke or closed
ground used for Deere , or with any hay or other nette or with any
fyrrett or pursenett any of the conyes or <P_3,756> rabettis being
within any parke or ground closed for maynten=a=nce or keping of Deere ,
or in any place being laufull warren , except it be suche p~sonne or
p~sones as hath or shal@ @have the keping or be maistre of the game of
suche parkes or ground~ closed for Deere , or that have or shal@ @have
the said conyes or rabettis in ferme or shal@ @be laufully licenced so
to doo ; Or if any p~sone or p~sones at any tyme of the night , that is
to say betwene the tyme of going downe of the sonne and arrising of the
same take kill or sle any Deere within any parke or closed grounde for
Deere , or with any hay or other nette or with any fyrrett or pursnett
any of the conyes or rabbitt~ in any parke closed ground or warren as is
above written , except it be suche p~sone or p~sonnes as hath or shal@
@have the keaping or be maisters of the game of suche parkes or cloased
groundis for Deere , or that have or shal@ @have the said conyes and
rabettis in ferme or shal@ @be laufully licenced so to doo ; that all
suche offences and ev~y of them shal@ @be adjudged and taken felony ;
and that th@ @offendour and offendours therin being therof laufully
attayntid shal@ @have and suffre suche paynes of death and shall lose
and forfaicte their goodis and cattall~ landis and tenementis as in
caces of felony by the course of the co~mon lawes of this realme .
STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,756.8

Provided alway and be it enactid by th@ @auctoritie aforesaid , that no
maner of p~sonne or p~sonnes shal herafter be made demed or taken by any
maner of meane as accessory or accessories to any offendour or
offendours in any thing above written , but only suche p~sonne or
p~sonnes as shal herafter {TEXT:herafer} abbette or procure any p~sonne
or p~sonnes to comitt or doo any of the offences above written contrary
to this said acte , which p~sone and p~sonnes so abetting or procuring
shall after such offence doon by auctoritie of this acte be adjudged
demed and taken as accessory or accessories in like maner as in caces of
felony at the co~mon lawe . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,756.9

Provided alway that any wourde article clause sentence forfaiture payne
or punyshment in the actes above written declarid , shall not in any
wise extend to any p~sone or p~sones that shall hunt take kill or slee
any conyes or rabbettis by day or by night contrary to this acte in any
chaces forrestis or warrennes of the Kinges the Quenys the Princes or of
any other p~sones , set lying and being within the Kinges dominion of
Wales or in the borders against Scotland , The forrest of Snowden in
Wales only exceptid , any thing above written notwithstanding .
STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,756.10

Provided also and be it enactid that this acte or any thing therin
conteynid extend not to any p~sone or p~sonnes which shall not be
laufully inditid or appeled of any of th@ @offences above written within
one yere after any suche offence co~mittid or doon , this acte or any
thing therin conteyned to the contrary notwithstanding .
STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,756.11

Provided alway that this acte or any thing therin conteynid extend not
to any parke or inclosed grounde usid for Deere , heretofore had or made
without the graunt or lycence of our Souveraine Lorde the King or of any
of his noble progenitours , or otherwise not allowed or approved of
recorde ; nor to any groundis herafter to be imparkid or inclosid for
Deere by any of the Kinges subjectis , nor to any groundes not nowe usid
as a warren for or of any conyes at this p~sent tyme ; nor to anny
p~sone or p~sonnes being freeholder copiholder lessee for terme of yeris
for terme of lif or any astate of inheritaunce , for or in any wise
concerning taking killing or sleying by any maner or {SIC:of} meane of
any conyes or rabettis in or uppon any bury within his awne grounde or
soyle , or elliswhere within the same his ground or soyle , being no
burye , with bowe arrowe firrett or pursenette ; any thinges bifore in
this acte conteynid to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding .
STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,756.12

<P_3,854>

<heading>

CHAPTER XVIII . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,854.15

An Acte for true makinge of Kersies . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,854.16

<$$heading>

Where at the Parliament holden at London in the thirde day of November
in the one_and_twentieth yere of our moste dread Soveraigne Lorde the
Kinge@ @s most gracious raigne that nowe ys , and from thence adjourned
to Westm~ and there contynued by sundrie progaco~ns unto the fourth daye
of Februarie in the xxvij=th= yere of his Graces saide raigne , It was
ordeyned and enacted , in the Session of the saide Parliament in the
saide seven_&_twentith yere amongest other thing~ , that after the Feast
of Saincte Michaell th@ @archaungell next ensuynge after the makinge of
the saide acte , everie Clothier within this Realme sholde sett his
seale of lead unto everie Clothe and Kersey that shold be redy made and
dressed to be put to sale , in whiche seale of lead sholde be conteyned
the true and juste content of the lenghe of everie of the same Clothes
or Kerseyes as it sholde be duely founde by everie buyer of the same
upon due proufe thereof to be tried by the water ; And in case upon any
suche profe to be made by any buyer of them at the water there sholde be
founde less and smaller content in lenghe then sholde be conteyned and
sp~ified in everie of the saide seales , that then everie suche clothier
makinge suche defaulte sholde lose and forfeyte unto everie suche buyer
of the same the double value of so muche clothe as sholde want or lacke
of his saide content in lenghe , at the onely sight and judgment of any
two indifferent p~sons that sholde measure the saide Clothes and
Karseyes : STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,854.18

And furthermore it was enacted by the saide acte that everie kersey so
to be put@ @to sale sholde conteyne in breadeth one yarde within the
liste , upon due profe thereof to be tried by the water , upon peyne to
forfeyte for everie suche kersey lacking of the saide content in bredth
twenty penc~ , as by the same acte amongest other thing~ therin
conteyned more at large it is exp~ssed and may appere : Whiche saide
acte yf it sholde be putt in execuco~n sholde not onelye growe and be to
the great losses and decaye of the Kings~ Highnes Customes , but also to
the great hindraunce hurte and ympoverishment of the Kinge~ lovinge and
obedient subjects , and specially of those inhabitinge within the
Counties of Berk Sutht~ Oxfordedshire Surrey Sussex and Yorkeshire ,
where there are a great nomber of course kerseyes made beinge of the
value of thirtie shilling~ the pece or thereabout~ , whiche kerseys are
made of course wooll and are co~monly solde for twenty pence or xxij d.
the yarde coloured , of whiche course sorte of kerseyes there are
co~monly made in the saide Counties fyve_hundred againste one fyne
kersey , by the makinge and workinge whereof a great nomber of the King~
subject~ are sett a worke and gett their living~ , whiche course
kerseyes are uttered unto the farr part~ beyond the sea and fewe or none
uttered in this Realme , and have not been used sithe the remembrance of
man to be made of suche content in bredith as ys lymitted in the said
estatute ; for that the woll and yarne wherof the saide karsayes are
made be of suche kindes and p~pertyes , as@ @well by reason of the
coursnes of the woll as also for the manyfolde difference of sundrie
spynnyng~ of the same , and for div~se other consideraco~ns the kerseyes
thereof made can@ @not be so certenly wroughte as the same sholde and
myght kepe any true or just certentye of lenghe or breadeth throughlye
when it shall come to the water , althoughe the workers and makers of
the same due putt thereunto the best of their forces and diligence , as
by experience and proofe thereof hathe bene dulye p~ved and ys nowe
right well p~ceyved ; by occaco~n whereof the makers and workers of
suche course kerseies sholde be compelled either to forsake their
mysteries of makinge of suche course kerseyes , wherby many thousand~
p~sons dwelling within this Realme , and speciallye within the Counties
above rehersed , nowe havinge good & competente lyvinges shoulde be
unoccupied and fall to idlenes , or els to incurre the daunger and
penaltye of the saide estatute to their utter undoinge : For remedy
whereof be it enacted by the Kinge our Soveraigne Lorde the Lordes
sp~uall and temporall and the Co~mons in this p~sent Parliament
assembled and by authoritie of the same , that from hensforth it shall
and maye be laufull to all and everie of the King~ subject~ , to make
worke and put@ @to sale at their lib~tye and pleasure all manner of
suche coloured kersey and kerseyes whiche shal@ @be solde at or for
twenty pence or xxij d. the yarde , or under and not above , of suche
lenghes and breadethes as they did myght or were wonte to doe before the
makinge of the said acte made in the saide seven_and_twentieth yere of
our saide Soveraigne Lorde the King~
{COM:preceding_word_"King~"_emended} raigne , or any other acte ,
without incurringe or ru~nynge into any daunger or penaltie for the same
; the saide acte made in the saide xxvij=th= yere or any thinge therin
conteyned or any other acte or statute made to the cont=a=rie
notwithstandinge . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,854.19

Provided alwaye that all manner of Kerseyes to be made wrought and put@
@to sale within this Realme , of the colours of blacke Marble russett or
white , whiche saide colours be co~monly solde and retayled within this
Realme , shal@ @be made of suche content in Breadeth as is lymitted in
the saide former Acte , upon peyne in the same former Acte conteyned ;
any thinge in this p~sent Acte conteyned to the cont=a=rie
notwithstandinge . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,854.20

And it is further enacted by th@ @auctoritie aforesaide , That all and
everie p~son or p~sons whiche shall make or worke any Kerseyes of the
prices above rehersed or under , shall at all tymes hereafter from tyme
to tyme make the same Kerseyes trulye without deceipte ; And that they
or any of them do nor shall falsefye or untrulie make or stoppe any
manner Kerseyes withe flock~ thru~mes or other deceivable things or
things to the deceite of any p~son or p~sons ; nor shall by colour of
any lib~tye to them geven or other matter comprised in this estatute
make worke and put@ @to sale any coloured Kersey or Kerseyes of the
price above rehersed , whiche shall conteyne any lesse in bredth than
thre quarters of a yarde and one nayle within the liste to be tried at
the Water ; upon peyne to forfeyte for everie Kersey so falslye made or
stopped withe flock~ thru~mes or other deceyvable thinge or thing~ to
the deceite of any p~son or p~sons Twenty shilling~ ; and upon peyne to
forfeyte for everie suche coloured Kersey of the price above rehersed ,
to be made and put@ @to sale not conteyninge thre Quarters of a yarde
and one nayle in Breadth within the Liste to be tried at the Water as ys
aforesaide , Twentye pence ; the one halfe of whiche forfeytures to be
to our Soveraigne Lorde the <P_3,855> Kinge and th@ @other halfe thereof
to be to him or them that will sue for the same in any of the King~
Court~ of Recorde by acc~on of Dett Bill Playnte or Informac~on ,
wherein the Defendaunts shall not be receyved to wage his lawe nor anye
essoyne or p~tecc~on for suche Defendaunte to be allowed .
STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,855.21

Provided alwaye that the saide former Acte made in the saide xxvij=th=
yere , and all Clauses and Articles in the same conteyned , other then
concerning the breadeth of coloured Kerseyes of the prices afore
rehersed shall stande and be in their full strenghe and effecte and be
kepte and observed , accordinge to the tenour and purporte of the same
Acte . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,855.22

Provided also and be it enacted by the auctoritie aforesaide , That the
Aulnager of ev~ye County shall and maye laufullye seale everie of the
same coloured Kerseyes of the prices abovesaide , in like manner and
fourme as he or they shoulde or myght have done yf the saide former Acte
had never bene had nor made . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,855.23

Provided also that none of the said Kerseyes of the prices afore
lymitted , nor any other Kersey or Brode Clothe made within this Realme
to be uttered and soulde , shal@ @be put@ to@ sale before that they and
everie of them shal@ @be sealed by the Aulnager withe the Kings Seale as
hathe bene accustomed . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,855.24

<P_3,996>

<heading>

CHAPTER IX . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,996.27

An Acte against Usurye . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,996.28

<$$heading>

Wheare before this tyme div~se and sondrie Actes Statut~ and Lawes have
bene ordeyned had & made within this Realme for th@ @avoydinge and
punyshment of Usurye , beinge a thinge unlaufull , and of other corrupte
bargaynes shift~ and chev=s=nses , w=ch= Actes Statut~ and Lawes ben soe
obscure and darke in sentenc~ wordes and termes , and upon the same soe
many doubt~ ambiguyties and questions have risen and growen , & the same
Actes Statut~ and Lawes bene of so litle force and effect , that by
reason therof litle or noe punyshment hath ensued to th@ @eoffendors of
the same , but rather hath encouraged them to use the same : For
Reformac~on wherof bee it enacted by the King our Sov~aigne lorde by th@
@assent of the Lords sp~uall and temporall and of the Comens in this
p~sent Parliament assembled and by th@ @auctoritie of the same , that
all and everie the saide Act~ Statutes and Lawes heretofore made of for
or concerninge usury shift~ corrupt bargaynes and chevysaunc~ and ev~y
of them , and all peynes forfeytures and penalities concerninge the same
and ev~y parte thereof , shall from henseforthe be utterlie voide and of
none effect to all intentes construcc~ons and purposes .
STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,996.30

And be it further enacted by th@ @auctoritie aforesaide , that noe p~son
ne p~sons of what estate degre or condic~on soever he or they be , from
and after the last daye of Januarie next comynge , shall by himselfe
Factor Attorney Serv=a=nte or Deputy , sell his m~chaundizes or Wares to
any p~son or p~sons , and within three monethes next after by himselfe
Factor Attorney Deputye , or by any other p~son or p~sons to his use@
@and be_houfe , by the same m~chaundizes or Wares , or any parte or
p~cell therof , uppon a lower price , knowinge them to be y=e= same
wares or m~chaundizes that he did before so bargayne and sell , uppon
the peynes and forfeytures hereafter lymitted in this Estatute
STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,996.31

And be it also enacted by the same auctoritie , that no p~son or p~sons
of what estate degree quality or condic~on soever he or they be , at any
tyme after the saide last day of Januarie next comynge , by way or meane
or any corrupte bargayne loone or eschaunge chevisaunce shifte int~est
of any wares m~chaundizes or other thinge or thinges whatsoever , or by
any other corrupte or deceitfull waye or meane , or by any covyne yngyne
or deceitfull waye or conveyaunce , shall haue receyve accepte or take ,
in lucre or gaynes , for the forbearinge or givinge daye of payment of
one hole yere of and for his or their money or other thing~ that shall
be due for the same wares m~chaundizes or other thinge or thing~ , above
the some of tenne poundes in the hundred , and so after that rate , and
not above of and for a more or lesse some or for a longer or shorter
tyme , and noe more or greater gayne or some therupon to be had , upon
the paynes and forfeytures hereafter in this Acte mencioned & conteyned
. STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,996.32

And be it further inacted by auctoritie aforesaide , that if any p~son
or p~sons , at any tyme after the said last day of Januarie , doe
bargayne and sell or ley to morgage by any waye or meane , any Mannors
Landes Tenn~t~ or hereditament~ to any p~son or p~sons , upon condic~on
of payment or non_payment of any so~me or so~mes of money to be had
paide or made at any day c~ten , or before any such day , by him that
shall so bargayne sell or ley to morgage the same Manners Lond~ Ten~t~
or Hereditament~ , that the same p~son or p~sons to whom any such
Mannors Landes Ten~t~ or Hereditament~ shall be so bargayned solde or
leyd to morgage , shall not by reason therof have ne take in lucre or
gaynes of the yssues revenues and p~fitt~ of the same Mannors Lond~
Ten~t~ or Hereditament~ , above the some of tenne pound~ in the hundred
for one hole yere , and so after the rate abovesaide for a more or
lesser some or for a longer or shorter tyme , and noe more or otherwise
, uppon the peynes forfeytures and penalties hereafter in this p~sent
Estatute lymitted and expressed . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,996.33

<P_3,997>

And be it further enacted by th@ @auctoritie aforesaide , that if any
p~son or p~sons of what estate degre qualitie or condic~on soever he or
they be , at anye tyme after the saide last day of Januarie next
co~mynge , shall doe any Acte or Act~ thinge or thing~ contrarie to the
tenor forme and effecte of this Estatute , or of any clause article or
sentence conteyned in the same , that then all and ev~y offendor and
offendors therin or in any parte therof , shall forfeyt and lose for
every such offence the treble value of the wares and m~chaundizes and
other thinge or thinges so bargayned solde eschaunged or shifted , and
the treble value of the yssues & p~fytt~ of the saide Mannors Land~
Ten~t~ and Hereditament~ so had taken or receyved by reason of any suche
bargayne sale or morgage , and also shall have and suffer ymprisonment
of his body , and make fyne and ransome at the King~ will and pleasure ;
the moytie of w=ch= forfeyture of the said treble value shal@ @be to the
Kinge , and th@ @other moytie to him or them that will sue for the same
, in any of the King~ Court~ by Acco~n of debte bill playnte or
informac~on , in w=ch= acc~on bill playnt or informac~on , no wager of
lawe essoyne or p~tecc~on shal@ @be admytted or allowed .
STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,997.35

Provided alwaye and be it enacted by th@ @auctoritie aforesaide , that
this Acte nor any thinge therein conteyned shall not in any wise extend
to any laufull obligac~on endorsed with a condicc~on , nor to any
statute or recognizaunce made and to be made for the payment of a lesser
so~me , so that the same obligac~on statute or recognizaunce be made for
a true just and p~fytt debte , or for the p~formance of any other true
coven=a=ntes made or to be made uppon a just and true intent hadd
betwene the parties , other then in cases of Usurie int~est corrupt
bargaynes shift or chevysance ; Ne yet shall extend to any recoverie
fyne feoffament release confirmac~on or graunte made or to be made upon
condic~on with a true intent , other then to such recoveries fynes
feoffament~ releases confirmac~ons and graunt~ as shal@ @be made upon
condic~on extending to usurie int~est corrupt bargaynes shift~ or
chevisaunce ; any thinge in this Estatute conteyned , or any Lawe
Statute or Ordyn=a=ce heretofore had used or made to the cont=a=ry
notwithstanding . STAT-1543-E1-P1,3,997.36

