<BEGIN_stevenso-1558-e1-p1>

<P_3>

<heading>

<font> THE PROLOGUE . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,3.4

<$$heading>

As Ga~mer Gurton , with manye a wyde styche Sat pesynge & patching of
Hodg her ma~@ @s briche By chance or misfortune as shee her geare tost
In Hodge lether bryches her needle shee lost , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,3.6

When Diccon the bedlam had hard by report That good Ga~mer Gurton was
robde in thys sorte , He quyetly perswaded with her in that stound Dame
Chat her deare gossyp this needle had found , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,3.7

Yet knew shee no more of this matter <paren> alas <$$paren> Then knoeth
Tom our clarke what the Priest saith at masse STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,3.8

Here of there ensued so fearfull a fraye , Mas Doctor was sent for these
gossyps to staye , Because he was Curate , and estemed full wyse Who
found that he sought not , by Diccons deuice , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,3.9

When all thinges were tombled and cleane out of fassion Whether it were
by fortune , or some other constellacion Sodenlye the neele Hodge found
by the prickynge STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,3.10

And drew it out of his bottocke where he felt it stickynge
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,3.11

Theyr hartes then at rest with perfect securytie , With a pot of good
ale they stroake vp theyr plauditie . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,3.12

<P_4>

<heading>

THE FYRST ACTE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.15

THE FYRST SCEANE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.16

<$$heading>

<font> Diccon . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.18

<font> Diccon <$$font> Many a myle haue I walked ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.19

diuers and sundry waies And many a good ma~s house haue I bin at in my
daies STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.20

Many a gossips cup in my tyme haue I tasted STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.21

And many a broche and spyt , haue I both turned and basted
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.22

Many a peece of bacon haue I had out of thir balkes In ronnyng ouer the
countrey , with long and were walkes , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.23

Yet came my foote neuer , within those doore cheekes , To seeke flesh or
fysh , Garlyke , Onyons or Leekes , That euer I saw a sorte , in such a
plyght As here within this house appereth to my syght ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.24

There is howlynge and scowlynge , all cast in a dumpe , With whewling
and pewling , as though they had lost a trump Syghing and sobbing ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.25

they weepe STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.26

and they wayle STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.27

I maruell in my mynd , what the deuill they ayle
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.28

The olde Trot syts groning , with alas and alas ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.29

And Tib wringes her hands , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.30

and takes on in worse case STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.31

With poore Cocke theyr boye , they be dryuen in such fyts I feare mee
the folkes be not well in theyr wyts , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.32

Aske them what they ayle , or who brought them in this staye ? They
aunswer not at all , but alacke and welaway STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,4.33

<P_5>

Whan I saw it booted not , out at doores I hyed mee
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.35

And caught a slyp of Bacon , when I saw that none spyed mee . Which I
intend not far hence , vnles my purpose fayle Shall serue for a
shoinghorne to draw on two pots of ale . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.36

<heading>

THE FYRST ACTE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.38

THE SECOND SCEANE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.39

<$$heading>

<font> Hodge . Diccon . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.41

<font> Hodge <$$font> See so ch@ @am arayed with dablynge in the durt
She that set me to ditchinge , ich wold she had the squrt
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.42

Was neuer poore soule that such a life had ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.43

Gogs bones thys vylthy glaye hase drest mee to bad Gods soule ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.44

see how this stuffe teares STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.45

Iche were better to bee a Bearward and set to keepe Beares By the Masse
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.46

here is a gasshe , a shamefull hole in deade STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.47

And one stych teare furder , a man may thruste in his heade .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.48

<font> Diccon <$$font> By my fathers soule Hodge , if I shulde now be
sworne I can not chuse but say thy breech is foule betorne ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.49

But the next remedye in such a case and hap Is to plaunche on a piece ,
as brode as thy cap . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.50

<font> Hodge <$$font> Gogs soule man , t@ @is not yet two dayes fully
ended Synce my dame Gurton <paren> ch@ @em sure <$$paren> these breches
amended . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,5.51

<P_6>

But ch@ @am made such a drudge to trudge at euery neede Ch@ @wold rend
it though it were stitched wyth sturdy pacthreede ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.53

<font> Diccon <$$font> Hoge , let thy breeches go ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.54

and speake and tell mee soone What deuill ayleth ga~mer gurton , & Tib
her mayd to frowne , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.55

<font> Hodge <$$font> Tush man th@ @art deceyued ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.56

t@ @ys theyr dayly looke , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.57

They coure so ouer y=e= coles , theyr eyes be bleared with smooke ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.58

<font> Diccon <$$font> Nay by the masse , I perfectly perceiued as I
came hether That eyther Tib & her dame hath ben by the eares together Or
els as great a matter as thou shalt shortly see .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.59

<font> Hodge <$$font> Now iche beseeche our Lord they neuer better agree
. STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.60

<font> Diccon <$$font> By gogs soule there they syt as still as stones
in the streite As though they had ben take~ with fairies or els w=t=
some il sprite STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.61

<font> Hodge <$$font> Gogs hart , I durst haue layd my cap to a crowne
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.62

Ch@ @would lerne of some prancome as sone as ich came to town .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.63

<font> Diccon <$$font> Why Hodge art thou inspyred ?
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.64

or dedst thou therof here ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.65

<font> Hodge <$$font> Nay , but ich saw such a wonder as ich saw nat
this vii. yere STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.66

Tome Tannkards Cow <paren> be gogs bones <$$paren> she set me vp her
saile STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.67

And flynging about his halfe aker fysking with her taile , As though
there had be in her ars a swarme of Bees , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.68

And ch@ @ad not cryed tphrowh hoore , she@ @ad lept out of his Lees .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,6.69

<P_7>

<font> Diccon <$$font> Why Hodg lies the connyng in Tom tankards cowes
taile ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,7.71

<font> Hodge <$$font> Well ich chaue {COM:sic} hard some say such tokens
do not fayle , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,7.72

But ca~st y=u= not tell in faith Diccon , why she frownes or wher at
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,7.73

Hath no man stolne her Ducks or Henes , or gelded gyb her Cat
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,7.74

<font> Diccon <$$font> What deuyll can I tell man ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,7.75

I cold not haue one word STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,7.76

They gaue no more hede to my talk then thou woldst to a lorde
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,7.77

<font> Hodge <$$font> Iche can not styll but muse , what meruaylous
thinge it is STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,7.78

Ch@ @yll in and know my selfe what matters are amys .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,7.79

<font> Diccon <$$font> Then farewell hodge a while , synce thou doest
inward hast , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,7.80

For I will into the good wyfe Chat@ @s , to feele how the ale dooth
taste . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,7.81

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_1_here}

<P_16>

<heading>

THE II. ACTE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.85

FYRSTE A SONGE . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.86

<$$heading>

Backe and syde go bare , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.88

go bare , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.89

booth foote and hande go colde : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.90

But Bellye god sende thee good ale ynoughe , whether it be newe or olde
. STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.91

I Can not eate , but lytle meate , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.92

my stomacke is not good : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.93

But sure I thinke , that I can drynke with him that weares a hood .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.94

Thoughe I go bare , take ye no care , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.95

I am nothinge a colde : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.96

I stuffe my skyn , so full within , of ioly good Ale and olde .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.97

{COM:refrain_omitted}

I loue no rostt , but a nut_browne toste and a Crab layde in the fyre ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.99

A lytle bread , shall do me stead STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.100

much breade I not desyre : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.101

No froste nor snow , no winde I trowe can hurte mee if I wolde , I am so
wrapt , and throwly lapt of ioly good ale and olde .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,16.102

{COM:refrain_omitted}

<P_17>

And Tyb my wyfe , that as her lyfe loueth well good ale to seeke , Full
ofte drynkes shee , tyll ye may see the teares run downe her cheekes :
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.105

Then dooth she trowle , to mee the bowle euen as a mault worme shuld ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.106

And sayth sweete hart , I tooke my part of this ioly good ale and olde .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.107

{COM:refrain_omitted}

Now let them drynke , tyll they nod and winke , euen as good felowes
shoulde doe They shall not mysse , to haue the blisse , good ale doth
bringe men to : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.109

And all poore soules that haue scowred boules or haue them lustely
trolde , God saue the lyues , of them and theyr wyues whether they be
yonge or olde . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.110

{COM:refrain_omitted}

<heading>

THE FYRST SCEANE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.113

<$$heading>

<font> Diccon . Hodge . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.115

<font> Diccon <$$font> Well done be Gogs malt , well songe and well
sayde , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.116

Come on mother Chat as thou art true mayde , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.117

One fresh pot of ale let@ @s see to make an ende Agaynst this colde
wether , my naked armes to defende , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.118

This gere it warms the soule , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.119

now wind blow on the worst , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.120

And let us drink and swill , till that our bellies burste
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.121

Now were he a wyse man , by cunnynge colde defyne Which way my Iourney
lyeth or where Dyccon will dyne STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,17.122

<P_18>

But one good turne I haue , be it by nyght or daye South , East , North
or west , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.124

I am neuer out of my waye . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.125

<font> Hodge <$$font> Ch@ @ym goodly rewarded , cham I not , do you
thyncke ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.126

Ch@ @ad a goodly dynner for all my sweate and swyncke ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.127

Neyther butter cheese , mylke onyons fleshe nor fyshe Saue thys poor
pece of barly bread , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.128

t@ @is a pleasant costly dishe . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.129

<font> Diccon <$$font> Haile fellow Hodge STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.130

& well to fare , w=t= thy meat , if y=u= haue any ?
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.131

But by thy words as I the~ smelled , thy daintrels be not manye .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.132

<font> Hodge <$$font> Daintrels dicco~ <paren> gogs soule ma~ <$$paren>
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.133

saue this pece of dry horsbred , Ch@ @a byt no byt this lyue_longe daie
, STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.134

no crome come in my hed STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.135

My gutts they yawle crawle STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.136

and all my belly rumbleth STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.137

The puddynges can not lye still , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.138

ech one ouer other tumbleth By gogs harte ch@ @am so vexte , and in my
belly pende STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.139

Ch@ @ould one peece were at the spittlehouse another at y=e= castels
ende . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.140

<font> Diccon <$$font> Why hodge , was there none at home thy dinner for
to set : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.141

<font> Hodge <$$font> Godgs bread Diccon ich came to late ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.142

was nothing ther to get STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.143

Gib <paren> a fowle feind might on her light <$$paren> lickt y=e= milke
pan so clene See Diccon , t@ @was not so well washt this .vii. yere as
ich wene STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,18.144

<P_19>

A pestilence lyght on all ill lucke , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.146

ch@ @ad thought yet for all thys Of a morsell of bacon behynde the dore
at worst shuld not misse , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.147

But when ich sought a slyp to cut , as ich was wont to do Gogs soule
Diccon , gyb our Cat had eate the bacon to . <font> Which bacon Diccon
stole , as is declared before . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.148

<font> Diccon <$$font> Ill luck quod he , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.149

mary swere it hodg , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.150

this day y=e= trueth to tel Thou rose not on thy right syde ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.151

or els blest thee not wel , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.152

Thy mylk slopt vp , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.153

thy baco~ filtched , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.154

that was to bad luck hodg . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.155

<font> Hodge <$$font> Nay , nay , ther was a fowler fault ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.156

my ga~mer ga me y=e= dodge STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.157

Seest not how ch@ @a~ rent & torn , my heels , my knees & my breech
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.158

Ch@ @ad thought as ich sat by the fire , help here & there a stitch ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.159

But there ich was powpte indeede . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.160

<font> Diccon <$$font> Why Hodge ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.161

<font> Hodge <$$font> Bootes not man to tell ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.162

Ch@ @am so drest amonst {COM:sic} a sorte of fooles , ch@ @ad better be
in hell , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.163

My gammer <paren> ch@ @am ashamed to say <$$paren> by god serued me not
weele STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.164

<font> Diccon <$$font> How so Hodge ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.165

<font> Hodge <$$font> Hase she not gone trowest now and lost her neele .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.166

<font> Diccon <$$font> Her Eele Hodge , who fysht of late ?
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.167

that was a dainty dysh . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.168

<font> Hodge <$$font> Tush tush , her neele , her neele , her neele man
. STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.169

t@ @ys neyther flesh nor fysh . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,19.170

<P_20>

A lytle thing with an hole in the end , as bright as any syller , Small
, longe , sharpe at the poynt , & straight as any pyller .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.172

<font> Diccon <$$font> I know not what a deuil y=u= me~est ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.173

y=u= bringst me more in doubt STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.174

<font> Hodge <$$font> Knowest not w=t= what tom tailers ma~ , sits
broching throughe a clout STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.175

A neele , neele , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.176

a neele , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.177

my gammers neele is gone . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.178

<font> Dicon <$$font> Her neele Hodge , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.179

now I smel thee , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.180

y=t= was a chaunce alone , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.181

By y=e= masse y=u= hadst a shamefull losse , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.182

& it wer but for thy breches <font> Hodge <$$font> Gogs soule man ch@
@ould giue a crown chad it but iii. stitches .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.183

<font> Diccon <$$font> How sayest y=u= Hodg , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.184

what shuld he haue , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.185

again thy neele got <font> Hodge <$$font> Be@ @m vathers soule ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.186

and ch@ @ad it ch@ @ould giue him a new grot .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.187

<font> Diccon <$$font> Canst thou keepe counsaile in this case .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.188

<font> Hodge <$$font> Els ch@ @wold my tonge were out .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.189

<font> Diccon <$$font> Do thou but then by my aduise , & I will fetch it
w=t=out doubt , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.190

<font> Hodge <$$font> Ch@ @yll runne , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.191

ch@ @yll ryde , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.192

ch@ @yl dygge , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.193

ch@ @yl delue , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.194

ch@ @ill toyle , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.195

ch@ @ill trudge STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.196

shalt see : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.197

Ch@ @ill hold STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.198

ch@ @il drawe , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.199

ch@ @il pull , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.200

ch@ @ill pynche STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.201

ch@ @ill kneele on my bare knee . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.202

Ch@ @ill scrape , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.203

ch@ @ill scratche , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.204

ch@ @ill syfte , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.205

ch@ @yll seeke , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.206

ch@ @ill bowe , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.207

ch@ @ill bende , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.208

ch@ @ill sweate , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.209

Ch@ @il stoop , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.210

ch@ @il stur , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.211

ch@ @il cap STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.212

ch@ @il knele , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.213

ch@ @il crepe on ha~ds & feete , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.214

Ch@ @il be thy bondman Diccon , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.215

ich sweare by sunne and moone STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.216

And ch@ @an@ @not sum what to stop this gap , ch@ @am vtterly vndone
<font> Pointing behind to his torne breeches . <$$font>
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,20.217

<P_21>

<font> Diccon <$$font> Why , is ther any special cause ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.219

thou takest hereat such sorow <font> Hodge <$$font>
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.220

Kirstian Clack Tom simsons maid , bi the masse coms hether to morow
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.221

Ch@ @am@ @not able to say , betweene vs what may hap ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.222

She smyled on me the last sonday when ich put of my cap ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.223

<font> Diccon <$$font> Well Hodge this is a matter of weight ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.224

& must be kept close , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.225

It might els turne to both our costes as the world now gose ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.226

Shalt sware to be no blab Hodge . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.227

<font> Hodge <$$font> Ch@ @yll Diccon . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.228

<font> Diccon <$$font> Then go to , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.229

Lay thine hand here , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.230

say after me as thou shalt here me do STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.231

Haste no booke ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.232

<font> Hodge <$$font> Ch@ @a no booke I . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.233

<font> Diccon <$$font> Then needes must force vs both , Upon my breech
to lay thine hand , and there to take thine othe .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.234

<font> Hodge <$$font> I Hodge breechelesse , Sweare to Diccon rechelesse
By the crosse that I shall kysse , To kepe his counsaile close And
alwayes me to dispose To worke that his pleasure is .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.235

<font> Here he kysseth Diccons breeche . <$$font>
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.236

<font> Diccon <$$font> Now Hodge see thou take heede
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.237

And do as I thee byd STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.238

For so I iudge it meete , This nedle againe to win
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.239

There is no shift therin But coniure vp a spreete .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.240

<font> Hodge <$$font> What the great deuill Diccon I saye ?
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,21.241

<P_22>

<font> Diccon <$$font> Yea in good faith , that is the waye ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.243

Fet with some prety charme . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.244

<font> Hodge <$$font> Softe Diccon be not to hasty yet ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.245

By the masse for ich begyn to sweat STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.246

Ch@ @am afrayde of some harme . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.247

<font> Diccon <$$font> Come hether then STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.248

and sturre the nat One inche out of this Cyrcle plat
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.249

But stande as I thee teache . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.250

<font> Hodge <$$font> And shall ich be here safe from theyr clawes
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.251

<font> Diccon <$$font> The mayster deuill with his longe pawes Here to
thee can not reache : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.252

Now will I settle me to this geare . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.253

<font> Hodge <$$font> I saye Diccon , heare me ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.254

heare Go softely to thys matter . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.255

<font> Diccon <$$font> What deuyll man , art afraide of nought
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.256

<font> Hodge <$$font> Canst not tarrye a lytle thought Tyll ich make a
curtesie of water . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.257

<font> Diccon <$$font> Stand still to it , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.258

why shuldest thou feare hym ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.259

<font> Hodge <$$font> Gogs sydes Diccon , me thinke ich heare him
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.260

And tarrye ch@ @al mare all . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.261

<font> Diccon <$$font> The matter is no worse then I tolde it ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.262

<font> Hodge <$$font> By the masse ch@ @am able no longer to holde it ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.263

To bad iche must beraye the hall . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.264

<font> Diccon <$$font> Stand to it Hodge , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.265

sture not you horson , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.266

What Deuyll , be thine ars strynges brusten ?
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.267

Thy selfe a while but staye , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.268

The deuill I smell hym wyll be here anone . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.269

<font> Hodge <$$font> Hold him fast Diccon , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.270

ch@ @am gone , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.271

ch@ @am gone STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.272

Ch@ @yll not be at that fraye . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,22.273

<P_23>

<heading>

THE II. ACTE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.276

THE II. SCEANE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.277

<$$heading>

<font> Diccon . Chat . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.279

<font> Diccon <$$font> Fy shytten knaue , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.280

and out vpon thee STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.281

Aboue all other loutes fye on thee , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.282

Is not here a clenly prancke ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.283

But thy matter was no better Nor thy presence here no sweter ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.284

To flye I can the thanke : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.285

Here is a matter worthy glosynge Of Gammer Gurtons nedle losynge And a
foule peece of warke , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.286

A man I thyncke myght make a playe And nede no worse to this they saye
Being but halfe a Clarke . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.287

Softe , let me alone , I will take the charge This matter further to
enlarge Within a tyme shorte , If ye will marke my toyes ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.288

and note I will geue ye leaue to cut my throte If I make not good sporte
, STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.289

Dame Chat I say , where be ye , within ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.290

<font> Chat <$$font> Who haue we there maketh such a din :
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.291

<font> Diccon <$$font> Here is a good fellow , maketh no great daunger ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.292

<font> Chat <$$font> What diccon ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.293

come nere , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.294

ye be no straunger , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.295

We be fast set at trumpe man , hard by the fyre ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.296

Thou shalt set on the king , if thou come a litle nyer .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.297

<font> Diccon <$$font> Nay , nay , there is no tarying :
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.298

I must be gone againe STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.299

But first for you in councel I haue a word or twaine .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,23.300

<P_24>

<font> Chat <$$font> Come hether Dol , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.302

Dol , sit downe STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.303

and play this game , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.304

And as thou sawest me do , see thou do euen the same
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.305

There is 5. trumps beside the Queene , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.306

y=e= hindmost y=u= shalt finde her STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.307

Take hede of Sim glouers wife , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.308

she hath an eie behind her , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.309

Now Diccon say your will . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.310

<font> Diccon <$$font> Nay softe a litle yet ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.311

I wold not tel it my sister , the matter is so great ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.312

There I wil haue you sweare by our dere Lady of Bulliane , S. Dunstone
, and S. Donnyke , with the three Kinges of Kullaine , That ye shal
keepe it secret . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.313

<font> Chat <$$font> Gogs bread that will I doo .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.314

<font> Diccon <$$font> Here is ga~mer gurton your neighbour , a sad &
heuy wight STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.315

Her goodly faire red Cock , at home , was stole this last night .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.316

<font> Chat <$$font> Gogs soule her Cock with the yelow legs , y=t=
nightly crowed so iust ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.317

<font> Diccon <$$font> That cocke is stollen .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.318

<font> Chat <$$font> What was he set out of the hens ruste ?
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.319

<font> Diccon <$$font> I can not tel where y=e= deuil he was kept ,
vnder key or locke , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.320

But Tib hath tykled in Gammers eare , that you shoulde steal the cocke
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.321

<font> Chat <$$font> Haue I stronge hoore ? by bread and salte .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.322

<font> Diccon <$$font> What softe , I say STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.323

be styl . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.324

Say not one word for all this geare . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.325

<font> Chat . <$$font> By the masse that I wyl ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,24.326

<P_25>

I wil haue the yong hore by the head , & the old trot by y=e= throte
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.328

<font> Diccon <$$font> Not one word dame Chat I say ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.329

not one word for my cote . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.330

<font> Chat <$$font> Shall such a begars brawle as y=t= thinkest y=u=
make me a theefe STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.331

The pocks light on her hores sydes , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.332

a pestlence & a mischeefe Come out thou hungry nedy bytche ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.333

o that my nails be short . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.334

<font> Diccon <$$font> Gogs bred woma~ hold your peace , this gere wil
els passe sport STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.335

I wold not for an_hundred pound , this matter shuld be knowen , That I
am auctour of this tale , or haue abrode it blowen
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.336

Did ye not sweare ye wold be ruled , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.337

before the tale I tolde I said ye must all secret keepe ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.338

and ye said sure ye wolde . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.339

<font> Chat <$$font> Wolde you suffer your selfe diccon , such a sort ,
to reuile you With slaunderous words to blot your name , & so to defile
you ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.340

<font> Diccon <$$font> No goodwife chat I wold be loth such drabs shulde
blot my name STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.341

But yet ye must so order all , y=t= Diccon beare no blame .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.342

<font> Chat <$$font> Go to then , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.343

what is your rede ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.344

say on your minde , ye shall mee rule herein .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.345

<font> Diccon <$$font> Godamercye to dame chat ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.346

in faith thou must the gere begin STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.347

It is twenty pound to a goose turd , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.348

my gammer will not tary But hetherward STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,25.349

she comes as fast as her legs can her cary , <P_26> To brawle with you
about her cocke , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.350

for well I hard Tib say The Cocke was rosted in your house , to breafast
yesterday , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.351

And when ye had the carcas eaten , the fethers ye out flunge
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.352

And Doll your maid the legs she hid a foote depe in the dunge .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.353

<font> Chat <$$font> Oh gracyous god my harte it burstes .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.354

<font> Diccon <$$font> Well rule your selfe a space
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.355

And gammer gurton when she commeth anon into thys place Then to the
Queane let@ @s see tell her your mynd STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.356

& spare not So shall Diccon blamelesse bee , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.357

and then go to I care not . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.358

<font> Chat <$$font> Then hoore beware her throte ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.359

I can abide no longer STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.360

In faith old witch it shal@ @be seene , which of vs two be stronger
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.361

And Diccon but at your request , I wold not stay one howre .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.362

<font> Diccon <$$font> Well keepe it in till she be here ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.363

and then out let it powre , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.364

In the meane while get you in , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.365

and make no wordes of this STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.366

More of this matter w=t=in this howre to here you shall not misse
Because I know you are my freind , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.367

hide it I cold not doubtles STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.368

Ye know your harm , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.369

see ye be wise about your owne busines STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.370

So fare ye well . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.371

<font> Chat <$$font> Nay soft Diccon STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.372

and drynke , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.373

what Doll I say Bringe here a cup of the best ale ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.374

let@ @s see , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.375

come quicly {COM:sic} awaye . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,26.376

<P_27>

<heading>

THE II. ACTT . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.379

THE III. SCEANE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.380

<$$heading>

<font> Hodge . Diccon . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.382

<font> Diccon <$$font> Ye see masters y=e= one end tapt of this my short
deuise STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.383

Now must we broche th@ @oter to , before the smoke arise
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.384

And by the time they haue a while run , I trust ye need not craue it ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.385

But loke what lieth in both their harts STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.386

ye ar like sure to haue it STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.387

<font> Hodge <$$font> Yea Gogs soule , art aliue yet ?
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.388

what Diccon dare ich come ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.389

<font> Diccon <$$font> A man is wel hied to trust to thee ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.390

I will say nothing but mum STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.391

But and ye come any nearer I pray you see all be sweete .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.392

<font> Hodge <$$font> Tush man , is gammers neele found ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.393

that ch@ @ould gladly weete STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.394

<font> Diccon <$$font> She may tha~ke thee it is not fou~d ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.395

for if y=u= had kept thy sta~ding The deuil he wold haue fet it out ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.396

euen hodg at thy co~maunding STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.397

<font> Hodge <$$font> Gogs hart , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.398

& cold he tel nothing wher the neele might be found
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.399

<font> Diccon <$$font> Ye folysh dolt , ye were to seek , ear we had got
our ground , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.400

Therfore his tale so doubtfull was , that I cold not perceiue it .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.401

<font> Hodge <$$font> Then ich se wel somthing was said ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.402

ch@ @ope one day yet to haue it , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.403

But diccon , diccon , did not the deuill cry ho , ho , ho ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,27.404

<P_28>

<font> Diccon <$$font> If y=u= hadst taryed where thou stoodst , thou
woldest haue said so STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.406

<font> Hodge <$$font> Durst swere of a boke , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.407

ch@ @ard him rore , streight after ich was gon
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.408

But tel me diccon what said y=e= knaue : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.409

let me here it anon . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.410

<font> Diccon <$$font> The horson talked to mee .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.411

I know not well of what STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.412

One whyle his tonge it ran STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.413

and paltered of a Cat , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.414

Another whyle he stamered styll vppon a Rat , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.415

Last of all there was nothing but euery word Chat , Chat ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.416

But this I well perceyued before I wolde him rid ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.417

Betweene Chat , and the Rat , and the Cat , the nedle is hyd ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.418

Now wether Gyb our cat haue eate it in her mawe , Or Doctor Rat our
curat haue found it in the straw , Or this dame chat your neighbour haue
stollen it , god hee knoweth But by y=e= morow at this time , we shal
learn how the matter goeth STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.419

<font> Hodge <$$font> Canst not learn to_night man ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.420

seest not what is here , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.421

<font> Pointyng behind to his torne breeches . <$$font>
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.422

<font> Diccon <$$font> T@ @ys not possyble to make it sooner appere ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.423

<font> Hodge <$$font> Alas Diccon then ch@ @aue no shyft , but least ich
tary to longe Hye me to Sym glouers shop , theare to seeke for a Thonge
, Ther with this breech to tatche and tye as ich may .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.424

<font> Diccon <$$font> To morow hodg if we chaunce to meete , shalt see
what I will say . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,28.425

<P_29>

<heading>

THE II. ACTE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.428

THE IIII. SCEANE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.429

<$$heading>

<font> Diccon : {COM:sic} Gammer . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.431

<font> Diccon <$$font> Now this gere must forward goe ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.432

for here my gammer commeth , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.433

Be still a while STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.434

& say nothing , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.435

make here a litle romth {COM:sic} . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.436

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Good lord , shall neuer be my lucke my neele
agayne to spye ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.437

Alas the whyle t@ @ys past my helpe , where t@ @is still it must lye .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.438

<font> Diccon <$$font> Now Iesus gammer gurto~ , what driueth you to
this sadnes STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.439

I feare me by my conscience , you will sure fall to madnes .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.440

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Who is that , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.441

what Diccon , ch@ @am lost man fye fye . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.442

<font> Diccon <$$font> Mary fy on them y=t= be worthy ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.443

but what shuld be your troble , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.444

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Alas the more ich thinke on it , my sorow it
waxeth doble STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.445

My goodly tossing sporyars neele , ch@ @aue lost ich wot not where .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.446

<font> Diccon <$$font> Your neele , whan ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.447

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> My neele <paren> alas <$$paren> ich myght full
ill it spare , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.448

As god him selfe he knoweth nere one besyde ch@ @aue .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.449

<font> Diccon <$$font> If this be all good gammer , I warrant you all is
saue . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.450

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Why know you any tydings which way my neele is
gone ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.451

<font> Diccon <$$font> Yea that I do doubtlesse , as ye shall here anone
, STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,29.452

<P_30>

A see a thing this matter toucheth within these .xx. howres , Euen at
this gate , before my face , by a neyghbour of yours ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.454

She stooped me downe , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.455

and vp she toke a nedle or a pyn : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.456

I durst be sworne it was euen yours , by all my mothers kyn .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.457

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> It was my neele diccon ich wot ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.458

for here euen by this poste Ich sat , what time as ich vp starte ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.459

and so my neele ich {SIC:it} loste STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.460

Who was it leiue son ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.461

speke ich pray the , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.462

& quickly tell me that ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.463

<font> Diccon <$$font> A suttle queane as any in thys Towne , your
neyghboure here dame Chat . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.464

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Dame chat STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.465

diccon let me be gone , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.466

ch@ @il thyther in post_haste . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.467

<font> Diccon <$$font> Take my councell yet or ye go , for feare ye
walke in wast , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.468

It is a murrion crafty drab , and froward to be pleased ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.469

And ye take not the better way , our nedle yet ye lose it
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.470

For when she tooke it vp , euen here before your doores What soft dame
chat <paren> quoth I <$$paren> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.471

that same is none of yours STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.472

Auant <paren> quoth she <$$paren> syr knaue , what pratest thou of that
I fynd : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.473

I wold y=u= hadst kist me I wot whear : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.474

<paren> she ment I know behind <$$paren> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.475

And home she went as brag , as it had ben a bodelouce , And I after as
bold , as it had ben , the goodman of the house
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,30.476

<P_31>

But there and ye had hard her , how she began to scolde The tonge it
went on patins , by hym that Judas solde , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.478

Ech other worde I was a knaue , and you a hore of hores , Because I
spake in your behalfe , and sayde the neele was yours .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.479

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Gogs bread , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.480

and thinks y=e= callet thus to kepe my neele me fro ?
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.481

<font> Diccon <$$font> Let her alone , and she minds non other but eue~
to dresse you so STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.482

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> By the masse ch@ @il rather spend the cote that
is on my backe . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.483

Thinks the false quean by such a slyght , that ch@ @ill my neele lacke
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.484

<font> Diccon <$$font> Slepe not your gere I counsell you ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.485

but of this take good hede STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.486

Let not be knowen I told you of it , how well soeuer ye spede .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.487

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Ch@ @il in Diccon a cleene aperne to take , and
set before me , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.488

And ich may my neele once see , ch@ @il sure remember the
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.489

<heading>

THE II. ACTE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.491

THE V. SCEANE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.492

<$$heading>

<font> Diccon <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.494

<font> Diccon <$$font> Here will the sporte begin , if these two once
may meete . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.495

Their chere durst lay money will proue scarsly sweete
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.496

My gammer sure entends , to be vppon her bones , With staues , or with
clubs , or els with coble stones . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,31.497

<P_32>

Dame Chat on the other syde , if {SIC:it} she be far behynde I am right
far deceiued STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.499

she is geuen to it of kynde , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.500

He that may tarry by it a whyle , and that but shorte I warrant hym
trust to it , he shall see all the sporte STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.501

Into the towne will I , my frendes to vysit there
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.502

And hether straight againe to see th@ @end of this gere
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.503

In the meane time felowes , pype vpp your fiddles ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.504

I saie take them STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.505

And let your freyndes here such mirth as ye can make them .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.506

<heading>

THE III. ACTE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.508

THE I. SCEANE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.509

<$$heading>

<font> Hodge . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.511

<font> Hodge <$$font> Sym glouer yet gramercy ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.512

ch@ @am meetlye well sped now , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.513

Th@ @art euen as good a felow as euer kyste a cowe ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.514

Here is a thonge in dede , by y=e= masse though ich speake it
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.515

Tom tankards great bald curtal , I thinke could not breake it
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.516

And when he spyed my neede , to be so straight and hard , H@ @ays lent
me here his naull , to set the gyb forward , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.517

As for my Gammers neele , the flyenge feynd go weete , Ch@ @ill not now
go to the doore againe with it to meete STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,32.518

<P_33>

Ch@ @ould make shyfte good inough and ch@ @ad a candels ende ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.520

The cheefe hole in my breeche , with these two ch@ @il amende .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.521

<heading>

THE III. ACTE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.523

THE II. SCEANE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.524

<$$heading>

<font> Gammer . Hodge . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.526

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> How Hodge , mayst nowe be glade ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.527

ch@ @a newes to tell thee STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.528

Ich knowe who hais my neele , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.529

ich trust soone shalt it see STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.530

<font> Hodge <$$font> The deuyll thou does , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.531

hast hard gammer in deede , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.532

or doest but iest STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.533

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> T@ @ys as true as steele Hodge .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.534

<font> Hodge <$$font> Why , knowest well where dydst leese it ?
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.535

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Ich know who found it , and tooke it vp
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.536

shalt see or it be longe . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.537

<font> Hodge <$$font> Gods mother dere , if that be true , farwel both
naule an thong STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.538

But who hais it gammer STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.539

say on : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.540

ch@ @ould faine here it disclosed . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.541

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> That false fixen , that same dame Chat , that
counts her selfe so honest . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.542

<font> Hodge <$$font> Who tolde you so : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.543

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> That same did Diccon the bedlam , which saw it
done . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.544

<font> Hodge <$$font> Diccon : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.545

it is a vengeable knaue gammer , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.546

t@ @is a bonable horso~ , Can do mo things then that
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.547

els ch@ @am deceyued euill STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.548

By the masse ich saw him of late cal vp a great blacke deuill ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,33.549

<P_34>

O the knaue cryed ho , ho , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.551

he roared STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.552

and he thundred , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.553

And ye@ @ad bene here , ch@ @am sure y@ @ould murrenly ha wondred .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.554

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Was not thou afraide Hodge to see him in this
place : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.555

<font> Hodge <$$font> No , and ch@ @ad come to me , ch@ @ould haue laid
him on the face , Ch@ @ould haue promised him .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.556

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> But Hodge , had he no hornes to pushe :
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.557

<font> Hodge <$$font> As long as your two armes ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.558

saw ye neuer Fryer Rushe Painted on a cloth , with a side_long Cowes
tayle And crooked clouen feete , and many a hoked nayle ?
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.559

For al the world <paren> if I shuld iudg <$$paren> ch@ @ould recken him
his brother STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.560

Loke euen what face Frier Rush had , the deuil had such another
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.561

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Now Iesus mercy hodg , did diccon in him bring :
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.562

<font> Hodge <$$font> Nay gammer <paren> heare me speke <$$paren> ch@
@il tel you a greater thing , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.563

The deuil <paren> when diccon had him , ich hard him wondrous weel
<$$paren> Sayd plainly <paren> here before vs <$$paren> , that dame chat
had your neele . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.564

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Then let vs go , and aske her wherfore she minds
to kepe it , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.565

Seing we know so much , t@ @ware a madnes now to slepe it .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.566

<font> Hodge <$$font> Go to her ga~mer , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.567

see ye not where she stands in her doores STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.568

Byd her geue you the neele , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.569

t@ @ys none of hers but yours . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,34.570

<P_35>

<heading>

THE III. ACTE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.573

THE III. SCEANE . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.574

<$$heading>

<font> Gammer . Chat . Hodge . <$$font> STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.576

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Dame Chat ch@ @olde praye the fair ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.577

let me haue y=t= is mine Ch@ @il not this twenty yeres take one fart
that is thyne STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.578

Therfore giue me mine owne STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.579

& let me liue besyde the STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.580

<font> Chat <$$font> Why art thou crept fro~ home hether , to mine own
doores to chide me : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.581

Hence doting drab , auaunt , or I shall set the further .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.582

Intends thou and that knaue , mee in my house to murther :
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.583

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Tush gape not so on me woman ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.584

shalt not yet eate mee , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.585

Nor all the frends thou hast , in this shall not intreate mee :
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.586

Mine owne goods I will haue , and aske the no beleue ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.587

What woman : pore folks must haue right , though the thing you agreue .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.588

<font> Chat <$$font> Giue thee thy right , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.589

and hang thee vp , w=t= al thy baggers broode STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.590

What wilt thou make me a theefe , and say I stole thy good :
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.591

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Ch@ @il say nothing <paren> ich warra~t thee
<$$paren> , but that ich ca~ proue it well Thou fet my good euen from my
doore , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.592

ch@ @am able this to tel , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.593

<font> Chat <$$font> Dyd I <paren> olde witche <$$paren> steale oft was
thine : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.594

how should that thing be knowen : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,35.595

<P_36>

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Ich can not tel , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.597

but vp thou tokest it as though it had ben thine owne ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.598

<font> Chat <$$font> Mary fy on thee , thou old gyb , with al my very
hart . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.599

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Nay fy on thee y=u= rampe , thou ryg , with al
that take thy parte . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.600

<font> Chat <$$font> A vengaunce on those lips y=t= laieth such things
to my charge . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.601

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> A vengeance on those callats hips , whose
conscie~ce is so large STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.602

<font> Chat <$$font> Come out Hogge . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.603

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Come out hogge , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.604

and let me haue right . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.605

<font> Chat <$$font> Thou arrant Witche . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.606

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Thou bawdie bitche , ch@ @il make thee cursse
this night . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.607

<font> Chat <$$font> A bag and a wallet . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.608

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> A carte for a callet .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.609

<font> Chat <$$font> Why wenest thou thus to preuaile ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.610

I hold thee a grote , I shall patche thy carte ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.611

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Thou warte as good kysse my tayle Thou slut ,
y=u= kut , y=u= rakes , y=u= iakes : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.612

will not shame make y=e= hide the STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.613

<font> Chat <$$font> Thou skald , thou bald , thou rotten , y=u= glotton
, I will no longer chyd the STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.614

But I will teache the to kepe home . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.615

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Wylt thou drunken beaste .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.616

<font> Hodge <$$font> Sticke to her gammer , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.617

take her by the head , ch@ @il warrant you thys feast .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.618

Smyte I saye gammer , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.619

Byte I say gammer , I trow ye wyll be keene : STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.620

Where be your nayls ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.621

claw her by the iawes , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.622

pull me out bothe her eyen , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.623

Gogs bones gammer , holde vp your head , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.624

<font> Chat <$$font> I trow drab I shall dresse thee .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,36.625

<P_37>

Tary y=u= knaue STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.627

I hold the a grote , I shall make these hands blesse thee
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.628

Take y=u= this old hore for amends , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.629

& lerne thy tonge well to tame STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.630

And say thou met at this bickering , not thy fellow but thy dame .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.631

<font> Hodge <$$font> Where is the strong_stued hore ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.632

ch@ @il geare a hores marke , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.633

Stand out ones way , that ich kyll none in the darke :
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.634

Up gammer and ye be alyue , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.635

ch@ @il feyght now for us bothe , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.636

Come no nere me thou scalde callet , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.637

to kyll the ich wer loth . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.638

<font> Chat <$$font> Art here agayne thou hoddy_peke ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.639

what doll bryng me out my spitte . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.640

<font> Hodge <$$font> Ch@ @ill broche thee wyth this ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.641

bi@ @m father soule , ch@ @yll coniure that foule sprete :
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.642

Let dore stand Cock , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.643

why coms in deede ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.644

kepe dore y=u= horson boy . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.645

<font> Chat <$$font> Stand to it y=u= dastard for thine eares ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.646

i@ @se teace y=e= a sluttish toye . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.647

<font> Hodge <$$font> Gogs woundes hore , ch@ @il make the auaunte ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.648

take heede Cocke , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.649

pull in the latche , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.650

<font> Chat <$$font> I faith sir loose breche STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.651

had ye taried , ye shold haue found your match .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.652

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Now ware thy throte losell ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.653

thou@ @se pay for al STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.654

<font> Hodge <$$font> Well said gammer by my soule ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.655

Hoyse her , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.656

souse her , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.657

bounce her , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.658

trounce her , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.659

pull out her throte_boule STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.660

<font> Chat <$$font> Comst behynd me thou withered witch ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.661

& I get once on foote Thou@ @se pay for all , y=u= old tarlether ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.662

i@ @le teach the what longs to it STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.663

Take ye this to make vp thy mouth , til time thou come by more
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,37.664

<P_38>

<font> Hodge <$$font> Up gammer STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.666

stand on your feete , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.667

where is the olde hore ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.668

Faith woulde ch@ @ad her by the face STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.669

ch@ @oulde cracke her callet crowne STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.670

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> A hodg , hodg , where was thy help , when fixen
had me downe . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.671

<font> Hodge <$$font> By the masse Gammer , but for my staffe Chat had
gone nye to spyl you STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.672

Ich think the harlot had not cared , and ch@ @ad not com to kill you
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.673

But shall we loose our neele thus ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.674

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> No Hodge ch@ @warde lothe doo soo ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.675

Thinkest thou ch@ @ill take that at her hand ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.676

no hodg ich tell the no STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.677

<font> Hodge <$$font> Ch@ @old yet this fray wer wel take vp , & our own
neele at home STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.678

T@ @will be my chaunce els some to kil , wher euer it be or whome
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.679

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> We haue a parson , <paren> hodge thou knoes
<$$paren> a man estemed wise Mast doctor Rat ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.680

ch@ @il for hym send , and let me here his aduise ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.681

He will her shriue for all this gere , & geue her penaunce strait
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.682

We@ @se haue our neele , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.683

els dame chat comes nere w=t=in heaue~ gate STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.684

<font> Hodge <$$font> Ye mary gammer , y=t= ich think best :
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.685

wyll you now for him send STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.686

The sooner Doctor Rat be here , the soner we@ @se ha an ende ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.687

And here gammer Dyccons deuill , <paren> as iche remember well <$$paren>
Of Cat , and Chat , and Doctor Rat : a felloneus tale dyd tell ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.688

Ch@ @old you forty pound , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.689

that is the way your neele to get againe . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,38.690

<P_39>

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Ch@ @il ha him strait ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.692

call out y=e= boy , we@ @se make him take the payn
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.693

<font> Hodge <$$font> What coke I saye , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.694

come out STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.695

what deuill canst not here . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.696

<font> Cocke <$$font> How now hodg ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.697

how does gammer , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.698

is yet the wether cleare ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.699

What wold ch@ @aue me to doo ? STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.700

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Come hether Cocke STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.701

anon Hence swythe to Doctor Rat , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.702

hye the that thou were gone , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.703

And pray hym come speke with me , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.704

ch@ @am not well at ease , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.705

Shalt haue him at his chamber , or els at mother Bees ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.706

Els speke him at Hob fylchers shop , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.707

for as ch@ @arde it reported There is the best ale in al the towne ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.708

and now is most resorted . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.709

<font> Cocke <$$font> And shal ich brynge hym with me gammer ?
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.710

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Yea , by and by good Cocke .
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.711

<font> Cocke <$$font> Shalt see that shal@ @be here anone ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.712

els let me haue one the docke STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.713

<font> Hodge <$$font> Now gammer shal we two go in , and tary for hys
commynge STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.714

What deuill woman plucke vp your hart , STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.715

& leue of al this glo~mi~g STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.716

Though she were stronger at y=e= first , as ich thinke ye did find her
Yet there ye drest the dronke~ sow , what time ye cam behind her
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.717

<font> Ga~mer <$$font> Nay , nay , ch@ @am sure she lost not all ,
STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.718

for set th@ @end to y=e= beginni~g And ich doubt not , but she will make
small bost of her winning . STEVENSO-1558-E1-P1,39.719

