<BEGIN_stow-1580-e2-p1>

<P_549_misnumbered_as_559>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<heading>

<font> WILLIAM VENOR : IOHN FREMINGHAM ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,549_misnumbered_as_559.5

THE 28. OF SEPTEM . STOW-1580-E2-P1,549_misnumbered_as_559.6

SIR IOHN CHADWORTH MERCER , STOW-1580-E2-P1,549_misnumbered_as_559.7

THE 28. OF OCTOBER . <$$font> STOW-1580-E2-P1,549_misnumbered_as_559.8

<$$heading>

<P_550>

The Conduit upon <font> Cornehil <$$font> in <font> London <$$font> was
made , which before time had bene a prison , called the <font> Tunne
<$$font> in <font> Cornehil <$$font> , whereunto , nightwalkers that
were taken in suspition of fellonie , or other trespasses , were
committed . STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.11

In the moneth of March appeared a blasing starre , first betwixt the
East and the North , and last of all putting firie beames towards the
North , foreshewing peraduenture the effusion of bloud , about the
partes of <font> Wales <$$font> and <font> Northumberlande <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.12

<font> Owen Glendouerdew <$$font> with his <font> Welchmen <$$font> ,
wasted y=e= lande of the Lord <font> Reignalde Gray <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.13

tooke him prisoner , STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.14

and slewe many of his people . STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.15

Certaine man affirmed King <font> Richarde <$$font> to be aliue , and
that he should shortly shew himself openly , & reward them y=t= wer
faithful vnto him . STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.16

But after a certain priest was taken at <font> Warwike <$$font> , who
had written y=e= names of many , which were the aucthours of these
troubles , both the hope and feare of this conspiracie vanished .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.17

The Priest was drawen hanged and quartered . STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.18

Also <font> Walter Waldocke <$$font> late Priour of <font> Laude
<$$font> a Priorie in <font> Leicestershire <$$font> , bycause he
confessed he knew euill against the king and did conceale it , was
likewise hanged and headed . STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.19

Moreouer certaine gray Friers were taken , of the whiche one <font>
Richard Friseby <$$font> , doctour of Diuinitie , being asked what he
would do if K. <font> Richard <$$font> were present , answered , that
he woulde fight in his quarrel against any man , euen to the death ,
wherfore he was condemned , drawen , and hanged in his religious habit
and weede . STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.20

At <font> Daneburie <$$font> in <font> Essex <$$font> , vpon <font>
Corpus Chrsti <$$font> day , the Diuell appeared in likenesse of a Gray
Frier , who entring the Church , raged insolentlye , to the greate feare
of the Parishioners : STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.21

and the same houre with a tempeste of whyrlewinde and thunder , the
toppe of the Steeple was broken downe , and halfe the Chauncel scattered
abroade . STOW-1580-E2-P1,550.22

Shortlye after , sir <font> Roger claringdon <$$font> Knighte , a
bastard sonne to <font> Edward <$$font> the blacke Prince , and wyth him
a <P_551> Squire and a yeomanne were beheadded , and eyghte Graye Friers
hanged and beheaded at <font> London <$$font> , and two at <font>
Leicester <$$font> , all whiche hadde published King <font> Richard
<$$font> to bee aliue . STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.23

<font> Owen Glendouerdew <$$font> , with a company of <font> Welchmen
<$$font> inuaded all the shires that bordered neare vnto hym , wherefore
sir <font> Edmund Mortimer <$$font> wyth manye Knightes and Esquiers
wente out to encounter with <font> Owen <$$font> , stronger than he was
of the Countrey : STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.24

but when it came to martial affayres , their owne Archers turned theyr
handes againste them , whome they shoulde haue defended .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.25

There were slayne aboue eleauen_hundred of our men .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.26

Sir <font> Edmunde Mortimer <$$font> was taken , STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.27

and the <font> Welchwomen <$$font> , when y=e= battayle was done , vsing
the deade carcasses too shamefullye to bee spoken , woulde not suffer
them to be buryed without great raunsome . STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.28

The Kyng went wyth a greate power into <font> Wales <$$font> , to pursue
<font> Owe~ Glendouerdew <$$font> , where he profited nothing , but
loste muche , STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.29

for the <font> Welchmen <$$font> conuayed themselues into vnknowen
places : wherefore the King constrayned by necessitie , returned into
<font> Englande <$$font> , after he had spoyled & brent the Country .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.30

The same time the <font> Scottes <$$font> cruelly entred into <font>
England <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.31

for they supposed all the Lords beyond <font> Humber <$$font> to be
occupyed in the parties of <font> Wales <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.32

but the Erles of <font> Northumberlande , Henrie Percie , <$$font> and
his sonne <font> Henrie <$$font> with the Earle of <font> Dunbarre ,
<$$font> <paren> that a good whyle agone hauing forsaken the <font>
Scottes <$$font> , had sworne to be true to the King of <font> England
<$$font> with a number of armed men & plentie of archers , sodainly came
to resiste the <font> Scottes <$$font> as they woulde haue retourned
home , after they hadde spoyled and brente the Countrey ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.33

but nowe vppon a sodayne theyr waye was forelayde , so that they muste
needes abyde and take a place to fighte vppon : STOW-1580-E2-P1,551.34

they chose therefore a mountaine neare to the Towne of <font> Wollor
<$$font> , called <font> Halydowe Hill , <$$font> in the whiche they
place themselues wyth theyr armed <P_552> men and Archers , which when
our men beheld , leauing the way in which they stoode against the <font>
Scottes <$$font> , they clynie {COM:sic} the hill that stoode ouer
against the <font> Scottes <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.35

and without delaye of time , our Archers placed in the valley , set
their arrowes against the <font> Scottes <$$font> battayle , that they
might by some means force them to come downe : STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.36

on the other side , the <font> Scottishe <$$font> Archers let flye at
our men , who yet after they felt the grieuous waighte , and as it had
bin a shower or tempest of the arrowes shotte by the <font> Englishmen
<$$font> , they fledde . STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.37

The Earle <font> Dowglas <$$font> perceyuing his men so to flee , for he
was their generall leader , tooke hys Speare , STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.38

and manfullye wyth a multitude came down the Hyll , trusting doubtlesse
in his armour and y=e= armour of hys complices that hadde bin three
yeares in makyng , STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.39

and forced himselfe to runne vpon the Archers , whiche when the Archers
sawe , they stepped backe , STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.40

and shotte so fiercely , that they pierced the armed mens bodies ,
stroke throughe theyr Helmets , ryued their Speares , and rente theyr
armoure wyth lyghte adoe . STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.41

Earle <font> Dowglas <$$font> hymselfe was wounded in fiue places ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.42

the residue of the <font> Scottes <$$font> that were not come beside the
Hyll , turnyng backe from the arrowes that flewe , fledde awaye ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.43

but theyr flyghte nothing auayled them whilest the Archers followed them
, but that they were compelled to yeelde themselues .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.44

Earle <font> Dowglas <$$font> also was taken , STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.45

and manye drowned in the Riuer of <font> Tweede <$$font> , whylest they
knewe not the Fourdes , to the number of fiue hundered <paren> as was
sayde . <$$paren> STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.46

In thys battayle no Lorde , no Knighte , nor Squire , gaue anye stroke
to the enimyes , STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.47

but onlye God gaue the victorie to the <font> Englishe <$$font> Archers
, the Lordes and armed menne beeyng onelye lookers on .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,552.48

That daye the flower of the <font> Scottishe <$$font> Chiualrye was
taken , to witte , the Earle <font> Dowglas , Murdake <$$font> the
eldest sonne of the duke of <font> Albanie <$$font> , that was heyre
apparente to the Realme of <font> Scotlande : <$$font> The Earles of
<font> Murey , Angus , <$$font> and <font> Orkeney , <$$font> the Lordes
of <font> Mountgomorie , Erskin <$$font> , and <font> Gram <$$font> ,
with manye other Knyghtes <P_553> in the number of fourescore , besides
Esquires & Yeomen , whose number was not knowne .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.49

There were slayne of Barons , the Lord <font> Gordon <$$font> , the Lord
<font> Iohn of Swinton <$$font> that was false to both the realmes &c.
STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.50

This battayle was fought on the fourteenth of September .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.51

<heading>

<font> RICHARD MARLOW : ROBERT CHICHELEY , STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.53

THE 8. OF SEPTEMB . STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.54

SIR IOHN WALCOT DRAPER , STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.55

THE 28. OF OCTOBER . <$$font> STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.56

<$$heading>

<font> Edmond Mortimere <$$font> which before was taken by <font> Owen
Glendouerdewe <$$font> now professed to take <font> Owens <$$font> part
against King <font> Henry <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.58

and did contract mariage with the daughter of the sayd <font> Owen
<$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.59

In a Parliament at <font> London <$$font> which beganne the morrow after
Michaelmas day , and lasted seauen weekes , there was granted to the
King a tenth and a halfe of the Cleargie , a tenth of the borough townes
, and a fifteenth of the commo~s through the Realme .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.60

The messengers that had bin sent for <font> Ioane <$$font> , late wife
to <font> Iohn <$$font> of <font> Mountfort <$$font> Duke of <font>
Breteyne <$$font> , returned with hir into <font> England <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.61

and landed at <font> Falmouth <$$font> in <font> Cornewall <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.62

The King met with hir at <font> Winchester <$$font> the seauenth of
February , where they were married in the churche of <font> Saint
Swithen <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.63

The sixe_and_twentith of February she was Crowned at <font> Westminster
<$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.64

In the Sommer following , by the Townes of <font> Bedforde <$$font> and
of <font> Broklesward <$$font> , Monsters were seene oft times mornings
and euenings to come out of the woods , vnder diuers coulours , in the
likenesse and similiitude of me~ of warre , which met one with another ,
and seemed to fight cruell battayles , which although they that were
a_farre off might see , yet they that were neere hande could not see nor
finde , wiche thing deceyued many that coueted to approch & come neere .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.65

<font> Henry Percy <$$font> the yonger , did sodeinly shew himselfe to
be the Kings enimie , vnto whome ioyned <font> Thomas Percy <$$font>
Earle of <font> Worcester <$$font> , Unkle to the sayde <font> Henry
<$$font> : STOW-1580-E2-P1,553.66

and to make their conspiracie excusable , they did write vnto the Shires
about , that they pretended nothing against the alleageance <P_554> nor
fidelitie which they ought to the King , neyther to gather to any other
ende an armie , but only for the sauing of their persons , and for the
better gouernement of the common wealth , bycause the payments and
taskes graunted to the King for the safe custodie of the Realme , were
put to such vses as they ought not to be , and were vnprofitably
consumed and wasted . STOW-1580-E2-P1,554.67

Moreouer they complayned , that bycause of the euill slanders which
their enimies had made of them , they durst not personally appeare in
the Kings presence , vntill the Prelates & Barons had intreated for them
, that they might be permitted to purge themselues before the King , and
be lawfully iudged by their peeres , so that many that saw their letters
, did praise their diligence , & extoll their fidelitie towards the
common wealth . STOW-1580-E2-P1,554.68

But the King being disquieted with these doings , that he might appease
the communaltie , he wrote to them , that he maruelled much , that
seeing the Earle of <font> Northumberland <$$font> , & <font> Henry
<$$font> his son had receiued the most part of the payme~ts & summes
granted to him by the Cleargy & co~munalite , for y=e= defence of the
Marches of <font> Scotland <$$font> , what occasion they had to make
such manifest slanders &c. STOW-1580-E2-P1,554.69

but the yong <font> Henry Percy <$$font> putting his co~fidence in the
ayd of <font> Owen Glendouerdew <$$font> , and <font> Edmond Mortimer
<$$font> Earle of <font> March <$$font> , with the <font> Welchmen
<$$font> , and men of <font> Cheshire <$$font> , published that King
<font> Richard <$$font> was aliue , and was with them , whom if any ma~
would see , they should without delay come in armour to y=e= Castell of
<font> Leycester <$$font> which declaration made diuers variable motio~s
in the hearts of many , & caused the~ to wauer . STOW-1580-E2-P1,554.70

King <font> Henry <$$font> considering all things wisely , gathered
togither as many as he could , STOW-1580-E2-P1,554.71

and came sodeinly into the parties where the Rebels kept their rage ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,554.72

and when <font> Henry <$$font> saw vpon a sodein the Kings banner , and
was euen ready to haue scaled y=e= towne of <font> Shrewsburie <$$font>
he streightways desisted fro~ the assault of the towne ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,554.73

and said to his men , we must now needes turne our weapons vpon them
that come against vs : STOW-1580-E2-P1,554.74

ye see the Kings Sta~dert : STOW-1580-E2-P1,554.75

neither ca~ we , though <P_555> we would , seeke any startinghole ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.76

stand to it manfully therfore , STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.77

for this day shall eyther bring vs all to promotion and honor , if we
ouercome , STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.78

or else if we be ouercome , it shall deliuer vs fro~ the Kings malice :
STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.79

for it is a more comely thing to die in battell for the co~mon wealth ,
than after battell to die by the sentence of condemnation by the enimie
: STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.80

& with that , 14000. of the best me~ that wer with <font> Henry
<$$font> , made vow & promise to stand by him so long as breath would
serue , STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.81

& they tooke the field that was commodious for them ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.82

and the King & his men lay in the field right against the~ .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.83

The bowmen of <font> Henry Percy <$$font> began the battell , whose
arrowes fell not vpon the ground , but vpo~ the bodies of the Kings
souldiers , STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.84

and the Kings archers shot as fiercely against their enimies , so that
on both sides many were slaine , and many thousands fledde , thinking
the King had bin slaine : STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.85

but the Earle of <font> Dunbar <$$font> withdrew the King from the place
that he stoode in , which was a good turne for him ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.86

for the foresayde <font> Henry Percy <$$font> , & Earle <font> Dowglas
<$$font> the <font> Scot <$$font> <paren> than whome was neuer man more
stoute <$$paren> raged so , that the Kings Standert was ouerthrowne ,
and those about it slaine , among whome was slaine <font> Humfrey
<$$font> Earle of <font> Stafford <$$font> , Sir <font> Walter Blunt
<$$font> the Kings Standertbearer , Sir <font> Nicholas Langford
<$$font> , Sir <font> Iohn Clifton <$$font> , and the two brethren
<font> Genetels <$$font> , with many other Knightes & Gentlemen , and of
the co~mons on both sides about 5000. slaine . STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.87

<font> Henry <$$font> the Prince was wou~nded in y=e= face with an arrow
. STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.88

In the meane season <font> Hen. Percy <$$font> , whilest he went before
his me~ in the battel , preasing {COM:sic} vpo~ his enimies , was
sodeinly slaine , which being knowne , the Kings enimies fled ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.89

but the Earle <font> Dowglas <$$font> was take~ , and also <font> Tho.
Percy <$$font> Earle of <font> Worcester <$$font> , with <font> Sir
Richard Vernon <$$font> , and the Baron of <font> Kinderton <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.90

and many other were taken . STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.91

This battell was fought on Mary Magdalen eue~ , neere vnto <font>
Shrewsburie <$$font> , in a place called <font> Old field , alias Bull
field <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.92

On the Monday following , were co~de~ned & beheaded at <font>
Shrewsburie <$$font> y=e= Earle of <font> Worcester <$$font> , the Baro~
of <font> Kinderton <$$font> , and <font> Sir Ri. Vernon <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,555.93

The body of <font> Hen. Percy <$$font> was deliuered to the L. of
<font> Furniuale <$$font> to be <P_556> buried , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.94

but the King caused the same body to be taken by , and to be reposed
between two Millstones in the Towne of <font> Shrewsburie <$$font> ,
there to be kept with armed men , and afterward to be headed and
quartered , commanding his head and quarters to be caried vnto diuers
Citeis of the Kingdome . STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.95

The Earle of <font> Northumberland <$$font> with a strong power was
comming towards his {COM:sic} <paren> as men thought <$$paren> or at the
least towards the King , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.96

but the Earle of <font> Westmerland <$$font> , and <font> Robert
Waterton <$$font> had gathered a great armie , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.97

and had entred to meet him sodeinly , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.98

but he taking none of them both to be his friends , returned vnto the
Castell of <font> Werworth <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.99

When all things were set in a stay at <font> Shrewsburie <$$font> , the
King went towards <font> Yorke <$$font> , where , when he was setled ,
he sent to the Earle of <font> Northumberland <$$font> , commanding him
to dismisse his company , and to come to him , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.100

and the Earle at the Kings commandement came to him on the morrow after
<font> Saint Lawrence <$$font> daye , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.101

but the King receyued him not freindly , but as one that sued for pardon
, STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.102

and pardoning him of his life , committed him to safe custodie .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.103

The <font> Britons Amorikes <$$font> , the Lord of <font> Cassels
<$$font> being their leader , inuaded the Towne of <font> Plimmouth
<$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.104

spoyled and brent it , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.105

and went their way free , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.106

but immediately the Westerne Nauie , vnder the conduct of <font> William
Wilford <$$font> Esquire , in the coast of <font> Briton <$$font> , took
fortie Shippes laden with Iron , Oyle , Sope , and Wine of <font>
Rochell <$$font> , to the number of a_thousand Tonne ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.107

and in returning backe agayne , he brent forty shippes ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.108

and at <font> Penarch <$$font> the sayd <font> William <$$font> arriued
with his men , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.109

and burned Townes and Lordships the space of sixe leagues ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.110

and set the Towne of <font> Saint Mathew <$$font> on fire , and their
Milles about the said Towne . STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.111

<heading>

<font> THOMAS FALCONER : THOMAS POOLE , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.113

THE 28. OF SEPTEMBER . STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.114

SIR WILLIAM ASKHAM FISHMONGER , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.115

THE 28. OF OCTOBER . <$$font> STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.116

<$$heading>

A little before Christmas , the <font> Frenchmen <$$font> came into the
isle of <font> Wight <$$font> , boasting that they would keepe their
Christmas there , STOW-1580-E2-P1,556.118

and when a_thousand of the <font> Frenchmen <$$font> were entred <P_557>
into the Iland , and driuing flockes of Cattell towarde the Sea ,
sodeinly there came vpon them a company of the Iland men , that forced
them to leaue their pray behinde them , and to get them gone <paren>
with shame ynough <$$paren> to theyr Shippes , with no small losse of
their men . STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.119

In a Parliament holden at <font> London <$$font> after the Octaues of
the <font> Epiphany <$$font> , the Earle of <font> Northumberland
<$$font> was restored to his former estate and dignitie .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.120

And in this Parlamente was graunted vnto the King an vnaccustomed taske
, very heauie and paynefull for the inhabitants , the manner of which
taske the graunters thereof would haue to be kept secret for euermore :
STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.121

and vnder that condition only it was graunted , that it should not be
any example to them that should come after , and that there should
remayne no record thereof , but the same forthwith to be brent .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.122

The <font> Frenchmen <$$font> about that time came before the Ile of
<font> Wight <$$font> with a great Nauie , STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.123

and sente certayne of their men to demaund in the name of King <font>
Richard <$$font> , and of Queene <font> Isabell <$$font> , a tribute or
subsedie of the inhabitants , who answered , that King <font> Richard
<$$font> was dead , and the Queene , sometime his wife , was sent home
to hir parents , withoute condition of any tribute :
STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.124

but if the <font> Frenchmens <$$font> minde were to fight , they willed
them to come vp , STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.125

and no man should let them for the space of sixe houres to refresh
themselues , STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.126

but when that time were exspired , they should haue battayle giuen to
them , which when the <font> Frenchmen <$$font> heard , they went away ,
and did nothing . STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.127

The Lord of <font> Cassels <$$font> in <font> Briteine <$$font> ,
arriued at <font> Blackepoole <$$font> , two mile out of <font>
Dertmouth <$$font> with a great Nauie , where of the rusticall people ,
whome he euere despised , he was slayne . STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.128

There were take~ that day three Lords , & twenty Knightes of name ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.129

and the vplandish people presenting their captiues to the King ,
returned with their pursses full of gold . STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.130

In the moneth of Aprill , the Cleargie granted vnto the King a tenth .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,557.131

All the sommer following , <font> Owen Glendouerdewe <$$font> and his
<font> Welchmen <$$font> , robbed , burne , and destroy the <P_558>
Countreys adioyning vnto them : STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.132

he tooke many captiues STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.133

and slew many <font> Englishmen : <$$font> STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.134

he layde flatte certayne Castels that he had taken ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.135

and some he kept for his owne defence . STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.136

The <font> Flemings <$$font> and <font> Briteines <$$font> took certayne
Shippes of oures laden with Merchandizes , STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.137

and slew or hanged all the marriners . STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.138

The olde Countesse of <font> Oxford <$$font> , <paren> mother to <font>
Robert de Vere <$$font> Duke of <font> Ireland <$$font> , who as we
sayde before died at <font> Louaine <$$font> <$$paren> did cause such as
were familiar with hir , to brute throughout all the parts of <font>
Estsex <$$font> , that King <font> Richard <$$font> was aliue , and that
he should shortly come and chalenge his old estate and dignitie .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.139

She caused many Harts of Siluer , and some of Gold , to be made for
badges , such as King <font> Richard <$$font> was wont to bestow on his
knightes , Esquires , & friendes , that distributing them in the Kings
name , she might the sooner allure the Knightes , and other valiant men
of the Countrey , to be at hir will and desire .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.140

Also , the fame and brute whiche dayle was blazed abroade by one <font>
William Serle <$$font> , sometimes of King <font> Richards <$$font>
Chamber , that the same King <font> Richard <$$font> was in <font>
Scotland <$$font> , and tarried with a power of <font> French <$$font>
and <font> Scottishmen <$$font> , caused many to beleeue that he was
aliue . STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.141

This <font> William Serle <$$font> had forged a priuie Seale in the said
King <font> Richards <$$font> name , STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.142

and had sent diuers comfortable letters vnto such as were familiar with
King <font> Richarde <$$font> , by which meanes , many gaue the greater
credite to the Countesse , in_so_much , that some religious Abbots of
that Countrey did giue credite vnto hir tales , who afterward were taken
of the Kings commandement and emprisoned , bycause they did beleeue and
giue credit to the Countesse in this behalfe , STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.143

and the Countesse had all hir goodes confiscate ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.144

& was co~mitted to close prison : STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.145

and <font> William Serle <$$font> was drawne fro~ <font> Pomfret
<$$font> , through the chiefest Cities of <font> England <$$font> , &
put to death at <font> London <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.146

About the feast of <font> S. Iohn Baptist <$$font> , at the Kings
commandement , the Earle of <font> Northumberla~d <$$font> came to
<font> Pomfret <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P1,558.147

& brought with him his Nephues , & nephues sonnes , by which doing he
mitigated the mindes of many , whiche <P_559> thought that he had giuen
the yong men counsell to rebell . STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.148

There came also with him <font> William Clifford <$$font> Knight , who
brought with him that <font> William Serle <$$font> K. <font> Richards
<$$font> chamberlain , whom we spake of before , who by a wile he had
caught and apprehended , by which doing , the King held him excused ,
and pardoned him , for that he had kept the Castell of <font> Berwike
<$$font> against the Kings will and pleasure . STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.149

<heading>

<font> WILLIAM LOUTH : STEPHEN SPILMAN , STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.151

THE 28. OF SEPTEMBER . STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.152

SIR IOHN HINDE , DRAPER , STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.153

THE 28. OF OCTOBER . <$$font> STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.154

<$$heading>

About the feast of <font> Saint Faith <$$font> , the King called a
Parliament at <font> Couentry <$$font> STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.156

and sent processe to the Sheriffes that they should choose no Knights
nor burgesses that had any knowledge in the lawes of the Realme , by
reason wherof , it was called the Lay mans Parliame~t .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.157

These piked out Knights and Burgesses , could deuise none other way to
releeue the Kings lacke of money , but to depriue the Cleargie of their
temporall lands and goodes : STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.158

but <font> Thomas Arundell <$$font> Archbishop of <font> Canterbury
<$$font> made answere , that the Cleargie did alwayes giue the King as
much as the Lay people did , considering that they did oftener giue the
King tenthes , than the laytie gaue fifteenes : and moreouer , that more
of their Tenants did serue the King in his warres , tha~ of the Tenants
of the laytie : STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.159

and besides this , they prayed for the prosperitie of the King , and of
all them that faithfully serued him . STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.160

And whe~ the speker of y=e= Parliame~t said with a loud voice , that he
little regarded y=e= prayers of the Church , the Archbishop of <font>
Ca~terbury <$$font> answered : then <paren> quoth he <$$paren> I know to
what end the fortune of the Realme will come , whe~ the suffrages of
y=e= Church are not set by , wherwith y=e= Godhead is wont to be
appeased : STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.161

surely that Kingdome neuer co~tinueth stable y=t= is voyde of prayer &
deuotion : STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.162

notwithstanding , thinke not that thou shalt without punishme~t take
away the possessio~s of the church , STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.163

for if the Archbishoop of <font> Canterburie <$$font> liue , thou shalte
haue euill taking of any thing that is his . STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.164

Then the Archbishoppe rose vppe , STOW-1580-E2-P1,559.165

and kneeled downe before the King , desiring hym to consider howe
gratiouslie , <P_560> and by Gods fauour he had atteyned to the Kingdome
, that he would co~sider his first promis , which was , that he would
preserue vnto euery man their right and title so farre as lay in him .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,560.166

He also willed him to remember the oth which he voluntarily made , which
was , that he would honor and defend the Church , and Ministers thereof
, wherefore he desired him to permit and suffer the church to enioy the
priuiledges and liberties which in time of his predecessors it did enioy
, and to feare that King , by whome all Kings doe raigne .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,560.167

When the Archbishop had said these and like words , the King commanded
him to go to his seate againe , STOW-1580-E2-P1,560.168

and sayde , that his intent and purpose was to leaue the Church in as
good state or better than he found it . STOW-1580-E2-P1,560.169

And then the Archbishop speaking to the Knightes and burgesses , sayde :
you , and such like as you be , haue giuen such counsell vnto our King ,
and to his predecessors , to confiscate the goodes of the Celles whiche
the <font> Frenchmen <$$font> and <font> Normans <$$font> did possesse
in <font> England <$$font> , and sayd , that by them he should heape by
great riches , as in deed they were worth many thousands of gold :
STOW-1580-E2-P1,560.170

notwithstanding it is most true that the King at this day is not the
richer thereby of halfe a Marke , STOW-1580-E2-P1,560.171

for you haue extorted , or at the least begged them out of this handes ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,560.172

and haue appropriated the saide goodes vnto your selues , so that it may
be coniectured that your request to haue our temporalities , is not for
the Kings profite , but for your owne couetousnesse :
STOW-1580-E2-P1,560.173

for without doubt , if the King <paren> as God forbid he should
<$$paren> fulfill your wicked purpose , he should not be one farthing
the richer the next yere following : STOW-1580-E2-P1,560.174

and surely , I will sooner let my head be cut off , than that the
Churche should be destitute of the least right that perteyneth to it &c.
STOW-1580-E2-P1,560.175

The Cleargie granted a tenth and a halfe , and the commons two fifteenes
, on condition the Lord <font> Furniuall <$$font> should receyue it to
spend on the Kings warres . STOW-1580-E2-P1,560.176

The same time such abondance of water brake sodeinly ouer the bankes in
<font> Kent <$$font> , as was neuer seene the like in <P_561> those
partes , whereby were drowned Beastes and Cattell without number :
STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.177

neyther did <font> England <$$font> only bewayle theyr losses ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.178

but also <font> Zeland <$$font> , <font> Flanders <$$font> , and <font>
Holland <$$font> susteyned the like , by the great excesse of waters .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.179

This yeare died <font> William Wikeham <$$font> Bishop of <font>
Winchester <$$font> , by whose charge and trauell , the Cleargie of
<font> England <$$font> was much encreased , STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.180

for he builded a notable Colledge in <font> Oxford <$$font> , for the
encrease of learning , where he placed the Warden and his company , to
the number of lxx. besides children , seruants , and tenne Priestes ,
to keepe dayly service , enduing the sayd company with sufficient lands
. STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.181

He beganne the foundation of a new colledge at <font> Winchster <$$font>
, STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.182

and in sixe yeares finished the same , where he placed the like number
of Schollers to learne their Gra~mer , and other principles , to be sent
afterward to his other colledge at <font> Oxford <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.183

These two colledges are called the new Colledges , dedicated to our
blessed Lady . STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.184

He builded the great body of the Church of <font> Saint Swithens
<$$font> in <font> Winchester <$$font> , where the Sermons are made , &
where his body is enterred , a very princely worke :
STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.185

neyther did he for all this diminish any thing of his ordinarie
housholde charges , STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.186

and fedde <paren> as the writing engraued on his Sepulchre sheweth
<$$paren> both rich and poore . STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.187

He deceassed at the age of fourescore yeares . STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.188

He dyed rich , STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.189

for beside that he gaue to his kinsefolks and to the poore , he gaue
somewhat to euery Church in his Dioces . STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.190

He gaue many things to the King , and to his owne seruants , and to his
Colledges : STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.191

neyther do I doubt but y=t= he that thus liued , is now with God , whome
I beseech to reyse vp many like Bishops in <font> England <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.192

<font> Iohn Leland <$$font> writeth <paren> by the reporte of Doctor
<font> London <$$font> <$$paren> that this <font> William Wikeham
<$$font> was borne at <font> Wickham <$$font> in <font> Hampshire
<$$font> , and was sonne to one <font> William Perot <$$font> , parishe
clarke there , of which place he tooke his surname : and that one <font>
Mayster Wodale <$$font> of <font> Wicke <$$font> brought him vp at
schole , where he learned his Grammer , and to write faire .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,561.193

After this , the Connestable of <font> Winchester <$$font> Castell , at
that time a <P_562> great ruler in <font> Hampshire <$$font> gote <font>
Perot , alias Wickham <$$font> of <font> Widall <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.194

and made him his Clearke . STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.195

<font> Edward <$$font> the third comming to <font> Winchester <$$font>
Castell , liked <font> Wickham <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.196

and tooke him to seruice , STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.197

and vnderstanding that he had mind to be a Priest , made him first
Parson of <font> Saint Martins <$$font> in <font> London <$$font> , and
then Deane of <font> Saint Martins le Graund <$$font> , and then
Archdeacon of <font> Buckingham <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.198

He made him also surveyor of his buildings , as of <font> Windsore ,
Quinborow <$$font> , in <font> Kent <$$font> , and other buildings .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.199

After this , he preferred him to be bearer of the priuie Seale , mayster
of the Wardes and Forests , and Treasourer of the Kings reuenue in
<font> France <$$font> , then Bishop of <font> Winchester <$$font> ,
Chancellour and Tresourer of <font> England <$$font> , as it very
manifestly <paren> sayth <font> Iohn Leyland <$$font> <$$paren>
appeareth by writing . STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.200

The blacke Prince scant fauoured <font> Wickham <$$font> , wherefore
<font> Wickham <$$font> procured to keepe the Prince in battell out of
the Realme , STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.201

but at length <font> Iohn <$$font> of <font> Gaunt <$$font> Duke of
<font> Lancester <$$font> , and <font> Alice Peeres <$$font> , Concubine
to <font> Edward <$$font> the third , caused him to be banished the
Realme , STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.202

and then he dwelled in <font> Normandy <$$font> and <font> Picardie
<$$font> seauen yeares , <font> Edward <$$font> the thirde yet liuing ;
STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.203

but he was restored about the second yeare of <font> Richard <$$font>
the second , of whome he had a generall pardon .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.204

About the feast of <font> Saint Valentine <$$font> the sonnes of the
Earle of <font> March <$$font> were taken out of the Castell of <font>
Windsore <$$font> , and ledde away into <font> Wales <$$font> to <font>
Owen Glendouerdewe <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.205

but shortly after were recouered againe . STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.206

The Smith that made the keyes , by the which they that conuayde them got
into them , had first his hands , and then his head cut off .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.207

The Lady <font> Spencer <$$font> , sister to the Duke of <font> Yorke
<$$font> , and widow of <font> Thomas <$$font> Lord <font> Spencer
<$$font> , before executed at <font> Brixton <$$font> , being
apprehended , and committed to prison , accused hir brother the Duke of
<font> Yorke <$$font> to be chiefe author , in stealing away of the
Earle of <font> Marche@ @s <$$font> sonnes , wherefore the sayde Duke
was kept by Sir <font> Iohn Pelham <$$font> in the Castell of <font>
Pemsey <$$font> till the next Parliament . STOW-1580-E2-P1,562.208

After the feast of the Purification of our Lady , the King assembled his
Barons at <font> London <$$font> , to treate of the gouernement <P_563>
of the Realme , and to haue ayde of money to be giuen him ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.209

but the Nobles would not at the time obey his request .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.210

In the Lent following therefore , the King caused the Cleargie and the
Barons to assemble at <font> Saint Albans <$$font> for the matter
aforesayd , STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.211

but by reason the nobles stroue against him , there was nothing done ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.212

and so departed on Palme sonday . STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.213

About the fifteenth of March , in a fight betwixt the <font> Englishmen
<$$font> and <font> Welchmen <$$font> , the sone of <font> Owen
Glendouerdewe <$$font> was taken , STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.214

and fifteene_hundred with him were taken or slayne .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.215

<font> Henry Percy <$$font> Earle of Northumberland , <font> Richard
Scrope <$$font> Archbishop of <font> York , Thomas Mowbry <$$font> Earle
Marshall , <font> Thomas <$$font> Lord <font> Bardolph <$$font> , and
other , co~spiring against King <font> Henry <$$font> , assembled
togither the Citizens of <font> Yorke <$$font> , and many other , to
stand with them for the commodities of the Realm .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.216

And to animate the commons to be the readier vnto this businesse , they
set articles vpo~ the dores of the Monasteries & Churches of the same
Citie , written in English agaynste the King , bycause he had put downe
King <font> Richard <$$font> , offering themselues for those articles to
liue and die , which caused great number of people to resort to them :
STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.217

but <font> Ralph Neuill <$$font> Earle of <font> Westermerland <$$font>
that was not farre off , togither with <font> Iohn <$$font> duke of
<font> Lancaster <$$font> the Kings sonne , being enformed of these
things , gathered an armie with speede to goe against the Archbishops
company , STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.218

but all was in vayne , STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.219

for the Archbishops power was farre greater than theirs , wherevpon ,
the Earle of <font> Westmerland <$$font> sente messengers , to enquire
of the Archbishop the cause of so great an assembly in armour ,
contrarie to the Kings peace , wherevnto the Archbishop answered , that
he tooke nothing in hand against the Kings peace , and he was in armour
and munited with men , only for feare of the King , whome he could not
safely come vnto to speake , STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.220

but his purpose <paren> he said <$$paren> was good and co~modious both
for y=e= King & Realme , if happily they would know it :
STOW-1580-E2-P1,563.221

& the~ he shewed a scedule , in which y=e= articles were <P_564>
conteyned , which when the Earle of <font> Westmerland <$$font> had read
, he with word and countenacne praysed the Bishops holy and vertuous
intent , and promised , that he and his would prosecute the same with
the Archbishop . STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.222

The Archbishop being glad of this , beleeued the Earles words ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.223

& perswaded the Earle , being vnwilling therevnto , to go with him to a
place appointed to talke togither , to whome they with like number came
, and the writing with the Articles was read ouer :
STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.224

streightway the Earle and they that were with him gaue their assent to
these articles , STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.225

then sayde the Earle being subtiller than the rest , behold the labour
that we haue take~ in hand is come to such end as we would haue it ,
STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.226

and the people hath now bin long in armour , STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.227

let some of your me~ beare word vnto the people to go their way home ,
and to lay downe their armour , STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.228

and euery ma~ to fall to his occupation , and accustomed labour :
STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.229

in the meane season we , in token of concord will drinke togither , that
the people on both sides shall see it , STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.230

and without delay , after they had take~ each other by the hands , a
Knight was sent on the Archbishops behalfe , to beare word to y=e=
people that it was peace , and to command euery man to lay downe their
armour , and to go to their owne home . STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.231

The people beholding signes of peace , & the Lords drinking togither ,
being aweeried with the vnaccustomed trauell of war , turned the reines
of their bridles homewards , STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.232

and so it came to passe y=t= whe~ the people of the y=e= Archbishops
side went away , y=e= nu~ber of the aduersaries increased as before it
was appointed , STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.233

& the Archbishop did not perceiue y=t= he was betrayd , vntill such time
as y=e= Earle arrested him : STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.234

he arrested the Marshall also , and many other with him , to all which
it was promised y=t= they should haue no harme , STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.235

but that promise was not kept , STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.236

for both the Archbishop & the Earle Marshall were beheaded when the King
came to <font> Yorke <$$font> the morrow after Whitsonday .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.237

After this , whe~ the King had punished the me~ of <font> Yorke <$$font>
at his pleasure , he set forth with an armie to pursue the Earle of
<font> Northumberland <$$font> , and <font> Thomas <$$font> Lord <font>
Bardolph <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P1,564.238

and tooke all manner of <P_565> munition with him , and an armie of
37._thousand fighting men . STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.239

The Earle of <font> Northumberland <$$font> perceyuing the Kings intent
, gote himselfe to <font> Berwike <$$font> with three_hundred horsse ,
and fro~ thence into <font> Scotland <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.240

The King being bent against the Earle of <font> Northumberland <$$font>
, went to <font> Berwike <$$font> , from whence the Earle fledde into
<font> Scotland <$$font> , and the Lord <font> Bardolph <$$font> with
him , whome <font> Dauid <$$font> Lord <font> Fleming <$$font> the
<font> Scotte <$$font> receyued into alliance . STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.241

The King vndersta~ding that the Earle was fled , he commanded them in
the Castell to render it vnto him , whiche when they refused to do , the
King caused a greate Gunne to be shotte , which ouerthrewe parte of a
Tower , wherevpon they of the Castell gaue ouer , and submitted
themselues to the King , who caused some of them to be beheaded , and
the residue to be sent to prisons . STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.242

After this , the Castell of <font> Alnewike <$$font> , and the rest of
the Earles Castels , were with small ado rendred to his handes , with
which successe , the King being encouraged , went streight into <font>
Wales <$$font> , where contrarywise nothing prospered with him ,
wherefore he returned , loosing Charets , Cartes , and Wagons to the
number of 50. with his Treasure , so that comming backe to <font>
Worcester <$$font> , he sent for the Archbishop and Bishops , and
declared to them his misfortune , desiring the~ to help him : to whome
the Archbishop answered , that he woulde talke with the Cleargie in that
matter . STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.243

In the meane season the <font> Frenchmen <$$font> came to succour the
<font> Welchmen <$$font> with 140. shippes : STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.244

they landed in <font> Milford Hauen <$$font> , hauing lost almost all
their horsses for lacke of fresh water . STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.245

The Lord <font> Barkley <$$font> and <font> Henry Pay <$$font> burnt
fifteene of those Shippes in the same Hauen . STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.246

These <font> Frenchmen <$$font> beseeged the Towne of <font> Carmarden
<$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.247

and tooke it , graunting to the inhabitants all their moueable goodes ,
and to goe whether they would . STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.248

The same time the foresayed Lorde <font> Barkley , Thomas Swinborn
<$$font> , and <font> Henry Pay <$$font> , tooke fourteene Shippes of
the <font> French <$$font> , in the whiche they tooke the Steward of
<font> France <$$font> , and eight Captaynes more .
STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.249

The Towne of <font> Reystone <$$font> in <font> Hartfordshire <$$font>
was brent . STOW-1580-E2-P1,565.250

