<BEGIN_strype-1664-e3-p1>

<P_176.12>

<heading:edcomment:LXIX_JOHN_STRYPE_TO_HIS_MOTHER,_FROM_JESUS_COLLEGE,_CAMBRIDGE,_A._D._1662>

<P_177.6>

Good Mother , Yours of the 24th instant I gladly received , expecting
indeed one a Week before , STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.5

but I understand both by Waterson and yourself of your indisposednesse
then to write . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.6

The reason you receive this no sooner is , because I had a mind <paren>
knowing of this honest woman's setting out so suddenly for London from
hence , and her businesse laying so neer to Petticote Lane , <$$paren>
that she should deliver it into your hands , that so you may the better
, and more fully heare of me , and know how it fareth with me .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.7

She is my laundresse ; STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.8

make her welcome , STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.9

and tell her how you would have my linen washed , as you were saying in
your Letter . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.10

I am very glad to hear that you and my brother Johnson do agree so well
, that I believe you account an unusual courtesie , that he should have
you out to the Cake-House . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.11

However , pray Mother , be careful of yourself
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.12

and do not over-walke yourself , STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.13

for that is wont to bring you upon a sick bed .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.14

I hear also my brother Sayer is often a visitor :
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.15

truly I am glad of it . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.16

I hope your Children may be comforts to you now you are growing old .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.17

Remember me back again most kindly to my brother Sayer .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.18

Concerning the taking up of my Things , 't@ @is true I gave one shilling
too much in the hundred : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.19

but why I gave so much , I thought indeed I had given you an account in
that same letter : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.20

but it seems I have not . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.21

The only reason is , because they were a Scholar's goods :
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.22

it is common to make them pay one shilling more than the Town's people .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.23

Dr. Pearson himself payed so , and several other lads in this College :
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.24

and my Tutor told me they would expect so much of me , being a Scholar :
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.25

and I found it so . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.26

Do not wonder so much at our Commons : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.27

they are more than many Colleges have . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,177.6.28

Trinity itself <paren> where Herring and Davies <P_178> are <$$paren>
which is the famousest College in the University , have but three
half-pence . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.29

We have roast meat , dinner and supper , throughout the weeke ; and such
meate as you know I not use to care for ; STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.30

and that is Veal : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.31

but now I have learnt to eat it . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.32

Sometimes , neverthelesse , we have boiled meat , with pottage ; and
beef and mutton , which I am glad of ; except Fridays and Saturdays ,
and sometimes Wednesdays ; which days we have Fish at dinner , and tansy
or pudding for supper . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.33

Our parts then are slender enough . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.34

But there is this remedy ; STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.35

we may retire unto the Butteries , and there take a half-penny loafe and
butter or cheese ; or else to the Kitchen , and take there what the Cook
hath . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.36

But , for my part , I am sure , I never visited the Kitchen yet , since
I have been here , and the Butteries but seldom after meals ; unlesse
for a Ciza , that is for a Farthing-worth of Small-Beer : so that lesse
than a Peny in Beer doth serve me a whole Day .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.37

Neverthelesse sometimes we have Exceedings : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.38

then we have two or three Dishes STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.39

<paren> but that is very rare <$$paren> : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.40

otherwise never but one : so that a Cake and a Cheese would be very
welcome to me : and a Neat's tongue , or some such thing , if it would
not require too much money . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.41

If you do intend to send me any thing , do not send it yet , until you
hear further of me : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.42

for I have many things to send for , which may all I hope be put into
that Box you have at home : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.43

but what they are , I shall give you an account of hereafter , when I
would have them sent : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.44

and that is , when I have got me a Chamber : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.45

for as yet , I am in a Chamber that doth not at all please me .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.46

I have thoughts of one , which is a very handsome one , and one pair of
stairs high , and that looketh into the Master's garden .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.47

The price is but 20@ @=s= per_annum , ten whereof a Knight's son , and
lately admitted into this College , doth pay : though he did not come
till about Midsummer , so that I shall have but 10@ @=s= to pay a year :
besides my income , which may be about 40@ @=s= or thereabouts .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.48

Mother , I kindly thank you for your Orange pills you sent me .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.49

If you are not too straight of money , send me some such thing by the
woman , and a pound or two of Almonds and Raisons .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,178.50

But first ask her if she will carry them , or if they be not too much
trouble <P_179> to her . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.51

I do much approve of your agreeing with the Carrier quarterly :
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.52

he was indeed telling me of it , that you had agreed with him for it :
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.53

and I think he means both yours and mine . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.54

Make your bargain sure with him . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.55

I understand by your Letter that you are very inquisitive to know how
things stand with me here . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.56

I believe you may be well enough satisfied by the Woman .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.57

My breakings-out are now all gone . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.58

Indeed I was afraid at my first coming it would have proved the Itch :
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.59

but I am fairly rid on it : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.60

but I fear I shall get it , let me do what I can :
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.61

for there are many here that have it cruelly . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.62

Some of them take strong purges that would kill a horse , weeks together
for it , to get it away , STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.63

and yet are hardly rid of it . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.64

At my first Coming I laid alone : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.65

but since , my Tutor desired me to let a very clear lad lay with me ,
and an Alderman's son of Colchester , which I could not deny , being
newly come : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.66

he hath laid with me now for almost a fortnight ,
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.67

and will do till he can provide himself with a Chamber .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.68

I have been with all my Acquaintance , who have entreated me very
courteously , especially Jonathan Houghton . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.69

I went to his Chamber the Friday night I first came ,
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.70

and there he made me stay and sup with him , STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.71

and would have had me laid with him that night ,
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.72

and was extraordinary kind to me . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.73

Since , we have been together pretty often . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.74

He excused himselfe , that he did not come to see me before he went ;
and that he did not write to me since he had been come .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.75

He hath now , or is about obtaining , 10 +L {TEXT:+L10} more from the
College . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.76

We go twice a day to Chapel ; in the morning about 7 , and in the
Evening about 5 . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.77

After we come from Chapel in the morning , which is towards 8 , we go to
the Butteries for our breakfast , which usually is five Farthings ; an
halfepenny loaf and butter , and a cize of beer .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.78

But sometimes I go to an honest House near the College ,
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.79

and have a pint of milk boiled for my breakfast .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.80

Truly I was much troubled to hear that my Letter for Ireland is not yet
gone . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.81

I wish if Mr. Jones is not yet gone , that it might be sent some other
way . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.82

Indeed I wish I could see my cousin James Bonnell here within three or
four years : STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,179.83

for I <P_180> believe our University is less strict to observe lads that
do not in every point conforme , than theirs at Dublin : though ours be
bad enough . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.84

Pray remember me to my Uncle , and all my friends there , when you write
. STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.85

Remember me to my cousin James Knox . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.86

I am glad he is recovered from his dangerous sickness , whatsoever it is
; STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.87

for I can@ @not make any thing of it , as you have written it .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.88

And thus , for want of Paper , I end , desiring heartily to be remembred
to all my Friends . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.89

Excuse me to my Brother and Sister that they have not heard from me yet
. STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.90

Next week I hope to write to them both . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.91

Excuse my length , STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.92

I thought I would answer your Letter to the full .
STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.93

I remaine your dutiful Son , J. Strijp . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.94

These for his honoured Mother Mrs. Hester Stryp widdow , dwelling in
Petticoat Lane , right over against the Five Ink-Hornes , without
Bishops-Gate , in London . STRYPE-1664-E3-P1,180.95

