<BEGIN_tbarring-1630-e2-p1>

<P_87>

<heading:edcomment:59_SIR_THOMAS_BARRINGTON,_17_SEPTEMBER_1629>

Madame I am verie sorye that I am necessitated upon my brother Gerard@
@'s letter to me , so freely letting me know the unseasonablenes of my
intention to have visited yow this weeke , to deferr my waiteing upon
yow somm few dayes longer . TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,87.4

Besides his desyre to be at home when I showld come , which by his
brother Mildmay I understood he would not be all this weeke , theise
resons inforced me to send into Hartfordshier and to make my apointment
with my brother Litton , who hath both expected and invited me often and
long , TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,87.5

and tharefor I hope yow will please not to impute my absence to any
neglect . TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,87.6

I profess my resolutions were alltred by my brother's free and freindly
notice , TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,87.7

else I had ben with you on Wedensday , which I intend and resolve to be
as soone as possiblye I can <paren> God willing <$$paren> .
TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,87.8

Meane while I beseich you perswade your affections and perfect your
desyres for Hatfeild . TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,87.9

My wife presents her dewtye and love to you and her wishes that yow will
turne our desolation to compleate consolation .
TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,87.10

Thus I rest Your most dewtyfull sonn Thomas Barrington Hatfield
TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,87.11

Broad Oak , TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,87.12

September 17=th= , 1629 TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,87.13

{COM:endorsed} To the honourable my very loving mother the lady Johann
Barrington at Harrow on the Hill TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,87.14

<P_96>

<heading:edcomment:70_SIR_THOMAS_BARRINGTON,10_OCTOBER_1629>

Madame I am obedient to all your desyres TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.17

and desire to rest satisfyed with what yow please ,
TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.18

yet I must confess this sodaine allteration of your purpose and promise
makes me imploye my patience and dewtie ; TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.19

dewtie towards yow injoynes me to be contented with your content ,
TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.20

patience houldes me within the limitts of a quiett mind in what soever
might otherwayes contradict my desyres . TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.21

My wife and I had made it our studye to express dewtye and love and to
render you all satisfaction , TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.22

and it so much the more troubles us by how much we ware confident to
have wintred together . TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.23

The house is farr the colder for your absence , because you have made
many harts so ; TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.24

but deferred hope though it faint the hart , yet accomplishments of
prolonged wishes increase comfort TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.25

and bring a somer's warmeth of joyes . TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.26

My prayers attend your health and wellfare , TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.27

and I , resolveing God willing to see you , rest Your most dewtyfull
sonn Thomas Barrington Hatfield TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.28

Broad Oak , TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.29

October 10 , 1629 TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.30

{COM:endorsed} To the honourable my verie good mother the Ladye Johan
Barrington at Harrow on the Hill TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,96.31

<P_97>

<heading:edcomment:72_SIR_THOMAS_BARRINGTON,_14_OCTOBER_1629>

Madame Allthough your winter's absence from hence hath more then a
little afflicted me in single relation to owr selves , yet so much am I
obliged to serve your desyres as that I submitt to your pleasuer with as
much patience as my judgment can worke in me .
TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,97.34

And so much doe I desyre to be freindly to my freinds , as that I shall
take the more glorye in my suffrings because theay are for the sake of
those that love me . TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,97.35

Madame , it@ @'s now more then time not to abuse you longer with hopes
of dew payments , TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,97.36

therefor ere long you shall have your mony long dew , and the rest with
the first I can receive , God willing . TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,97.37

And now my wife tenders her lame legg for an excuse that her hand
presents yow not her dewtye , TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,97.38

trewly she is not yet well but amending , TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,97.39

and so I pray God we may all and cheifly Your most dewtyfull sonn Thomas
Barrington TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,97.40

October 14th , 1629 TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,97.41

{COM:endorsed} To my honourable good mother the ladye Johan Barrington
at Harrowe on the Hill give these {COM:preceding_word_"these"_emended}
TBARRING-1630-E2-P1,97.42

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample,_letter_94,_here}

