<BEGIN_thoward2-1571-e2-p1>

<P_1,86>

After the reading of the Indictment , the Clerk of the Crown said to the
Duke ; How say'st thou , <font> Thomas <$$font> Duke of <font> Norfolk
<$$font> , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.3

art thou guilty of these Treasons whereof thou art indicted , in manner
and form as thou art thereof indicted , Yea or No ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.4

Thereupon the Duke began , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.5

and said to this effect : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.6

May it please your Grace , and you the rest of my Lords here , The
hearing of this Indictment giveth me occasion to enter into the making
of a Suit , which I meant not to have done before my coming hither :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.7

I beseech you , if the Law will permit it , that I may have Counsel
allow'd me for the answering of this Indictment .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.8

The Lord Chief Justice answer'd , That in case of High-Treason he can@
@not have Counsel allow'd : And that he was to answer to his own Fact
only , which himself best knew , and might without Counsel sufficiently
answer . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.9

<font> Duke . <$$font> That you may understand that I speak it not
without some ground , these be the Causes that move me to make this Suit
: THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.10

I was told before I came here , that I was indicted upon the Statute of
the 25th of <font> Edward <$$font> III . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.11

I have had very short warning to provide to answer so great a matter ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.12

I have not had fourteen Hours in all , both day and night ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.13

and now I neither hear the same Statute alledged ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.14

and yet I am put at once to the whole Herd of Laws , not knowing which
Particularity to answer unto . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.15

The Indictment containeth sundry Points and Matters to touch me by
Circumstance , and so to draw me into matter of Treason , which are not
Treasons themselves : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.16

Therefore with Reverence and humble Submission I am led to think I may
have Counsel . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.17

And this I shew , that you may think I move not this Suit without any
ground . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.18

I am hardly handled , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.19

I have had short warning , and no Books , neither Book of Statutes , nor
so much as the Breviate of Statutes . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.20

I am brought to fight without a Weapon : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.21

yet I remember one Case in Law , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.22

I think it is in the First Year of King <font> Henry <$$font> VII .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.23

It is the Case of one <font> Humphrey Stafford <$$font> , which was
indicted of High-Treason , and had Counsel allowed him :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.24

If the Precedent in his Case be such , as it may extend to me , I
require it at your hands , that I may have it allow'd :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.25

I shew you my ground why I crave it , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.26

I refer me to your Opinions therein . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.27

Then Sir <font> James Dyer <$$font> , Lord Chief Justice of the
Common-Pleas , said ; My Lord , That Case of <font> Humphrey Stafford
<$$font> in <font> primo <$$font> of <font> Henry <$$font> VII. was
about pleading of Sanctuary , for that he was taken out of Sanctuary at
<font> Culneham <$$font> , which belong'd to the Abbot of <font>
Abingdon <$$font> : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.28

So the Question was , whether he should be allowed Sanctuary in that
Case , and with that Form of Pleading , which was matter of Law : In
which Case he had Counsel , and not upon the Point of Fact of
High-Treason ; but only for the Allowance of Sanctuary , and whether it
might be allowed , being claimed by Prescription , and without shewing
any former Allowances in <font> Eier <$$font> , and such like Matters ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.29

but all our Books do forbid allowing of Counsel in the Point of Treason
; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.30

but only it is to be answered Guilty , or not Guilty .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.31

<font> Duke . <$$font> <font> Humphrey Stafford <$$font> 's Case was
High-Treason , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.32

and he had Counsel . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.33

I must submit my self to your Opinions : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.34

I beseech you , weigh what Case I stand in .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.35

I stand here before you for my Life , Lands and Goods , my Children and
my Posterity , and that which I esteem most of all , for my Honesty ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.36

I forbear to speak of my Honour . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.37

I am unlearn'd : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.38

if I ask any thing , and not in such Words as I ought , I beseech you
bear with me , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.39

and let me have that Favour that the Law allows me .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.40

If the Law do not allow me Counsel , I must submit me to your Opinions .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.41

I beseech you , consider of me ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.42

my Blood will ask Vengeance , if I be unjustly condemn'd :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.43

I honour your Learnings and your Gravities : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.44

I beseech you , have Consideration of me , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.45

and grant me what the Law will permit me . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.46

I am now to make another Suit to you , my Lords the Judges :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.47

I beseech you , tell me , if my Indictment be perfect and sufficient in
Law ; and whether in Whole , or in the Parts , and in which Parts , that
I may know to what I should answer . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.48

Lord Chief Justice <font> Catlin <$$font> . The Lord Ch. Justice said
, For the Sufficiency of your Indictment , it hath been well debated and
consider'd by us all ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.49

and we have all , with one Assent , resolv'd , and so do certify you ,
that if the Causes in the Indictment expressed be true in Fact , the
Indictment is wholly and in every Part sufficient .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,86.50

<P_1,87>

<font> Duke . <$$font> Be all the Points Treasons ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.52

L. Ch. Just. <font> Catlin <$$font> . All be Treasons , if the Truth
of the Case be so in Fact . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.53

<font> Duke . <$$font> I will tell you what moveth me to ask you this ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.54

I have heard of the Case of the Lord <font> Scroope <$$font> ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.55

it was in the time of <font> Henry <$$font> the IVth <paren> <font> the
Judges said <$$font> Henry <font> the <$$font> Vth <$$paren> he
confess'd the Indictment , and yet travers'd that the points thereof
were no Treasons . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.56

L. Ch. Just. <font> Catlin <$$font> . My Lord , he had his Judgment
for Treason upon that Indictment , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.57

and was executed . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.58

Then the Clerk of the Crown said again , How sayest thou , <font> Thomas
<$$font> Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.59

art thou guilty of the Treasons whereof thou are here indicted in Manner
and Form as thou are indicted , Yea , or No ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.60

The Duke answer'd , Not Guilty . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.61

The Clerk said , By whom wilt thou be try'd ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.62

The Duke said , By God and my Peers . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.63

Then the Duke spake to the Lords , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.64

and said thus : Now I am not to use a short Speech , which I meant
before to have used , but that the reading of the Indictment hath driven
me to other Occasions . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.65

Altho' these heinous Treasons and outrageous Faults objected against me
, do much abash me ; yet I conceive no small comfort , to think under
how gracious a Queen and Sovereign Lady I live , which well appeareth by
her most gracious Proceeding with me according to the Course of Law .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.66

Her Majesty seeketh not my Blood , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.67

but giveth me the Trial which the Laws admit , and in the most
favourable manner that I can require ; for which I am most bounden to
her Majesty . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.68

Now I am to make two Suits : The one to your Grace , my Lord High
Steward , That as your Place requireth to do justice , so it may please
you to extend to me your lawful Favour , that I may have Justice , and
that I may not be overlaid in Speeches : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.69

My Memory was never good , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.70

it is now much worse than it was ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.71

sore Troubles , sore Cares , Closeness in Prison , evil Rest , have much
decay'd my Memory ; so as I pray God , that this day it fail me not ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.72

and another time I will forgive it : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.73

I beseech this of you , my Lord High Steward .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.74

The second Request , I thought to make to you , my Lords , my Peers :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.75

I think myself happy to have my Trial in such a Company .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.76

A much greater Matter , if I could have greater , I durst put it into
your hands , and <paren> a very few excepted <$$paren> even into every
one of your hands singly ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.77

that Opinion I have of you . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.78

I know Religion beareth a stroke among you , which I hope , so ruleth
your Consciences , that for no Respect you will swerve from Justice ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.79

you will not bring a Worm into your own Consciences ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.80

you will not burden your Souls with condemning me wrongfully ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.81

you will not do what God's Law and Right alloweth not :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.82

This above all things comforteth me , next unto her Majesty's most
gracious Favour of my lawful Trial . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.83

If I had not made a full Account to have this for the way of my lawful
Purgation , I needed not to have been here at this time , neither for
Matters pass'd two Years ago , nor for that whereof I am charg'd at this
present . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.84

I have chosen , my Peers , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.85

I have chosen rather to come here to be try'd by you , than with
needless and cowardly running away , to have left a Gap open for my
Enemies slanderously to lay to my charge in my absence what they could
maliciously invent . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.86

I have this day <paren> tho' I am sorry for any Cause to come in this
Case before you <$$paren> even the day that I could wish to be tried by
such Peers . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.87

I will not enter into Particularities , and discourse my whole Cause at
large , but answer from Point to Point , as I shall be charged ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.88

for my Memory was never good , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.89

and it is now worse than ever it was . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.90

Yet one Request more I beseech of you , my Peers , which I with Favour
may ask , and you with Justice may grant : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.91

Unhappy Man that I am , tho' I have to this Indictment pleaded Not
Guilty of the Treasons therein objected against me , nor of no Treasons
; yet I confess , as I have with all Humility , and with Tears confess'd
, and as some of you , my Lords , here present can witness , that I have
neglected my Duty to the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , in Case
inferiour to Treason , and that be no Parts of Treason :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.92

I have laid them at her Majesty's feet , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.93

and pour'd them forth before her in Confession , so far as my Conscience
will suffer me to declare . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.94

Let , I beseech you , neither my Confession already made of inferiour
Faults , that be not in compass of Treason ; nor , if I shall now in
mine Answers confess them again , if they be objected against me ; lead
you to judge the worse of me in the greater Case .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.95

Let each Fault have his own Pine ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.96

I beseech you , remember the Differences and Degrees of Offences , and
not to mix my smaller Faults with this great Cause :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.97

let these mean Crimes rest at her Majesty's Feet , where I with all
humility have laid them . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.98

Thus I beseech you all , have consideration of me .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.99

Then spake the Queen's Serjeant , Mr. <font> Barrham <$$font> ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.100

and said to this effect : It hath appear'd to your Grace and your
Lordships all , that the Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> is by this
Indictment charged with three principal Points of High Treason :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.101

the first is , That forgetting his Allegiance and Duty to his Sovereign
Lady the Queen , he hath traitorously imagin'd , devis'd and practis'd ,
to deprive and depose the Queen's Majesty of and from the Crown of this
Realm , and her Royal Style , Name and Dignity , and to bring her to
Death and Destruction ; and so to alter the whole State of Government of
this Realm . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.102

The second Point is , That he hath traitorously reliev'd and comforted
the <font> English <$$font> Rebels that levy'd War against her Majesty
within her Realm , and which since fled into <font> Scotland <$$font> ,
and from thence beyond the Sea . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.103

The third Point is , That he hath traitorously given Relief and
Maintenance to the Duke of <font> Chastelleroy <$$font> , the Earl of
<font> Huntley <$$font> , the Lord <font> Harris <$$font> , the Lord
<font> Hume <$$font> , and other <font> Scots <$$font> , the Queen's
Majesty's publick Enemies , Succourers and Detainers of the said Rebels
. THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.104

To prove these great Treasons , there is in this Indictment set forth
unto you good and sufficient Matter ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.105

first , to prove that the Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> sought ,
imagin'd , compass'd and practis'd to deprive and depose the Queen's
Majesty of her Royal Crown , Estate and Dignity ; and consequently to
bring her to Death and Destruction , are alleg'd two matters :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,87.106

The first is , That the Duke knowing the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen
falsely and unjustly to claim and pretend Title , to have and enjoy the
present possession of the Crown of <font> England <$$font> ; and that
she untruly usurp'd the Name and Style of this Realm ; and that she gave
and quarter'd the Arms of <font> England <$$font> without Difference ;
and that she continued in that Fact , and usurp'd Claim without
Renunciation thereof , and without acknowledging her Error unto the
Queen's Majesty , tho' she hath been thereto requir'd : He , I say ,
knowing all this , yet without the Queen's Majesty's Assent , against
her Majesty's special and <P_1,88> express Commandment upon his
Allegiance , and against his own Promise and Protestation upon his Faith
, hath nevertheless secretly sought and practis'd to join himself with
the said <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen in Marriage , and to advance and
maintain her said false and pretended Title to the present Possession of
the Crown of this Realm ; which can@ @not be without purpose to depose
and deprive the Queen's Majesty , and consequently to bring her to Death
and Destruction . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.107

The second is , that the Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> hath conspired
and practised to procure Strangers to enter into this Realm , and invade
the same , and to make open War against her Majesty , within her own
Realm ; and so forcibly to work her Deposing , Deprivation , Death and
Destruction . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.108

Hereupon the said Duke hath pleaded Not Guilty ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.109

and for his Trial hath put himself upon his Peers ; yours therefore in
the Trial . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.110

And now for Evidence to prove him guilty of the Treasons contain'd in
the said Indictment , it may please your Lordships to hear such a Matter
as I shall for the Queen bring forth against him .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.111

<font> Duke . <$$font> I am occasion'd , by the Speech of Mr. <font>
Serjeant <$$font> , to gather what I shall find in the rest of them ; a
Meaning with Circumstance to draw me into Treason , with Eloquence to
overlay me , and to exasperate Matters extremely against me , and to
enforce things that be not Treasons indeed .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.112

I beseech you , my Masters , for God's sake do your Duty ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.113

remember Equity , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.114

consider Conscience , and what I am : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.115

I am no Stranger , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.116

I am a Christian Man , and an <font> English <$$font> Man .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.117

You may do your Duties to the Queen sufficiently , and yet deal
conscionably with me , and heap not , unconscionably , Circumstances to
cloy my Memory . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.118

Go directly to the Indictment : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.119

It is no Praise nor Glory for you to overlay me .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.120

I am unlearned , unable to speak , and worst of all to speak for myself
; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.121

I have neither good Utterance , as the World well knoweth , nor
Understanding : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.122

For God's sake do not overlay me with superfluous Matter .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.123

One thing I had forgotten : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.124

I know a Man suspected is half condemn'd . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.125

Now as it happen'd in my last Trouble , so at this time there want not
to put abroad to the World , and heap up things which I never thought ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.126

and great number of such there be , as I see many here at this present .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.127

They have publish'd , that I took an Oath of things which afterwards
prov'd contrary ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.128

blame me not that I mistrust the worse , because I have found the worst
. THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.129

But to take away scruple from you , true it is , that I took an Oath ,
but not generally , but to special Points .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.130

And now when I take Oath to Points , to draw me to the Whole , and to
take <font> Pars pro Toto <$$font> , is great Injury .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.131

To prove that I took that Oath to Parts , and not to the Whole , I
refus'd to set my Hand without expressing of the Point ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.132

for my Hand , my Oath , and my Heart shall go all together .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.133

And for further Proof that my Oath was but to special Points , I can
name good Witnesses to whom I did presently , within three hours after
my Oath taken , specially report the three Points that I made mine Oath
unto . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.134

This , I say , to take from the Scruple of such Matter as I have been
charg'd with , and which perhaps you have heard of me to my discredit .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.135

Then said Mr. Serjeant <font> Barrham <$$font> , I have yet given no
Evidence , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.136

and for that Oath you are not once yet charged withal .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.137

I have done nothing yet , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.138

but recited the Matters contain'd in the Indictment :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.139

now will I bring forth Matter for the Queen in Evidence ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.140

and will prove the things in the Indictment to be true .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.141

There are alledg'd three great Treasons , as I have before said :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.142

the first only I will deal with , that is , to prove that the Duke of
<font> Norfolk <$$font> imagin'd , compass'd and conspir'd , to deprive
and depose the Queen's Majesty , our Sovereign Lady , of her Crown and
Royal Estate and Dignity : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.143

and I will use the second Matter but for Inducement of the first , by
shewing how the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen falsely and unjustly
claim'd the present Possession of the Crown of this Realm ; and that he
knowing that the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen so unjustly claim'd the
said Crown , that she quarter'd the Arms of <font> England <$$font> ,
that she usurp'd the Style and Royal Name ; that she hath not
acknowledged her Error , nor renounc'd her untrue and unjust Claim and
Usurpation , tho' she hath been requir'd thereunto ; and whereto himself
hath been privy , and hath dealt in Treaty , as a chief Commissioner for
the Queen's Majesty for that purpose : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.144

This Matter , I say , I will set out ; how he knowing all this , yet
without the Assent of the Queen's Majesty , against her Highness's
express Commandment upon his Allegiance , against his own Faith and
Promise to the contrary , practis'd to join himself in Marriage with the
said Queen of <font> Scots : <$$font> THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.145

and I mean to join thereto an Intent of his , to advance and maintain
that unjust Title of the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.146

If then this attempting to join himself in Marriage with the <font>
Scotish <$$font> Queen shall be prov'd unto you , and that he knew of
her unjust Claim and Pretence of Title , and that thereby he join'd
himself to advance and maintain the said Title , this must needs tend to
a Purpose and imagining to depose and deprive the Queen's Majesty , and
thereupon consequently to bring her to Death and Destruction , which is
High Treason within the Compass of the Statute of 25 of King <font>
Edward <$$font> III . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.147

For whoso shall imagine and go about to maintain a Title to the present
Possession of the Queen's Crown , and to join himself in Marriage with
her that so claimeth , without doubt he meaneth to aspire to the Crown
himself ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.148

and so meaning , it plainly followeth , that he can@ @not suffer her
Majesty to reign , and his Jealousy can@ @not suffer her to live where
he desireth to reign . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.149

Now will I show you the manner of his procuring to match himself in
Marriage with the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , and first the
beginning thereof : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.150

first of all , to prove how secretly he dealt to that end , by Suits and
Means , before he was a Commissioner , to examine Causes between the
<font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , and the young King her Son , and other
the Lords of <font> Scotland <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.151

Before that time there were secret suits and Practices between them by
Motions , by Messages , by Letters and Tokens , and pleaded so far forth
, as that the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen took it , that she was
assur'd of his Good-Will . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.152

For when Commission was directed to him , and to the Earl of <font>
Sussex <$$font> , and to Sir <font> Ralph Sadler <$$font> , Counsellors
of the Dutchy of <font> Lancaster <$$font> , the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen had repos'd full Affiance in the Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> ,
to have at his Hands favourable hearing ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.153

and so she reported , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.154

and so indeed it follow'd . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,88.155

And where you speak of an Oath , and seem so loath to be disprov'd , and
would so feign have it taken , that your Oath , Hand , and Heart go all
together ; there was an Oath specially appointed for the Commissioners ,
that they should deal in that matter between the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen and her Son and Nobility , directly , sincerely , and uprightly ,
and to weigh all things that should be objected or answer'd on either
part indifferently <P_1,89> without all Partiality .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.156

Then after this Oath taken , the Duke being the first nam'd Commissioner
, this Oath notwithstanding , dealt indirectly ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.157

deceiv'd the Queen's Majesty's Trust , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.158

and demean'd him partially against his said Oath , wherein he committed
wilful Perjury : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.159

Besides that , without regard of his Oath of a sworn Counsellor to the
Queen's Majesty of her Privy Council , he disclosed her Majesty's
Secrets , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.160

and fell to practising for matching himself with the <font> Scotish
<$$font> Queen in Marriage . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.161

Now shall I prove his knowledge at the same time , that the <font>
Scotish <$$font> Queen pretended Title to the present Possession of the
Crown of this Realm . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.162

<font> Duke . <$$font> Then the Duke ask'd , if all the Treasons
contain'd in his Indictment were upon the Statute of King <font> Edward
<$$font> III . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.163

And it was answered by Mr. <font> Serjeant <$$font> and Mr. <font>
Attorney-General <$$font> , that they were grounded upon the same
Statute only . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.164

Then the Duke began thus : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.165

Here the Matters that Mr. <font> Serjeant <$$font> hath prov'd against
me stand in two Points ; by which he chargeth me with imagining the
Deprivation and Death of the Queen's Majesty , and with indirect and
untrue Dealing in the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen's Cause ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.166

and therein he burdeneth me with Perjury . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.167

The <font> Scotish <$$font> Cause hath divers Pleas ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.168

and therefore bear with me , I pray you , if I cast back again to
rehearse my doing therein , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.169

for my Memory is not good : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.170

As for my Dealing therein , God is my Witness , that I have done
uprightly . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.171

<font> Serj. <$$font> Then Mr. <font> Serjeant <$$font> urged him to
confess if he had knowledge that the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen
pretended Title to the present Possession of the Crown of <font> England
<$$font> ; offering , if the Duke would deny it , to make proof of it .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.172

<font> Duke . <$$font> The Duke said , I will make mine own Confession
; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.173

I pray you to teach me not how to answer or confess , because it is the
first ground that you build upon against me :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.174

and because I know not whether my Peers do all know it or no , I will
make a short Declaration of my Doings in that Matter with the <font>
Scotish <$$font> Queen . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.175

<font> Serj. <$$font> First we pray your Grace <paren> speaking to the
Lord High Steward <$$paren> that he may directly answer , whether he
knew that the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen so claim'd or no ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.176

if he say no , we will prove it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.177

<font> Duke . <$$font> Then being ruled over by the Lord High Steward ,
that he should answer directly to that Question , he answer'd , that
indeed he knew that she had so claim'd , but with Circumstance .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.178

<font> Serj. <$$font> Say plainly , Did you know it or no ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.179

for if you say nay , we can prove it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.180

<font> Duke . <$$font> You handle me hardly ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.181

you would so trap me by Circumstance , and infer upon me that she was
the Queen's Enemy , and so make me a Traitor .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.182

I will answer directly to the whole Matter of my Dealing with her .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.183

<font> Serj. <$$font> Answer to the parts as they fall out .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.184

Did you know that she claim'd the present Possession of the Crown ?
That she usurp'd the Arms and Royal Style of this Realm ? And that she
made no Renunciation of that usurp'd Pretence ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.185

If you say you knew it not , we will prove every part of it .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.186

<font> Duke . <$$font> I did not know it in such sort as is alledg'd ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.187

I know that Renunciation of that Claim was offer'd , and upon certain
Causes respited . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.188

<font> Serj. <$$font> It is well known , and yourself then knew it ,
that the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen claim'd the present Possession of
the Crown of <font> England <$$font> , quarter'd the Arms of <font>
England <$$font> with the Arms of <font> Scotland <$$font> , and usurp'd
the Style of this Realm ; and that there was a <font> French <$$font>
Power sent to prosecute it by invading this Land by the way of <font>
Scotland : <$$font> THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.189

your self was made the Queen's Majesty's Lieutenant ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.190

and levy'd an Army to expulse them . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.191

Afterward the Queen's Majesty sent her Embassadors , which met with the
<font> French <$$font> Lords and <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen's
Commissioners at <font> Edinburgh <$$font> , and agreed upon a Treaty of
Peace ; in which one special Article was , that the <font> Scotish
<$$font> Queen should acknowledge her Error , and should renounce her
pretended Claim to the present Possession of the Crown of this Realm .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.192

It was not done , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.193

nor yet is done . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.194

My Lord of <font> Norfolk <$$font> was at this Treaty ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.195

and when this last Commission went out , when the Commissioners sat at
<font> York <$$font> about the Matter between the <font> Scotish
<$$font> Queen , her Son , and the Nobility of <font> Scotland <$$font>
, wherein were Commissioners the Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> , the
Earl of <font> Sussex <$$font> , and Mr. <font> Chancellor <$$font> of
the Dutchy ; one special Instruction was for the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen's Recognition of her unjust Claim , and to require that she should
ratify the former Treaty of Peace . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.196

The Duke knoweth well it was not done . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.197

<font> Duke . <$$font> What is this to me ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.198

I need not enter to defend her Doings , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.199

I like them not . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.200

It is not my Case , but that you make it my Case ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.201

else I would not meddle with it , answer it who would for me .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.202

Indeed I have heard , that being Covert-Baron then , marry'd to the
<font> French <$$font> King , in her Husband's Life she made Claim to
the Crown of <font> England <$$font> , and quarter'd the Arms of <font>
England <$$font> with the Arms of <font> Scotland <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.203

I have heard also , That Sir <font> Nicholas Throckmorton <$$font> made
complaint thereof , and mov'd for Redress , and thereupon it was laid
down . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.204

I have heard that she hath been requested to make Renunciation of that
Claim when the Peace was concluded , when <font> Montmorancy <$$font>
came over , and time was taken for it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.205

After this there grew Amity between the Queen's Majesty and the <font>
Scotish <$$font> Queen ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.206

the Queen took her for her Friend , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.207

sent Embassadors unto her , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.208

and christened her Child ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.209

all this excluded Enmity . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.210

And when my Lord of <font> Bedford <$$font> was there , and mov'd her
for ratifying of the Treaty , and for the Renunciation , she refus'd not
; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.211

but said , she would send to shew Causes why she did it not presently .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.212

And then it was refused not absolutely , but upon certain Words , and
the treating thereof committed to my Lord <font> Burleigh <$$font> and
Mr. <font> Wotton <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.213

As for our Commission at <font> York <$$font> , it took no end ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.214

the Matter was brought up hither , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.215

and here was sat upon at <font> Westminster <$$font> in the
Parliament-Chamber . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.216

And this is my understanding , that she claim'd the Crown ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.217

and I have not otherwise known it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.218

<font> Serj. <$$font> Thus have you confess'd far enough , That you
knew that she did pretend Title to the present Possession of the Crown ;
That she quarter'd the Arms , and usurp'd the Royal Style of this Realm
. THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.219

<font> Duke . <$$font> It was in her Husband's time , when she was
Covert-Baron . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.220

<font> Serj. <$$font> You know also , how since her Husband's Time ,
she hat not renounced that Claim ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.221

and you had , in special , Instruction to require it when you were
Commissioner . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.222

<font> Duke . <$$font> A full Renunciation was offer'd when the Lord
<font> Burleigh <$$font> was with her , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.223

and our Commission was ended , and the Matter brought up hither .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.224

<font> Serj. <$$font> But what was the Cause why it took no end by your
Commission ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.225

Your self was the Cause that the Commission broke up , because you dealt
indirectly ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.226

you set out your own Affection and Partiality ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,89.227

and behav'd your self partially , without regard to the Queen's
Majesty's special Commandment , <P_1,90> without regard of your Oath ,
then specially taken for that Commission , or of your Oath as a
Counsellor : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.228

you utter'd your Partiality , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.229

you disclos'd to the other side aforehand the Queen's Secrets ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.230

you devis'd with the one side , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.231

and gave them Counsel how to deal for stay of the Matter :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.232

you did prevaricate the Queen's Intention ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.233

and when you were by your Commission to examine the <font> Scotish
<$$font> Queen's Adulteries , and her Murdering of her Husband , you
practis'd with those that were Dealers for the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.234

and you told them , by way of Advice , That if these Matters went
forwards to Hearing , the Earl <font> Murray <$$font> , and his Side ,
would disclose all the foul Matter that they could , both by her Letters
and other Evidences , to her Dishonour ; and that the Queen's Majesty
had some such Counsellors about her , as if these things were once
produc'd , she would cause them to be publish'd , that all foreign
Princes should understand them , to the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen's
great Infamy , and to move foreign Princes to proceed no further suing
for her . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.235

And this was the Cause of the Breach and Dissolution of your Commission
. THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.236

<font> Duke . <$$font> You said you would prove that I knew of the
<font> Scotish <$$font> Queen's claiming the present Possession of the
Crown . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.237

<font> Serj. <$$font> Your self have confessed it ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.238

for you know there was yet no Renunciation made ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.239

and you were special Commissioner for that purpose ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.240

and tho' your Commission took no effect , yet by that , that the
requiring of the Renunciation was matter of your Instructions , and the
same not done , it is plain that you knew sufficiently of her former
unjust claiming of the present Possession of the Crown :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.241

And now will we by good Evidence prove your partial and indirect dealing
in that Commission . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.242

Here I will produce Matter of your own Conference at <font> York
<$$font> with <font> Ledington <$$font> and the Bishop of <font> Rosse
<$$font> , and how your self told them , that you understood at <font>
Lyth <$$font> , that rigorous Matter would be set out by the Earl <font>
Murray <$$font> and the rest of that Side , against the <font> Scotish
<$$font> Queen , touching her Whoredom and the Murder of her Husband .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.243

You gave Advice to stay the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> from so doing
; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.244

you told the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen's Ministers , how the Queen
of <font> England <$$font> had some Counsellors that could cause her to
publish all those Matters to the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen's Infamy
; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.245

you practis'd with them to devise to qualify the Matter ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.246

you told the Way that you thought best to do it ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.247

you advis'd them to deal with the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> that
the Matter might be compounded , or else so to handle it , that it might
take no end . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.248

<font> Duke . <$$font> Here the Duke took advantage of that Mr.
Serjeant had said , That the Duke understood at <font> Lyth <$$font> ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.249

for the Duke then protested , that at that time he had never been at
<font> Lyth <$$font> . Whereupon the Lord <font> Burleigh <$$font>
dissolv'd that Knot , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.250

and said on the Duke's Behalf to Mr. Serjeant :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.251

<font> Burleigh . <$$font> You were best proceed with your Evidence ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.252

you may mistake : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.253

my Lord <font> Norfolk <$$font> had not then been at <font> Lyth
<$$font> , otherwise than he and I were there once secretly in a Morning
. THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.254

The Cause of this Error rose thus : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.255

In one <font> Scotish <$$font> Paper produc'd for that Matter , was
contain'd , how the Duke understood at <font> Lyth <$$font> , which in
<font> Scotch <$$font> is as much as at <font> length <$$font> ; which
Mr. Serjeant , in perusing the Matters for Evidence deliver'd unto him
, took for <font> Lyth <$$font> , as the Clerk of the Crown also
afterwards did in reading the same Paper . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.256

Then was produc'd an Examination of the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font>
, taken at the <font> Tower <$$font> , <font> Nov. <$$font> 5 . 1571 ,
as followeth : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.257

The <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen told the Bishop of <font> Rosse
<$$font> , that the Conference at <font> York <$$font> was to make the
Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> , and other her disobedient Subjects , to
answer before the Queen's Majesty of <font> England@ @'s <$$font>
Commissioners , for their unnatural and unjust Proceedings against her ;
and that after their Offences acknowledg'd for the Queen of <font>
England@ @'s <$$font> Pleasure , they should be remitted , and receiv'd
into Favour again , and so all Matters compounded .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.258

The Bishop's Answer to this was , That he was sorry she had agreed to
any Conference wherein they should be accus'd ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.259

for he was assur'd in that Case , they would utter all that they could
for their Defences , altho' it were for her Dishonour , and that
{TEXT:missing_"that"} of the whole Realm : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.260

for they would be loth to confess openly that they were evil Subjects ,
and she a good Princess ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.261

and therefore he wish'd that the Matter might be treated by way of
Concord , before any entry to Accusations : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.262

And to that end he counseled her to travel with her Friends at Court to
<font> York <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.263

To this she reply'd , that there was no such Danger in the matter as I
suppos'd ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.264

for she trusted I would find the Judges favourable , principally the
Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> , who was first in Commission ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.265

and doubted not but the Earl of <font> Sussex <$$font> would be ruled by
him as his tender Friend , and Sir <font> Ralph Sadler <$$font> would
not gainstand their Advice ; and that <font> Liggons <$$font> had been
at <font> Bolton <$$font> , by whose Message , told by him to the Lord
<font> Scroope <$$font> , he understood of the Duke's good Will towards
her , and the Bruite was also spread abroad of a Marriage between the
Duke and her ; and besides , that she had many good Friends in the
Country that did favour her , and seek to her , such as the Earl of
<font> Northumberland <$$font> and his Lady , by whom she had many
Intelligences and Messages ; the <font> Nortons <$$font> , <font>
Markenfield <$$font> and others , who would all be with the Duke at
<font> York <$$font> , and would persuade him to favour her Case .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.266

In the mean time , before our Passage to <font> York <$$font> , <font>
Robert Melvin <$$font> came to <font> Bolton <$$font> with Letters ,
sent by <font> Ledington <$$font> from <font> Fauly Castle <$$font> to
the Queen my Mistress , to advertise her , that the Earl of <font>
Murray <$$font> was wholly bent to utter all that he could against her ,
and to that effect had carried with him all the Letters which he had to
produce against her , for proof of the Murder , whereof he had recover'd
the Copies , and had caus'd his Wife to write them , which he sent to
the Queen ; and that he had not come into <font> England <$$font> in the
Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> 's Company , unless it had been to do her
Service , and to travel for migitation of those Rigors intended ;
desiring to be certified by <font> Robert Melvin <$$font> , that she
wish'd to stay those rigorous Accusations : and because he was well
acquainted with the Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> , desired him to
travel with the Duke in his favour , and that he could confer with the
Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> , by whom he should understand his whole
Mind particularly from time to time . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,90.267

After this , <font> Robert Melvin <$$font> at <font> York <$$font> did
bring me to <font> Ledington <$$font> 's Lodging , where we talk'd
almost a whole Night ; where he told , That he had conferr'd with the
Duke , who seem'd to bear great Good-will to the Queen my Mistress , and
had willed him to counsel the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> , and
others , to abstain from uttering any dishonest Matter against the Queen
, but to grant to some Compositions amongst themselves : so that <font>
Ledington <$$font> said , it appear'd to him , that the Duke had some
Intention to marry with the Queen , as the Bruite was ; and that he did
verily believe , that if it were follow'd , the Marriage would take
effect , which would be most of all other things for the Queen's Honour
and <P_1,91> Weal : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.268

and will'd me to speak with the Duke secretly alone , without the
Commissioners , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.269

and <font> Ledington <$$font> should advertise the Duke to appoint the
time convenient , as he did one day in the Morning , by seven of the
Clock , before the meeting of the Commissioners .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.270

I talk'd with the Duke alone in a Gallery , where he utter'd to me ,
That he bore good Will to the Queen my Mistress , and that he had talk'd
with the Earl <font> Murray <$$font> at <font> length <$$font> , and had
seen the Letters which they had to produce against the Queen my Mistress
, and other Defences , whereby there would such Matter be proved against
her , that would dishonour her for ever ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.271

and if it were once published , the Queen's Majesty of <font> England
<$$font> would get Counsel by such as lov'd not the Queen my Mistress ,
to publish the same to the World , and to send Embassadors to all other
Princes , to make the same known to them ; so that they would make no
further Suit for her Delivery , and perhaps greater Rigours might ensue
to her Person : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.272

Therefore he advis'd me to confer with <font> Ledington <$$font> ; and
that betwixt him and me , we might find some means to stay the Rigour
intended ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.273

and promised all that he could do to that effect , by <font> Ledington
<$$font> 's Advertisement , he would do . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.274

I reply'd that <font> Ledington <$$font> would have her to ratify the
Dimission made at <font> Lochlevin <$$font> for a time ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.275

for he had assur'd her it could hurt her no more , being kept Prisoner
in <font> England <$$font> , than that which was done in <font>
Lochlevin : <$$font> THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.276

for so should she stay the uttering of any matter against her ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.277

and within six Months she should be restor'd to her Country with Honour
; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.278

and so might revoke all done by her . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.279

To this the Duke : What if that were done , to be quit of the present
Infamy and Slander , and let him work out the rest ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.280

I told him we were come to that Conference for to make an Agreement ,
and not to answer to Accusations : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.281

and therefore wish'd him to further the Agreement amongst us .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.282

He answer'd , That their Commission was only to hear the Differences
amongst us ; and if I would propound any thing , he would like well of
it , and should advertise the Queen's Majesty , his Mistress , thereof ,
and get her Answer . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.283

In this Conference , the Duke did oftentimes insinuate the good Will
that he did bear to the Queen my Mistress , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.284

But spoke nothing to me particularly of the Marriage at that time ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.285

but referr'd all to <font> Ledington <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.286

Upon this I did confer with <font> Ledington <$$font> divers times , by
whose Advice I rode to <font> Bolton <$$font> , to speak with my
Mistress , in the time of my Conference ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.287

and during my remaining there , the Conference was broken up ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.288

and the whole Commissioners for our part , came to <font> Bolton
<$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.289

And so my Lord <font> Harris <$$font> and I were sent to <font> London
<$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.290

In the mean time , <font> Robert Melvin <$$font> came to <font> Bolton
<$$font> to the Queen , with Messages of <font> Ledington <$$font> 's ,
of such Conference as he had with the Duke at the Hunting in the Fields
, where I believe <font> Ledington <$$font> did well encourage the Duke
to attempt the Marriage , as he told me afterwards , declaring her
Properties , and the Honour and Commodities that might ensue to them
both thereby ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.291

and the Duke did give good Ear thereto , wishing to the Queen to follow
that Course . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.292

In the Mean time , the Duke had <font> Liggons <$$font> , and others ,
going between them and the Lady <font> Scroope <$$font> , who did
entertain the Matter betwixt them . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.293

After this , the Duke coming to <font> Hampton-Court <$$font> , <font>
Ledington <$$font> made the mean with the Duke , to cause him to send
<font> Liggons <$$font> to deal with me upon this behalf , and to give
me some favourable Advertisement of the Weal for our Case .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.294

And likewise the Duke caused the Lord <font> Lumley <$$font> sometimes
to speak with me , to advise me what was best to be done , and
especially when the <font> Spanish <$$font> Embassador had spoken to me
of the Marriage of one of the House of <font> Austria <$$font> ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.295

the Duke , by my Lord <font> Lumley <$$font> , counseled me to open the
matter to the Queen's Majesty , by my Lord of <font> Arundel <$$font> ,
which might be an occasion to move her to like better of the Match with
him , than with any Foreigner . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.296

And then he sent me word by <font> Liggons <$$font> , that the Queen's
Majesty was inform'd of such a like Bruite , of his Marriage with the
Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.297

but he had satisfy'd her well enough , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.298

and so still did follow the Matter , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.299

and did treat thereupon with the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> and
<font> Ledington <$$font> at <font> Hampton-Court : <$$font> by whose
Advice <font> Robert Melvin <$$font> was sent to the Queen , my Mistress
, at <font> Rippon <$$font> , to move the Matter upon the Earl of <font>
Murray <$$font> 's behalf , with a full Determination , that the Earl of
<font> Murray <$$font> liked of it : Which Message I heard afterward
that <font> Murray <$$font> alledg'd he did send it , for fear of some
Enterprize against him at <font> Northallerton <$$font> , in his Return
to <font> Scotland <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.300

And so after this manner the Matter had been entertain'd betwixt the
Queen and the Duke from time to time , as is at length declar'd in the
former Examinations . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.301

<font> Serj. <$$font> The Effect of all , is the Duke's partial and
untrue Dealing ; for that before the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> 's
going to <font> York <$$font> , the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen
declar'd to the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> , That she doubted not
of the Favour of the Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.302

for she told him that my Lady <font> Scroope <$$font> had by Motions and
Means assur'd her of his good Will , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.303

and she doubted not of my Lord of <font> Sussex@ @'s <$$font> , for the
great Friendship and tender Love he bare to the Duke ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.304

and she made account that Mr. <font> Sadler <$$font> would be friendly
, for that he alone would not stand to them both .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.305

It appeareth also , for further proof of his partial Dealing , that tho'
he were sworn , both as a Counsellor to the Queen's Majesty , and also
specially for the Matter of this Commission ; yet he indirectly ,
secretly , and underhand , dealt with <font> Ledington <$$font> ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.306

and told him , how that the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> and his Side
intended to utter sharp Matter against the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen
. THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.307

The Duke gave his Advice how to stay it , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.308

and so dealt partially , and against the Queen's Majesty's special Trust
and Commandment , and against his own Oath and Promise .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.309

Next after that , in Conference had with the Duke of <font> Norfolk
<$$font> on the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen's part , the Duke declar'd
his good Will that he bare to the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.310

He shewed how , that if the same matter of Evidence against her , were
once utter'd by the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> , some of the Queen's
Majesty's Counsellors of <font> England <$$font> would procure her
Majesty to publish them . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.311

He advised that the matter should be compounded with the Earl of <font>
Murray <$$font> ; and that he should not stick , being here in <font>
England <$$font> , and not at her own liberty , for the present time ,
to be content to ratify the Dimission of the Crown of <font> Scotland
<$$font> , which she made at <font> Lochlevin <$$font> ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.312

and so she might be restor'd into her own Country ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.313

and then she might undo all again at her pleasure : and upon pretence of
Constraint and Fear , as well revoke that which she should do in <font>
England <$$font> , as she before revoked that which she had done at
<font> Lochlevin <$$font> in <font> Scotland <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,91.314

Also <P_1,92> the Duke at that time was privy to the Device , that
<font> Ledington <$$font> accompany'd the Earl <font> Murray <$$font>
only to understand his Secrets , and to betray him ; and that <font>
Ledington <$$font> stole away the Letters , and kept them one Night ,
and caused his Wife to write them out . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.315

Howbeit , the same were but Copies translated out of <font> French
<$$font> into <font> Scotch <$$font> ; which , when <font> Ledington
<$$font> 's Wife had written out , he caused them to be sent to the
<font> Scotish <$$font> Queen : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.316

She laboured to translate them again into <font> French <$$font> , as
near as she could to the Originals wherein she wrote them ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.317

but that was not possible to do , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.318

but there was some Variance in the Phrase ; by which Variance , as God
would , the Subtilty of that Practice came to light .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.319

<font> Duke . <$$font> What if all this be true ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.320

What is this to the matter ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.321

Any dealing of mine with the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen by my Sister
<font> Scroope <$$font> 's Means , I utterly deny .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.322

As for <font> Ledington <$$font> , and the Bishop of <font> Rosse
<$$font> , what their Speeches were to me , I care not ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.323

I am to answer but for mine own Speeches . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.324

<font> Serj. <$$font> The Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> accuseth you
of your own Speeches , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.325

and this he doth , being examined freely , and without any Compulsion .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.326

<font> Duke . <$$font> He is a <font> Scot <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.327

<font> Serj. <$$font> A <font> Scot <$$font> is a Christian Man .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.328

<font> Duke . <$$font> At my being at <font> York <$$font> in
Commission , <font> Ledington <$$font> broke with me himself to have the
Matter compounded between the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen and the Earl
of <font> Murray <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.329

I told him that our Commission was only to hear indifferently what
should be alledged on both parts , and thereof truly to make report .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.330

What hurt is this ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.331

The Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> afterwards sent for me , that he
might speak with me : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.332

when we met , he moved me for the compounding of the Matter , as <font>
Ledington <$$font> had done . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.333

I told him , that our Commission was but to hear and report , as I had
told <font> Ledington <$$font> before ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.334

and therefore if they would fall to compounding , I willed them to
devise the Means themselves , and to make Offers ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.335

and thereupon we would advertise the Queen's Majesty thereof , as we
would of all the Matters alledged . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.336

If it be otherwise , and as you say , let my Letters be looked on ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.337

and see if they contain any such Matter . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.338

If the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> , for Fear or for Malice , have
said untruly ; if being a <font> Scot <$$font> , he care not how many
<font> English <$$font> Men , by his false Testimony , he bring to
destruction ; I beseech you let not that hurt me .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.339

<font> Serj. <$$font> You made the first Motion of compounding the
Matter to <font> Ledington <$$font> your self ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.340

and another time to the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> , you offered to
further it all that you could . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.341

<font> Duke . <$$font> I never saw the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font>
before I came to <font> York <$$font> ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.342

and would I , think you , deal so dangerously with a <font> Scot
<$$font> that I never saw before ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.343

Also , I did by my Letters signify to the Queen's Majesty our Proceeding
, and my misliking of the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen's part :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.344

Let that Letter be seen ; which Letter was written after my talk with
<font> Ledington <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.345

I wrote it when I went from <font> York <$$font> ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.346

and I never saw the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> afterward , till I
came to <font> London <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.347

<font> Serj. <$$font> The writing of your Letters to the Queen's
Majesty , wherein you advertised against the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen , and though the same were written after your Conference with
<font> Ledington <$$font> and the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> , is
no proof but that you dealt partially for the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.348

for those Letters were written by others , as well as your self , namely
, by my Lord of <font> Sussex <$$font> , and Mr. Chancellor of the
Dutchy : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.349

and you could not otherwise , do , but so signify , notwithstanding your
partial secret Dealing ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.350

for else you should have too openly bewrayed your Intention .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.351

<font> Duke . <$$font> When <font> Ledington <$$font> moved me of the
Marriage of the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , I utterly refused it .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.352

<font> Serj. <$$font> That is not so : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.353

And for proof , as well of your partial Dealing in the Commission as for
the Marriage , there shall be brought forth sufficient Evidence .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.354

Here was alledged how a Letter had been written to the Earl of <font>
Murray <$$font> , requiring to be advertised by him of so much as he
knew concerning the Doings of the Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> , both
for the Matter of the Commission , and the Practice of his Marriage with
the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.355

And the Earl <font> Murray <$$font> 's Answer to the same Letter was
produced , and read , as followeth . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.356

<font> Note <$$font> , That the beginning and ending of this Letter was
not read ; but so much only as pertained to the matter , <font> viz
<$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.357

' In <font> York <$$font> , at the meeting of all the Commissioners , I
found very honourable and neutral Dealing with the Duke and others her
Highness's Commissioners , in the beginning of the Cause , as in the
making of the Oaths to proceed sincerely , <font> &c. <$$font> During
which time , I only entered into general Speech , sticking at our just
Defence in the Matters that were objected against us by the said Queen's
Commissioners ; looking certainly for none other thing but a summary
Cognition in the Causes of Controversy , with a small Declaratory to
have followed . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.358

Upon a certain Day , the Lord <font> Ledington <$$font> 's Secretary rid
with the Duke to <font> Cawood <$$font> ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.359

what purpose they held , I can@ @not say : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.360

but that night , <font> Ledington <$$font> returning , and entering in
Conference with me upon the State of our Action , I was advised by him
to pass to the Duke , and to require familiar Conference ; by the which
I might have some feeling to what Issue our Matters would tend .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.361

According to which Advice , having gotten Time and Place convenient in
the Gallery of the House , where the Duke was lodged ; after renewing of
our first Acquaintance made at <font> Berwick <$$font> , the time before
the Siege of <font> Lyth <$$font> , and some Speeches passed betwixt us
, he began to say to me how he in <font> England <$$font> had Favour and
Credit , and I in <font> Scotland <$$font> Good-will and Friendship of
many . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.362

It was thought there could be none more fit Instruments to travel for
the Continuance of the Amity betwixt the two Realms , then we two .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.363

And from that Discourse upon the State of both , and how I was entered
in that Action tending so far to the Queen's Dishonour , I was willed by
him to consider how Matters stood in this Isle , what Honour I had
received of the Queen , and what Inconveniencies her Defamation in the
matters laid to her charge , might breed to her Posterity , whose
Respect was not little to the Crown of <font> England <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.364

There was but one Babe , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.365

the <font> Hamilton <$$font> 's , my Unfriend , had the next Respect ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.366

and if I should , the Issue of her Body would be the more affectionate
to me and mine , than any other that could attain to that Room :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,92.367

and so it should be meetest that she affirmed her Dimission made in
<font> Lochlevin <$$font> , and we to abstract the Letters of her Hand
writ , that she should not be defamed <P_1,93> in <font> England
<$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.368

My Reply to that was , how the matter had pass'd in Parliament , and the
Letters seen to many ; so that the abstracting of the same , could not
then serve her to any purpose : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.369

and yet should we in that Doing bring the Ignominy upon us , affirming
it could not be sure for us that way to proceed , seeing the Queen's
Majesty of <font> England <$$font> was not made privy to the matter , as
she behoved to be , in respect we were purposely come into <font>
England <$$font> for that End , and for the justifying of the Grounds of
our Case . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.370

The Duke's Answer was , he would take in hand to handle matters well
enough at the Court . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.371

After this , at the Occasion of certain Articles that were required to
be resolved in , before we entered directly in the Declaration of the
very Ground of our Action , we came up to the Court ; where some new
Commissioners were adjoined to the former , and the hearing of the
Matter ordain'd to be in the <font> Parliament-House <$$font> at <font>
Westminster <$$font> . In presence of which Commissioners for the said
Queen , and partly thro' the sharp rebuking of the Queen's Majesty of
<font> England <$$font> 's Commissioners , we utter'd the Grounds of the
Action , and produc'd such Evidences , Letters , and Probations as we
had , which might move the Queen's Majesty to think well of our Case .
Whereupon expecting her Highness's Declaration , and seeing no
likelihood of the same to be suddenly given , but daily Motions made to
come to an accord with the said Queen , our Matters at home in <font>
Scotland <$$font> in the mean season standing in hazard and danger ; we
were put to the uttermost Point of our Wit to imagine whereunto the
Matters would tend : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.372

for albeit we had left nothing undone for the Justification of our Cause
, it appeared yet no End , but continual Motions made , to come to some
accord with the Queen , and restore her to whole or half Reign .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.373

I had no other Answer to give them , but that I could neither do against
Conscience nor Honour in that matter . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.374

Notwithstanding , seeing this my plain Answer wrought no End or Dispatch
to us , and that I was informed that the Duke began to mislike of me ,
and to speak of me as that I had reported of the said Queen irreverently
, calling her Whore and Murderer ; I was advised to pass to him , and to
give him good Words , and to purge myself of the things objected to me ;
that I should not upon the sudden enter in his evil Grace , nor have him
to our Enemy , considering his Greatness : it being therewithal
whisper'd and shew'd to me , that if I departed , he standing
discontented and not satisfy'd , I might peradventure find such trouble
in my way , as my Throat might be cut before I came to <font> Berwick
<$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.375

And therefore since it might well enough appear that he aspired to her
Marriage , I should not put him in utter despair that my Good-will can@
@not be had therein . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.376

So , few days before my departing , I came to the Park at <font>
Hampton-Court <$$font> , where the Duke and I met together ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.377

and there I declared , that it was come to my ears how some Misreport
should be made of me to him , as that I should speak irreverently and
rashly of the said Queen , my Sovereign's Mother , such words as before
express'd , that he might perceive my Affection to be so alienate from
her , as I could not love her , nor be content of her Preferment .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.378

Howbeit , he might persuade himself of the contrary ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.379

for as she once was the Creature in the Earth that I loved best , having
that Honour to be so near unto me , and having received such Advancement
and Honour by her , I was not so unnatural ever to wish her Body harm ,
or to speak of her as was untruly reported of me , howsoever the Truth
were in itself . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.380

And as the Preservation of her Son , now my Sovereign , had moved me to
enter in this Cause , and that her own pressing was the occasion of that
which was uttered to her Infamy ; so whensoever God shall move her Heart
to repent of her by-past Behaviour and Life , and after her known
Repentance , that she should be separate from that ungodly and unlawful
Marriage that she was entered in , and then after were join'd with such
a godly and honourable Personage , as were affectioned to the true
Religion , and whom we might trust ; I could find in my heart to love
her , and to shew her as great Pleasure , Favour , and Good-will , as
ever I did in my Life . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.381

And in case he should be that Personage , there was none whom I should
better like of , the Queen's Majesty of <font> England <$$font> being
made privy to the matter , and she allowing thereof ; which being done ,
I should labour in all things that I could , to her Honour and Pleasure
, that were not prejudicial to the King my Sovereign@ @'s Estate :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.382

and pray'd him not to think otherwise of me ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.383

for my Affection was rather bury'd and hid within me , waiting until God
should direct her to know herself , than utterly alienate and abstracted
from her . Which he seem'd to accept in very good part , saying Earl of
<font> Murray <$$font> , thou knowest of me that thing whereunto I will
make none in <font> England <$$font> nor <font> Scotland <$$font> privy
, THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.384

and thou hast <font> Norfolk <$$font> 's Life in thy hands .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.385

So departing , I came to my Lodging , &c. THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.386

Thus have I plainly declared how I have been dealt withal for this
Marriage , and how just Necessity moved me not to repugn directly that
which the Duke appear'd so bent unto . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.387

And for my Threatnings to assent to the same , I have express'd the
manner . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.388

The Persons that laid the Terror before me , were of mine own Company ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.389

and the Duke since hath spoken , that it was his writing which saved my
Life at that time . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.390

In conclusion , I pray you persuade her Majesty , that she let no
Speeches , nor any other thing pass'd and objected to my prejudice ,
move her Majesty to alter her Favour towards me , or any ways to doubt
of my assured Constancy towards her Highness :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.391

for in any thing that may tend to her Honour and Surety , I will , while
I live , bestow my self , and all that will do for me , notwithstanding
any Hazard or Danger ; as proof shall declare , when her Majesty finds
time to employ me . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.392

' <font> Serj. <$$font> Thus appeareth it , That the Duke of <font>
Norfolk <$$font> first travell'd with <font> Ledington <$$font> for stay
and compounding the matter , and afterward likewise with the Bishop of
<font> Rosse <$$font> , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.393

and at both times first moved it of himself :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.394

so now the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> also by his Letters doth
testify , that in Conference with him , it came first of the Duke to
move the stay of the Contention , and to what end the Duke did it ,
namely , for that he aspired to the Marriage of the <font> Scotish
<$$font> Queen , and therein made account of her Respect to the Crown of
<font> England <$$font> ; and that without the Queen's Majesty's Assent
or Knowledge . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.395

Now shall you also see , for further proof thereof , the Bishop of
<font> Rosse <$$font> 's Letter to the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,93.396

For the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> went from <font> York <$$font>
to <P_1,94> <font> Bolton <$$font> , as you have before heard in his
Examination . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.397

On the way , before he came to <font> Bolton <$$font> to the <font>
Scotish <$$font> Queen , from his Lodging he wrote a Letter to her ,
which Letter was lost by his Servant ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.398

but as good hap was , he reserv'd a copy thereof ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.399

and negligently left it behind him in his Lodging at <font> Newcastle
<$$font> , where the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> half a year after
being lodg'd in the same Chamber , found it ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.400

and sent it to the Queen's Majesty's Council ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.401

and here it is all written with the Bishop's own Hand , as himself ,
being examin'd thereof , hath confess'd . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.402

Here he setteth out the Conference between the Duke of <font> Norfolk
<$$font> and <font> Ledington <$$font> , and himself .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.403

He sheweth the Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> 's Advice to the <font>
Scotish <$$font> Queen , for a Letter by her to be written to the
Queen's Majesty ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.404

and also he openeth the Duke's Advice , how to work for the <font>
Scotish <$$font> Queen , with disclosing the Queen's Majesty's Secrets .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.405

Here was the said Letter produced , and read as followeth .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.406

<font> Copy of the Letter sent from <$$font> York <font> by the Bishop
of <$$font> Rosse <font> to the Queen-Mother , to the Queen our
Sovereign Lady , then remaining at <$$font> Bolton .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.407

' Please your Majesty , I confer'd at great length with <font> A.
<$$font> one great part of the Night ; who assured me he had reason'd
with <font> B. <$$font> this Saturday , as yesterday on the Fields who
<font> C. <$$font> determined to him , that it was <font> D <$$font> 's
determinate Purpose not to end your Cause at this time , but to hold the
same in suspense ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.408

and did what was in her power to cause us : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.409

<font> E. <$$font> pursued extremely , to the effect <font> F <$$font>
and his Adherents might utter all that they could to your dishonour ; to
the effect , as was suppos'd , to cause you come in disdain with the
whole Subjects of this Realm , that you may be the more unable to
attempt any thing to her disadvantage ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.410

and to this effect is all her Intention . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.411

And when they have produced all they can against you , the Queen will
not appoint the matter instantly , but transport you up in the Country ,
and reserve you there till she think time to shew you Favour ; which is
not able to be hastily , because of your Uncles in <font> France
<$$font> , and the fear she hath of your self to be her Unfriend .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.412

And therefore their Counsel is , that you write a Writing to the Queen ,
meaning that you are informed concerning your Subjects , which have
offended you , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.413

this in effect ; That your Majesty hearing the Estate of your Affairs ,
as they proceeded in <font> York <$$font> , was inform'd that her
Majesty was inform'd of you , that you could not godly remit your
Subjects in such sort , as they might credit you hereafter : which was
one great cause of the stay of this Controversy to be ended .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.414

And therefore persuading her Grace effectuously not to trust any who
made such Narration ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.415

but like as you had rendred you in her hands , as most tender you of any
living , so pray'd her Grace to take no Opinion of you :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.416

but you would use her Counsel in all your Affairs ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.417

and would prefer her Friendship to all others as well Uncles as others ,
and assure her to keep that thing you would promise to your Subjects by
her Advice . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.418

And if her Grace discredit you , you would be glad to satisfy her in
that point , to be removed within her Realm in secret and quiet manner ,
where her Grace pleased , unto the time her Grace were fully satisfy'd ,
and all occasion of Discredit removed from her ; so that in the mean
time your Realm were holden in quietness , and your true Subjects
restored and maintained in your own Estate ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.419

and such other things tending to this effect .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.420

And affirms , that they believe that this may be occasion to cause her
credit you better , that you offer safer , and may come , that within
two or three Months she may become better_minded toward your Grace ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.421

for now@ @while she is not well_minded , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.422

and will not shew you any pleasure , for the causes aforesaid .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.423

' <font> Duke . <$$font> Here be many things and many parts very hard
for me to remember ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.424

and here be produced three Witness against me , <font> Ledington
<$$font> , the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> , and the Earl of <font>
Murray <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.425

Hereunto I will answer as my Memory will serve me :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.426

<font> Ledington <$$font> , because he and I were acquainted at <font>
Lyth <$$font> , came to me THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.427

and practised to search at my hands , and to feel how the Queen's
Majesty was satisfy'd . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.428

I told him , that 'till I heard what the Queen's Majesty would resolve ,
I could tell him nothing : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.429

And so time spent away . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.430

And in the mean season , upon a <font> Saturday <$$font> , I being at
Dinner with the Lord of <font> Sussex <$$font> , <font> Ledington
<$$font> came in ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.431

and after Dinner talking with me , he brake more earnestly for me with
the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , and a Marriage between her and me ,
which I utterly refused , as by my Letters from <font> York <$$font> to
the Queen's Majesty it may appear ; wherein I signify'd my Opinion of
the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , or else she must be maintain'd by
the Queen of <font> England <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.432

I said to him again , that the Queen's Majesty sought the Quietness of
that Realm ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.433

but for any Advice of restoring the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen into
her Country , I could not see how it might be consider'd :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.434

and so I advised him to submit the whole Matter to the Queen's Majesty's
Judgment . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.435

Otherwise he and I never talk'd . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.436

Of those other doings , between <font> Ledington <$$font> and the <font>
Scotish <$$font> Queen , I know nothing . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.437

The Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> shortly after said to me ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.438

and intreated to have my help for compounding of the Matter ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.439

as you know well he can speak fair . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.440

I told him I could nothing without my Fellows , and only in such a
manner as was prescrib'd by our Commission .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.441

I told him also , that we were but to hear and certify ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.442

and for the matter of compounding , they were best to make Offers
themselves ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.443

for we were but to receive such Devices as they should chuse , and to
give Advertisement of the same . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.444

To what end should I need to utter the Matters of the Earl of <font>
Murray <$$font> 's part to the other side , when <font> Ledington
<$$font> himself was present , and privy to all ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.445

I spake not with the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> , but at that time
only . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.446

And as for that Advice , to avoid the discovering of those rigorous
Matters by the Earl , and the publishing thereof to the Queen's Majesty
, to the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen's Infamy ; I never disclosed any
such Secrets , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.447

nor gave any such Advice : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.448

Only I did advise the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> , that he and that
side should hold themselves contented with the Queen's Majesty's dealing
, and with the Determination taken at <font> Hampton-Court <$$font> ,
which was such as might content them , and such as my Lord <font>
Burleigh <$$font> then mislik'd . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,94.449

As for the Earl <font> Murray <$$font> , <P_1,95> he began with me , and
not I with him : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.450

He came to me at <font> Cawood <$$font> , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.451

and prayed me to tell him what end would come of the Matter .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.452

I said , I knew not ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.453

for it must come from the Queen's Majesty : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.454

We knew not of the differing of the Commission at that time , nor till
such time as Mr. <font> Sadler <$$font> was sent for .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.455

How could I tell him , and knew it not my self ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.456

I never yielded to the Marriage between the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen and me : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.457

I can@ @not gather such Matter of Looks alone ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.458

I never dealt more therein , but only that <font> Ledington <$$font>
broke it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.459

Have I not answered all these Matters ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.460

If I have not , put me in any thing I have omitted , and I will answer
it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.461

<font> Serj. <$$font> Your Answer is but only Denial ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.462

<font> Ledington <$$font> and the rest write otherwise , that you made
the first Motion to them : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.463

and therefore <font> Ledington <$$font> , by Practice between you and
him , sent the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> to you , under pretence of
searching to learn the State of their own Cause , to be moved by you for
the Marriage ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.464

upon your Answer , it is but yea and nay between you .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.465

If you meant {COM:sic} directly , then needed you not to have dealt so
secretly in Conference with <font> Ledington <$$font> , without the rest
of the Commissioners ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.466

and besides <font> Ledington <$$font> 's Conference with you , both the
Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> and the Earl <font> Murray <$$font>
affirm your practicing with them to the same intent : which is
sufficient Proof against your own bare denial .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.467

<font> Duke . <$$font> The Earl <font> Murray <$$font> sought my Life ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.468

the other are not of Credit ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.469

yet all these prove not that I dealt in the matter of the Marriage with
the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , in any respect of her Claim to the
Crown of <font> England <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.470

If the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> , or any other , can say
otherwise , let them be brought before me face to face .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.471

I have often so desired it , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.472

but I could not obtain it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.473

<font> Serj. <$$font> The Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> confesseth it
; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.474

this is his own hand ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.475

and here you shall have , by Witnesses , proved the Duke's Assent to the
Marriage with the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.476

and to practise the furtherance thereof , you shall see how that
afterwards he was privy to a Device , that the Earl <font> Murray
<$$font> should have been murdered at <font> Northallerton <$$font> , in
his way homeward , by the <font> Nortons <$$font> , <font> Markenfield
<$$font> , and other Rebels ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.477

and afterwards , being satify'd at the Earl <font> Murray <$$font> 's
Hands , a Letter was written to stay that Device : containing also a
Device of compounding the Matter , and how the Earl <font> Murray
<$$font> had assented to the Marriage . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.478

Here was contained the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> 's Confession ,
in Article , the ninth ; wherein appeareth , That the Earl <font> Murray
<$$font> should have been murdered by the way , going home into <font>
Scotland <$$font> ; and that the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> wrote
to the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen that the Duke of <font> Norfolk
<$$font> advised her to stay that Murder , because the Earl <font>
Murray <$$font> had yielded his god Will to the Marriage as followeth :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.479

<font> Out of the Bishop of <$$font> Rosse <font> 's Examination , taken
the <$$font> <font> 6_th {COM:font_change_only_around_"th"} of <$$font>
November , 1571 . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.480

To the 9th he saith , That the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> was in
fear to have been murdered by the way , in his Return to <font> Scotland
<$$font> ; whereupon this Examinate , by the Duke's Advice , did write
to the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> , that the Attempt might be staid
, for that <font> Murray <$$font> had yielded to the Duke to be
favourable ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.481

and the Murder should have been executed about <font> Northallerton
<$$font> , by the <font> Nortons <$$font> , <font> Markenfield <$$font>
, and others , as this Examinate was advertised by the <font> Scotish
<$$font> Queen's Servants that came from <font> Bolton <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.482

<font> Serj. <$$font> Thus it appeareth , that the Duke so far assented
to the Marriage , that rather than it should not have taken effect , he
was contented that the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> should have been
murdered . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.483

<font> Duke . <$$font> The Unkindness between the Earl <font> Murray
<$$font> and me , was not about this Matter of his Mistress the <font>
Scotish <$$font> Queen , but for another Cause ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.484

it was because the Earl <font> Murray <$$font> had reported that I
sought the Marriage of the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.485

I charg'd him therewith by Message , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.486

he excused himself thereof , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.487

and laid it upon the Earl <font> Moreton <$$font> and the Bishop of
<font> Orkney <$$font> ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.488

and for the Device of murdering him , I was never privy to it .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.489

And where the Article saith , that I heard it by the <font> Scotish
<$$font> Queen's Servants that came from <font> Bolton <$$font> , it is
not true . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.490

I never heard of it till <font> Whitsuntide <$$font> after , when <font>
John Wood <$$font> came , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.491

and then I heard it not but by the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.492

neither did I hear that it should have been done by the <font> Nortons
<$$font> , but by my Brother of <font> Westmoreland <$$font> being an
hunting , when the Earl <font> Murray <$$font> espying a great Company
on the Hill-side , imagin'd that he should have been slain .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.493

<font> Serj. <$$font> You shall also understand , that the Duke himself
wrote to the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> , wherein is plainly
declared his Practice and Assent to the Marriage : which very Letter we
have not , but the Copy thereof , under the Regent's own hand , which
the Regent sent to the Queen's Majesty , whereby the Matter most plainly
appeareth . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.494

<font> My good Lord <$$font> , ' I Have received your courteous Letter ,
whereby I do not only perceive you well affected for the Advancement of
your common Weal , and the uniting of this Island , but also your good
Mind towards me ; which two Points I can@ @not but note to your special
Commendation , and my great Comfort . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.495

As you shall prove me industrious to assist you with all my Power in the
one , so shall you not find me ungrateful in the other , but ready
{SIC:really} to requite you to my uttermost for your Friendship so
frankly offered ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.496

the rather I shall have occasion to imploy my self for the just Reward
of your Deserts , the sooner I shall think my self in Nature ,
Friendship , and Conscience discharged of my Obligation .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.497

In the mean time , good my Lord , assure your self , that you have not
only purchas'd a faithful Friend , but also a natural Brother , who is
not , nor will not be less careful for your Weal and Surety , than his
own Honour and Credit : whereof I am fully persuaded you doubt not :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.498

and therefore in that Point I need not to be over-tedious ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,95.499

but briefly to return to that you desire to be satisfy'd of , which is ,
for my Marriage with all Sincerity with your Sister ; wherein I must
deal plainly with your Lordship , as my only Friend , that I have so far
proceeded herein , as I , with Conscience , can neither revoke that that
I have done , nor never do mean , while I do live , to go back from this
that is done , nor with Honour proceed further , until such time as you
there shall remove such Stumbling-blocks , as be Impeachment to our more
apparent Proceeding ; which when by me it shall be finished , upon mine
Honour the rest shall follow to your Contentment and Comfort .
Wherefore my earnest Request , at this present , to my good Lord , is ,
that you will proceed herein with such Expedition , as the Enemies of
this good Purpose , which will be no small number , against the uniting
of this Land into one Kingdom in time coming , and the Maintenance
<P_1,96> of God's true Religion , may not have Opportunity , thro' the
Delay given them , to hinder our intended Determination ; against the
which , I am of opinion , there will be no Practices by foreign Princes
omitted . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.500

This I hope will be sufficient to resolve you , my Lord , of your Desire
touching the Marriage ; referring my self wholly , for your more ample
Instruction and Satisfaction in all Points , to my Lord <font> Boid
<$$font> , who hath commission both by the Queen of <font> Scotland
<$$font> , your Sister , and also by me , to resolve you of all Doubts ,
whom I wish you to credit as my self . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.501

You shall not want the furtherance in this Enterprize of the most part
of the Noblemen of this Realm ; whose faithful Friendship in this Case ,
and all other my Actions , I have to my Contentment sufficiently proved
. THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.502

Thus being persuaded that your Lordship's Endeavour is for the
Maintenance of God's Glory , and the Advancement of the common Weal of
this Island , I have adventured to impart my secret Determination , as
to one whom I make account to be assured of , and unto whom I wish long
Life and prosperous Health , to his Heart's Desire .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.503

So with my hearty Commendations at this present , without further
Molestation , I am , My good Lord , Your faithful and most assured
Friend . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.504

<font> From my House in <$$font> London , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.505

<font> July <$$font> 1 . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.506

I have heard you have been in the <font> North <$$font> of <font>
Scotland <$$font> , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.507

and doubt not but you have satisfy'd the Request I made for the Bishop
of <font> Rosse <$$font> , and have caused his Servants to be obeyed of
his Benefices ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.508

and what is left undone , I pray you cause it to be effectually
furthered . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.509

He hath the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> Letter , directed to you for
that effect ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.510

but trusting that my Request shall make him to be obeyed , ere the other
come to your hands , wherein you shall do me singular Pleasure .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.511

<font> Norfolk <$$font> THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.512

<font> Duke , <$$font> All these are Letters , and answer'd two years
ago , when Mr. <font> Sadler <$$font> and Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font>
were sent to examine me upon Interrogatories .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.513

Indeed I must confess my own Folly ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.514

it is an ill Cook that can@ @not lick his own Fingers .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.515

The Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> wrote the Letter ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.516

and he lick'd his own Fingers . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.517

The Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> wrote to me very humbly , and that he
was at my Commandment , with such like words .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.518

I having no leisure to write Answer to him , drew Articles to give him
thanks : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.519

but that the Noblemen liked of that Marriage , and I wished no Man's
Friendship more than his in it , the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font>
added of his own , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.520

and put it in Cipher in this Form , which Cipher I had not then .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.521

<font> Serj. <$$font> This is the very Copy of your own Letter .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.522

<font> Duke . <$$font> See my Answer made in my first Troubles , two
years past . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.523

<font> Serj. <$$font> The Queen's Majesty understanding the Duke's
Intention to marry with the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , the Duke
himself , by way of Prevention , complained to the Majesty of the Rumour
that was spread against him , that he sought the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen's Marriage , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.524

and prayed it might be examined . In which her complaint , as I have
heard her Majesty her self declare it , and some here of my Lords have
likewise heard it , he said , among other things , To what end should I
seek to marry her , being so wicked a Woman , such a notorious
Adulteress and Murderer ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.525

I love to sleep upon a safe Pillow : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.526

I account my self , to your Majesty's good Favour , as good a Prince at
home in my Bowling-Alley at <font> Norwick <$$font> , as she is , tho'
she were in the middle of her Kingdom . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.527

The Revenues of the Crown of <font> Scotland <$$font> <paren> all the
ordinary Charges deducted <$$paren> about the necessary Affairs of the
Realm , are not comparable to mine own that I enjoy by your goodness ,
as I have heard of the chief Officers of that Realm ; considering also
that her Kingdom is not in her hand , but possess'd by another ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.528

if I should seek to match with her , knowing , as I do know , that she
pretendeth a Title to the present possession of your Crown , your
Majesty might justly charge me with seeking your own Crown from your
Head . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.529

This the Duke spake to the Queen's Majesty , in his Excuse , when the
Fame went of his Marriage with the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , when
yet , beside that time , he had dealt earnestly in it .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.530

<font> Duke . <$$font> I may not nor will not stand against her
Majesty's Testimony , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.531

I must give place unto it ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.532

but hereof I was examined two years ago , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.533

and then I declared , as I now do , that at that time I intended not the
Marriage . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.534

And true it is , that I have at sundry times , some at one time , and
some at another , used some of those kinds of Speeches ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.535

but at that time I dealt not with that Marriage ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.536

nor minded it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.537

<font> Serj. <$$font> Your own Confession is otherwise ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.538

for your self have since confessed , that you concealed from the Queen
your Conferences with <font> Ledington <$$font> and <font> Rosse
<$$font> about the Marriage , both the Conferences had at <font> York
<$$font> and at <font> Hampton-Court <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.539

<font> Duke . <$$font> I never consented to the Marriage at those times
of their Conferences , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.540

and so I might well use their Speeches . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.541

Then was produced his own Examination the 6th of <font> November
<$$font> , 1571 . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.542

and it was read , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.543

and he confessed his Concealment of those Speeches and Conferences
before used about the Marriage , and that it had indeed been moved , but
not concluded on : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.544

He remembreth that the Queen charged him straightly not to proceed in
that Marriage ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.545

but he remembreth not that she charged him upon his Allegiance .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.546

<font> The Duke of <$$font> Norfolk , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.547

<font> the <$$font> <font> 6_th {COM:font_change_only_around_"th"} of
<$$font> November , 1571 . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.548

To the first and second , he saith , That he remembreth that at <font>
Hampton-Court <$$font> , upon a Report made by <font> Robert Melvin
<$$font> , so declared by <font> Woolcock <$$font> , that this Examinant
had gone about a matter of Marriage with the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen for himself , wherein he took himself to be much wronged , and
desired to have the Matter examined ; for that he had not dealt in that
Matter , and doth not remember what the Queen's Majesty said unto him at
that time : at which time he said for himself , That he intended no such
thing , nor meant any such thing ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.549

and yet he confesseth , That he did not declare to the Queen's Majesty ,
at that time , of any Speech that had been used unto him by <font>
Ledington <$$font> at <font> York <$$font> , and the Earl of <font>
Murray <$$font> at <font> Hampton-Court <$$font> , touching the said
Marriage . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.550

Being at <font> Titchfield <$$font> , the Queen's Majesty called him to
her Gallery , asking of him , Whether he had dealt any wise for the
Marriage of the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> , as it was reported ?
Whereunto he answered , He thought her Majesty had heard by others .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.551

But she willed him to declare the Truth , because she had rather hear it
of himself : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,96.552

And so he <P_1,97> declar'd , That he had received Letters from her ;
that the matter had been mov'd and written unto her ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.553

but he had not made any Conclusion in that Matter with her . Whereupon
her Majesty shewing herself to mislike thereof , commanded and charged
him that he should not deal any further therein with the Queen of <font>
Scots <$$font> , nor any other Person in that Matter :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.554

But that he was charg'd upon his Allegiance , he doth not certainly
remember ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.555

but that he was straitly commanded , he doth well remember .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.556

At length he confess'd , that he was charg'd upon his Allegiance .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.557

<font> Serj. <$$font> At <font> Titchfield <$$font> the Queen's Majesty
expressly commanded the Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> upon his
Allegiance , as himself hath now confess'd , not to proceed in that
Marriage with the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.558

Now , if we prove that this Commandment notwithstanding , and against
his own Promise , he afterward still proceeded , and that much more
earnestly than before ; and yet nevertheless , that he had all the while
conceived an evil Opinion against the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen ,
and upon the sight of her Letters , and other Evidences , shewed he
thought her plainly guilty of abominable Whoredom , of the Murder of her
Husband , and signify'd it by Letters , and declar'd the same his
Opinion to <font> Bannister : <$$font> And also , That he made no
account of her Kingdom of <font> Scotland <$$font> , which she had not
in Possession ; or if she would have it , yet he counted it not
comparable to his own Dukedom . He <paren> I say <$$paren> so doing ,
and so conceiving and so declaring , and yet still more and more
prosecuting the Marriage , can@ @not be said to have prosecuted it , in
respect of her Person , but of some other thing <paren> forsooth the
Crown of <font> England <$$font> <$$paren> which he hoped to attain
under her pretended Title . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.559

You never saw her , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.560

you could not then be carried with Love of her Person ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.561

you conceiv'd ill Opinion of her , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.562

so could you not be led with Love of her Condition ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.563

the Fame of good Qualities and virtuous Conditions you never heard much
of , except it were by herself , or the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font>
, or some of the Ministers ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.564

her Kingdom of <font> Scotland <$$font> you esteemed not , both because
she had it not in Possession , but it was in Possession of her Son , by
her own Dimisse ratify'd by Parliament , and for that it was not so good
value as your own Possessions were . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.565

To what end then pursued you the Marriage ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.566

To what end then pursued you the Marriage ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.567

To no other End surely , but to advance and maintain the false and
pretended Title to the present Possession of the Crown of <font> England
<$$font> ; and for the attaining thereof , to practise the Deprivation ,
Death and Destruction of the Queen's Majesty .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.568

If further , we shall plainly prove that after your departing from the
Court , you meant not only to prosecute the Marriage , but also to
prosecute it with Force , against the Queen in her own Realm ; then it
must needs be with intent of her Majesty's Deprivation and Destruction ,
and so High-Treason , within compass of the Statute of 25 of <font>
Edward <$$font> the Third . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.569

For whoso shall take upon him to prosecute and maintain a Title to the
Crown by force against the Queen , and within her own Realm , must needs
make account that the Queen must and will resist that Force ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.570

if then that Force may overcome the Prince's Force , what is the
likelihood then to ensue ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.571

There must needs follow Deprivation of the Queen , and thereupon her
Death and Destruction ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.572

for the Jealousy of an Usurper by Force , can in no wise suffer a
rightful Prince to live . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.573

Now to prove your Intention to pursue the Marriage with Force against
the Queen : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.574

In your Journey towards <font> London <$$font> , you entered into
Conference and Device between another and you , for taking the <font>
Tower <$$font> of <font> London <$$font> , with all the Queen's Ordnance
, Ammunition and Treasure therein , and to have kept the <font> Tower
<$$font> by Force against the Queen , and so to have brought the
Marriage to pass by Force , whether the Queen would or no .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.575

But it took not Effect : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.576

for the Queen's Majesty having understanding thereof before , provided
for enforcing the Place with new Supply ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.577

and Mr. <font> Pelham <$$font> , Lieutenant of the Ordnance , was , for
that purpose , put in with sufficient Power .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.578

Afterward being at your own House , the <font> Charter-House <$$font> ,
the Queen's Majesty understanding of these Attempts , sent for you ;
whereunto you make a feigned Excuse of doubt of Sickness , and that you
had taken Physick so that for four or five Days you could not journey ;
promising after those four or five Days , to wait on her Majesty ,
according to your Duty . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.579

And immediately after this Excuse sent , without tarrying four or five
Days , or any more Days , the same Night , you by and by stole away into
<font> Norfolk <$$font> , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.580

and there intended to have levied Force ; but that the Queen's Majesty
and her Council suspecting your Purpose , had secretly sent into those
Parts before , and taken Order for impeaching of your Intention .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.581

If this then be prov'd true , That you still prosecuted the Marriage ,
without liking of her Person , without Estimation of her Possessions ,
with only respect to her false Title to the Crown of <font> England
<$$font> , and with Force ; and sithence it can@ @not be pursued with
Force against the Queen , nor Force levied against her Majesty , without
Purpose to suppress her Majesty's Force , and to depose her from her
Crown and Dignity ; and he that so seeketh to depose her must needs be
thought that he will not suffer her to live : All these Matters
consider'd , the seeking of this Marriage in this Form , must needs be
High-Treason , within Compass of the Statue of 25 of <font> Edward
<$$font> the Third . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.582

Here was produced the Duke's own Letter , and the other Commissioners ,
from <font> York <$$font> to the Queen's Majesty ; wherein is signified
the great Abomination of the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , appearing
in her own Letters , and the Certainty of the Truth of those Letters ,
both by offer of Oath of those that exhibited them , and by Discourses
of some Matters there ; which could not be written but by herself ,
being known to none other . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.583

The Commissioners Letter is as followeth . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.584

' Afterwards they shew'd unto us an horrible and long letter of her own
Hand <paren> as they say <$$paren> containing foul Matter , and
abominable to be either thought of , or to be written by a Princess ,
with divers fond Ballads of her own Hand ; which Letters , Ballads , and
other Writings before specify'd , were closed in a little Coffer of
Silver and gilt , heretofore given to her by <font> Bothwell <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.585

The said Letters and Ballads did discover such inordinate and filthy
Love , between her and <font> Bothwell <$$font> , her Loathsomeness and
Abhorring of her Husband that was murdered , and the Conspiracy of his
Death , in such sort as every good and godly Man can@ @not but detest
and abhor the same . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.586

And those Men here do constantly affirm the said Letters and other
Writings , which they produce of her own Hand , to be her own Hand
indeed , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,97.587

and do offer to swear and to take their Oath thereupon ; as indeed the
Matter contain'd in them being <P_1,98> such as could hardly be invented
or devis'd by any other than by herself ; for that the Discourse of some
things , which were unknown to any other than to herself and <font>
Bothwell <$$font> , doth the rather persuade us to believe that they be
indeed of her own Hand-writing . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.588

And as it is hard to counterfeit so many and so long Letters ; so the
Matters of them , and the Manner how these Men came by them is such , as
it seemeth that God , in whose sight the Murder and Blood of the
Innocent is abonimable , would not permit the same to be hid or
conceal'd . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.589

In a Paper herein inclos'd , we have noted to your Majesty the chief and
principal Points of their Letters , written <paren> as they say
<$$paren> with her own Hand , to the Intent it may please your Majesty
to consider of them , and so to judge whether the same be sufficient to
convince her of the detestable Crime of the Murder of her Husband ;
which in our Opinion and Consciences , if the said Letters be written
with her own Hand <paren> as we believe they be <$$paren> is very hard
to be avoided . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.590

<font> Duke . <$$font> This maketh for me ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.591

for this proveth that I so much misliking her , and signifying by my
Letter so much against her , dealt not on that side when I was at <font>
York <$$font> , where this Letter was written .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.592

<font> Serj. <$$font> There were others join'd with you in the Letter ,
so that you could not otherwise write ; however you otherwise dealt :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.593

but this maketh much against you , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.594

for it prov'd you had an evil Opinion of her , and so could not seek the
Marriage in respect of her Person , but only in respect of her false
Title ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.595

and that not to the Kingdom of <font> Scotland <$$font> , which she had
not , and which you despis'd , but to the Crown of <font> England
<$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.596

Now you shall , to the same end , hear your own Report against her to
<font> Bannister <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.597

<font> Duke . <$$font> <font> Bannister <$$font> was shrewdly cramp'd
when he told that Tale . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.598

I beseech you let me have him brought Face to Face .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.599

<font> Serj. <$$font> No more than you were .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.600

Then was read <font> Bannister <$$font> 's Confession , in <font>
October <$$font> , 12 <font> Eliz. <$$font>
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.601

This sheweth that you had an evil Opinion of her , and so no Affection
to the Person ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.602

therefore your seeking of that Marriage was for another Respect ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.603

and therefore <font> Ledington <$$font> , <font> Rosse <$$font> , and
you practis'd the Matter at <font> York <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.604

<font> Duke . <$$font> They broke it to me .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.605

What is this to me ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.606

Did I consent ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.607

<font> Serj. <$$font> You consented . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.608

<font> Duke . <$$font> No . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.609

<font> Serj. <$$font> They say plainly , that you practis'd to withdraw
the things that might charge her . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.610

<font> Wilbraham . <$$font> You have said , that the Bishop of <font>
Rosse <$$font> hath accus'd you of Malice ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.611

but you answer nothing to that which the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font>
wrote to his Mistress , the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , in Secrecy ,
wherein could be no Malice . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.612

<font> Duke . <$$font> <font> Ledington <$$font> broke it to me ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.613

and the Earl <font> Murray <$$font> broke it to me .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.614

I pray you , let them be brought face to face to me :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.615

I have often requir'd THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.616

and the Law I trust is so . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.617

<font> Serj. <$$font> The Law was so for a time in some Cases of
Treason : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.618

but , since , the Law hath been found too hard and dangerous for the
Prince , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.619

and it hath been repeal'd . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.620

You intended to have proceeded with the Marriage by Force ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.621

and for proof thereof , you have heard of the Device for taking of the
<font> Tower <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.622

Now to prove further your Purpose to pursue your Enterprize by Force ,
let be read the Confession of the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> to the
second Article . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.623

<font> The Bishop of <$$font> Rosse <font> 's Confession the <$$font>
<font> 3_d {COM:font_change_only_around_"d"} of <$$font> November , 1571
. THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.624

<font> To the second Article <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.625

The Duke being after conferr'd with by the Bishop of <font> Rosse
<$$font> , from his Mistress , to know what he would do in the Matter of
the Marriage , if the Queen would not assent , said , he knew she would
, tho' not at the first ; because most of the Council and Noblemen
thought it meet ; and that he had known the Minds of most of the
Noblemen . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.626

And after , when the Queen was offended with him coming from <font>
Southampton <$$font> , he told the Bishop he would depart into his own
Country , and so was resolv'd , by the Earls of <font> Arundel <$$font>
and <font> Pembroke <$$font> , who would do the like ; and there would
take purpose , by the Advice of his Countrymen and Friends , and do that
was likeliest for the Advancement of the Cause .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.627

The Bishop said , the Queen's Majesty would by Force fetch him out of
his Country . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.628

He answer'd ; That no Nobleman in <font> England <$$font> would accept
that Charge at her Commandment ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.629

for he knew their Minds , specially for those in the <font> North
<$$font> , who would assist . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.630

And if that he might once have that open Quarrel against her , that she
would first pursue him , he would have Friends enough to assist him
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.631

and that the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen should be safely enough
provided for ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.632

for that was the principle Mark he shot at , and would do what he could
to have her in his hands . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.633

And the Earls of <font> Arundel <$$font> and <font> Pembroke <$$font>
had promised to do as he did ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.634

and they in the <font> North <$$font> had promis'd the like .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.635

<font> Item <$$font> , <font> Liggons <$$font> told the Bishop , that
the Duke was resolv'd to go thro' with the Matter by Force , if the
Queen would not assent to it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.636

At this time common Messages past between the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen and the Duke , and them of the <font> North <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.637

<font> Duke . <$$font> All is false , saving that the Bishop of <font>
Rosse <$$font> once spake with me ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.638

and then understanding him to be a suspected Man , I desir'd him to
forbear to come to me ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.639

nevertheless , by his great Earnestness and Importunity , that I would
but once admit him to come to me , at length he came ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.640

and then he mov'd me for certain Money of the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen , about 2000 <font> l. <$$font> remaining in my keeping :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.641

One Letter he brought me , and no more Letters , 'till after my first
Trouble . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.642

As for my going into <font> Norfolk <$$font> , I can bring good Witness
, that I meant not to go into <font> Norfolk <$$font> , four Hours
before I went , and that I spake not with him in two days before .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.643

It is of good ground that I have prayed to have the Bishop of <font>
Rosse <$$font> brought to me in private Examination face to face ,
whereby I might have put him in remembrance of truth ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.644

but I have not had him face to face , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.645

nor have been suffer'd to bring forth Witnesses , Proofs , and Arguments
, as might have made for my Purgation . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.646

As for sending of Letters to my Lord of <font> Northumberland <$$font> ,
or my Brother of <font> Westmoreland <$$font> , all is false ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.647

I never received Letters from them in all my time .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.648

If ever I sent to them , or receiv'd from them any Letters in three
Quarters of a Year before , let me never be credited .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,98.649

<P_1,99>

<font> Serj. <$$font> You shall have Proofs that the Bishop of <font>
Rosse <$$font> hath said it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.651

You stand much upon your own Credit : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.652

Now therefore to your Credit , I will say
{COM:no_period;_parse_best_i_can_do} somewhat
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.653

against your Oath specially taken , when you were appointed Commission
for the Matter at <font> York <$$font> ; and against your Oath of a
Counsellor to the Queen's Majesty , you dealt indirectly and partially ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.654

you deceived the Queen's Majesty's Trust , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.655

and disclosed her Secrets . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.656

<font> Duke . <$$font> I deny it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.657

<font> Serj. <$$font> It is well proved that at <font> Hampton-Court
<$$font> , being examined of the Matter by the Queen's Majesty , you
dissembled it : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.658

Being examined of Money lent by you to the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen
, you denied it : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.659

Being charged upon your Allegiance , you promised not to proceed further
in the Matter . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.660

Notwithstanding that express Commandment of her Majesty ; yet , against
your Duty , against your Promise and Faith , you still proceeded .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.661

<font> Duke . <$$font> I confess this was mine Error ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.662

but I have already made humble Petition to my Peers , not to confound my
Faults together , nor to mingle my inferior Offences with this great
Cause . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.663

<font> Serj. <$$font> Sithence the Commandment given to you at
Titchfield , not to proceed in Dealing with the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen in any wise , you have continually dealt with her :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.664

You have lent her Money ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.665

you have maintained <font> Liggons <$$font> , your Man and your
Solicitor , continually to advertise you , from the Bishop of <font>
Glasgow <$$font> , and the Pope's Nuncio ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.666

and you have advertised him from hence . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.667

He hath had Money of you , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.668

and you have received Letters from him four times in Coffers .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.669

<font> Duke . <$$font> <font> Liggons <$$font> is not my Sollicitor .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.670

<font> Serj. <$$font> He is your Sollicitor ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.671

and so your self have expounded him ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.672

for where the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , in her Letters , speaketh
of your Sollicitor , being asked whom she meant thereby , you have
answered , <font> Liggons . <$$font> THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.673

<font> Duke . <$$font> At the first indeed she so called him ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.674

but Sollicitor is no Name of use . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.675

He hath not been so since my first Trouble ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.676

and so for her calling , it is no matter , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.677

she once called me <font> Legista . <$$font>
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.678

<font> Serj. <$$font> He is your Sollicitor ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.679

for she so taketh him , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.680

and your self do so expound it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.681

Then was read his own Confession , of Money lent 2000 <font> l.
<$$font> and received , <font> &c. <$$font>
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.682

The Duke confessed this receiving and lending of Money .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.683

Then was read the Bishop of <font> Rosse <$$font> 's Confession ,
concerning Money sent by <font> Barthwick <$$font> , and of Money
delivered to <font> Francis Bishop <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.684

<font> Duke . <$$font> This I deny not . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.685

<font> Serj. <$$font> <font> Francis Bishop <$$font> was a Traitor .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.686

<font> Duke . <$$font> I knew him not . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.687

<font> Serj. <$$font> Now for the mater of taking the <font> Tower .
<$$font> THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.688

<font> Duke . <$$font> I deny it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.689

<font> Serj. <$$font> Was it not mentioned unto you in the way , when
you came from <font> Titchfield <$$font> , by one that came to you , and
moved you a Device between you and another , for taking the <font> Tower
? <$$font> THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.690

<font> Duke . <$$font> I have confessed that such a Motion was made to
me , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.691

but I never assented to it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.692

<font> Serj. <$$font> You concealed it : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.693

And to what end should you have taken the <font> Tower <$$font> , but to
have kept it against the Queen by Force ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.694

But you say you like not the Motion , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.695

you asked advice of it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.696

<font> Duke . <$$font> Indeed I told one of it :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.697

<font> Owen <$$font> met me by the way from <font> Titchfield <$$font> ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.698

and told me how we were all in danger , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.699

and said , That some of our Friends thought it was best to take the
<font> Tower <$$font> . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.700

I refused to do it , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.701

and said , Take the <font> Tower ! <$$font>
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.702

that were a proper Device indeed ! THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.703

And thence I went to my Lord of <font> Pembroke <$$font> 's ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.704

and there din'd ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.705

and then I told my Lord of <font> Pembroke <$$font> of that Device ;
whereunto he answered , We are well , and safe enough :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.706

Let them that be faulty take the <font> Tower <$$font> , if they will .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.707

And to what end should I have taken the <font> Tower ? <$$font>
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.708

<font> Serj. <$$font> To maintain by Force that which you had practised
against the Queen's Majesty's Commandment , which was the Marriage with
the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.709

<font> Duke . <$$font> I had not then dealt with it .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.710

<font> Serj. <$$font> It is well proved that you had ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.711

and afterward , at your House at <font> Charter-House <$$font> , you
receiv'd Letters , Messages , and Tokens from the <font> Scotish
<$$font> Queen ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.712

you received from her a Brooch , with a Hand cutting down a Vine , and
this Poesy upon it , <font> Virescit vulnere Virtus <$$font> .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.713

But my Lord , do green Vines grow when they be cut ?
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.714

And a green Vine it was . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.715

<font> Wilbraham <$$font> . My Lord , you still say you dealt not at
this time , or that time , against her Majesty's Commandment ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.716

I pray you at what time , since her Majesty's Commandment upon your
Allegiance , did you forbear to deal with the <font> Scotish <$$font>
Queen ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.717

<font> Serj. <$$font> Beside this you have given advice as a Counsellor
to the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen , against the Queen's Majesty :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.718

Namely , when in Treaty between the Queen's Majesty and her , there were
three Articles propounded on the Queen's Majesty's part ; the one for
the Delivery of her Son into the Queen's Majesty's Custody ; the other
for delivering the <font> English <$$font> Rebels that were fled into
<font> Scotland <$$font> ; the third for delivering certain Holds in
<font> Scotland <$$font> into <font> English <$$font> Men's Possession :
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.719

He gave Advice herein as a Counsellor , against the Queen his Sovereign
Lady . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.720

The Articles were expressly sent to the Duke to have his Advice , before
that the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen would resolve of any Answer ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.721

and she respited her Answer to be made according to his Direction .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.722

He gave Advice , that she should in no wise deliver her Son ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.723

for it was against her own Safety , not knowing whether she delivered
him into her Friends hands or no . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.724

As for the Rebels , she should in no wise deliver them ,
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.725

for it were against her Honour : THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.726

And as for the Holds , she should not deliver any ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.727

for it were against the Safety of her Friends in <font> Scotland .
<$$font> THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.728

<font> Duke . <$$font> For advising not to deliver the Rebels , I deny
that ever I gave any such Advice . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.729

As for Delivery of her Son , I advised her not otherwise but thus , that
I wished her to bestow him there , where she might have sure Friends .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.730

<font> Serj. <$$font> Thus , contrary to your Oath , Allegiance , and
Fidelity , and against the Credit that you would fain be thought of ,
you became , by your own Confession , a Counsellor to a foreign Prince
against your own Sovereign Lady . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.731

<font> Burleigh . <$$font> My Lord , did you ever desire to have any
Proofs or Witnesses produced for your part , to prove any thing that
might make for you ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.732

And were you denied ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.733

<font> Duke . <$$font> I have divers times prayed , that if any thing
were denied to be true which I said , I might be driven to my Proof of
it . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,99.734

<P_1,100>

<font> Burleigh <$$font> . I ask it , because I have not heard it
reported to her Majesty that you made any such Request , to have any
special Witnesses examined , or Proofs heard , on your part .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.736

Here was produc'd and read the Confession of <font> Hickford <$$font> to
the 3d Article . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.737

<font> Duke <$$font> . I advised her , touching her Son , that she
should first be well assur'd that he should be bestow'd among her
Friends . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.738

For her Castles , I advised her , that she should in any wise take heed
, that they might not after come into the hands of her Enemies ;
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.739

for so if she deliver'd <font> Edinburgh-Castle <$$font> , she should
not be safe in <font> Holyrood-House . <$$font>
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.740

<font> Serj. <$$font> How standeth this with the Duty and Oath of a
Counsellor , to give Advice to a foreign Prince against the Queen's
Majesty ? THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.741

<font> Duke . <$$font> I excuse it not , THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.742

herein I confess my Error ; THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.743

I beseech you call not these my inferiour Faults , which I have
confess'd , among the greater wherewith I am charg'd .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.744

<font> Serj. <$$font> Thus appeareth how he hath given Advice against
the Queen to the <font> Scotish <$$font> Queen .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.745

Now it shall be further prov'd unto you , that where the <font> Scotish
<$$font> Queen is here in Custody as the Queen's Prisoner , he hath also
been privy to Devices for conveying her away .
THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.746

Here was produc'd the Confession of <font> Barker <$$font> , <font>
October <$$font> 5 . 1571 . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.747

Article . THOWARD2-1571-E2-P1,1,100.748

