<BEGIN_thoward-1517-e1-p1>

<P_114,H>

<heading:edcomment:SECOND_DUKE_OF_NORFOLK_TO_THE_TENTH_LORD_CLIFFORD,_20_JULY>

{COM:c._1517_to_1520}

To my lord and cousin my lord Clifford . THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.5

My lord and cousin in my most herty wise I commend me unto yow .
THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.6

And so it is that your servaunt this bearer hath right well and
diligently solicited your causes in these partes ,
THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.7

howbeyt there hath been noe small delayes of hearing as@ @well of your
causes as of all others by reason of the ambassadors and other great
matters concerninge outward partes . THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.8

And in that I may doe for the furtherance of your said causes at any
tyme , I shall be glad to doe noe less for you there in then I would doe
for myne owne . THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.9

And allwayes as nigh as ye cann you shall have myne advyce to leave
pursuytes and busynes , and especially in these parts
THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.10

for they be chargeable and very costly besides longe delayes .
THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.11

And over this my lord , as touchinge your late servaunt Tempeste , noe
doubte there is , but he hath done you right good service about your
busynes in these partes ; for the which it is thought here , that ye
ought better to accept and take the same then hitherto ye have done ,
and to looke unto him therefore as it becometh a man of your honour to
doe , and to doe for him what yee may reasonably in recompence of the
same ; THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.12

for I knowe right well he hath well deserved largely to have your favour
. THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.13

And of such news as be occurrance in these partes , I have declared my
mynde unto your said servaunt THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.14

and partly he hath seene and heard himselfe to whome as@ @well therein
as in all other your causes I pray you give credence .
THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.15

And thus the Holye Trinitye have you in his safeguard .
THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.16

Written at Lambeth the 20th day of Julye . THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.17

Your loving cousin , T. Norffolke . THOWARD-1517-E1-P1,114,H.18

