<BEGIN_tillots-b-1679-e3-p1>

<P_433>

<heading>

OF THE TRYALL OF THE SPIRITS TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.4

<$$heading>

{COM:preached_at_white-hall,_on_4_april_1679}

<heading>

<font> 1 John <$$font> IV. 1. TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.8

<font> Beloved , believe not every spirit , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.9

but try the spirits whether they are of God ; because many false
Prophets are gone out into the World . <$$font>
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.10

<$$heading>

This caution and counsel was given upon occasion of the false Prophets
and Teachers that were risen up in the beginning of the <font> Christian
<$$font> Church , who endeavoured to seduce men from the true Doctrine
of the Gospel delivered by the Apostles of our Lord and Saviour .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.12

And these teaching contrary things , could not both be from God ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.13

and therefore St. <font> John <$$font> calls upon Christians to examine
the Doctrines and Pretences of those new Teachers , whether they were
from God or not . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.14

<font> Believe not every Spirit ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.15

that is <$$font> , not every one that takes upon him to be inspired and
to be a Teacher come from God : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.16

<font> But try the Spirits ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.17

that is <$$font> , examine those that make this pretence , whether it be
real or not ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.18

and examine the Doctrines which they bring , because there are many
Impostors abroad in the World . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.19

This is the plain sense of the Words : In which there are contained
these <font> four <$$font> Propositions . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.20

First , <font> That men may , and often do , falsly pretend to
Inspiration <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.21

And this is the reason upon which the Apostle grounds this Exhortation :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.22

<font> Because many false Prophets are gone out into the world <$$font>
, therefore we should try who are true , and who are false .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.23

Secondly , <font> We are not to believe every one that pretends to be
inspired , and to teach a Divine Doctrine <$$font> :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.24

This follows upon the former ; because men may falsly pretend to
Inspiration , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.25

therefore we are not to believe every one that makes this pretence .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.26

For any man that hath but confidence enough , and conscience little
enough , may pretend to come from God . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,433.27

And if we admit all pretences <P_434> of this kind , we lie at the mercy
of every crafty and confident man to be led by him into what delusions
he pleaseth . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.28

Thirdly , <font> Neither are we to reject all that pretend to come from
God <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.29

This is sufficiently implied in the <font> Text <$$font> ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.30

for when the <font> Apostle <$$font> says <font> believe not every
Spirit <$$font> , he supposeth we are to believe some ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.31

and when he saith <font> try the Spirits whether they be of God <$$font>
, he supposeth some to be of God , and that those which are so are to be
believed . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.32

These <font> three <$$font> Observations are so plain that I need only
to name them , to make way for the <font> Fourth <$$font> , Which I
principally designed to insist upon from these Words .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.33

And that is this , <font> That there is some way to discern mere
pretenders to Inspiration , from those who are truly and Divinely
inspired : <$$font> TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.34

And this is necessarily implied in the <font> Apostles <$$font> bidding
us to <font> try the Spirits whether they are of God <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.35

For it were in vain to make any trial , if there be no way to discern
between pretended and real Inspirations . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.36

Now the handling of this will give occasion to <font> two <$$font> very
material Enquiries , and useful to be resolved .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.37

I . <font> How we may discern between true and counterfeit Doctrines
<$$font> : those which really are from God , and those which only
pretend to be so ? TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.38

II . <font> To whom this judgment of discerning doth appertain ?
<$$font> TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.39

I . <font> How we may discern between true and counterfeit Doctrines
and Revelations <$$font> ? TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.40

for the clearing of this I shall lay down these following Propositions .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.41

1 . <font> That Reason is the faculty whereby Revelations are to be
discerned <$$font> ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.42

or to use the phrase in the text , it is that whereby we are to judge
what <font> Spirits are of God , and what not <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.43

For all Revelation from God supposeth us to be men , and to be indued
with Reason ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.44

and therefore it does not create new Faculties in us ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.45

but propounds new Objects to that Faculty which was in us before .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.46

Whatever Doctrines God reveals to men are propounded to their
Understandings , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.47

and by this Faculty we are to examine all Doctrines which pretend to be
from God , and upon examination to judge whether there be reason to
receive them as Divine , or to reject them as Impostures .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.48

2 . <font> All supernatural Revelation supposeth the truth of the
Principles of Natural Religion . <$$font> TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,434.49

We must first be assured that <P_435> there is a God , before we can
know that he hath made any Revelation of himself :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.50

and we must know that his Words are true , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.51

otherwise there were no sufficient reason to believe the Revelations
which he makes to us : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.52

and we must believe his Authority over us , and that he will reward our
obedience to his Laws , and punish our breach of them ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.53

otherwise there would neither be sufficient obligation nor encouragement
to Obedience . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.54

These and many other things are supposed to be true , and naturally
known to us , antecedently to all supernatural Revelation ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.55

otherwise the Revelations of God would signifie nothing to us , nor be
of any force with us . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.56

3 . <font> All Reasonings about Divine Revelations must necessarily be
governed by the Principles of Natural Religion :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.57

that is , <$$font> by those apprehensions which men naturally have of
the Divine perfections , and by the clear Notions of good and evil which
are imprinted upon our Natures . Because we have no other way to judg
what is worthy of God , and credible to be revealed by him , and what
not , but by the natural notions which we have of God and of his
essential perfections : which , because we know him to be immutable , we
have reason to believe he will never contradict .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.58

And by these Principles likewise , we are to interpret what God hath
revealed ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.59

and when any doubt ariseth concerning the meaning of any divine
Revelation <paren> as that of the Holy Scriptures <$$paren> we are to
govern our selves in the interpretation of it by what is most agreeable
to those natural Notions which we have of God ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.60

and we have all the reason in the World to reject that sense which is
contrary thereto . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.61

For instance , when God is represented in Scripture as having a humane
shape , eyes , ears and hands , the Notions which men naturally have of
the Divine Nature and Perfections do sufficiently direct us to interpret
these expressions in a sense worthy of God , and agreeable to his
Perfection : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.62

And therefore it is reasonable to understand them as rather spoken to
our capacity , and in a Figure , than to be literally intended .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.63

And this will proportionably hold in many other cases .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.64

4 . <font> Nothing ought to be received as a Revelation from God which
plainly contradicts the Principles of Natural Religion , or overthrows
the certainty of them . <$$font> TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,435.65

For instance , it were in vain to pretend a Revelation from God , <font>
That there is no God <$$font> , because <P_436> this is a contradiction
in terms . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.66

So likewise to pretend a command from God , <font> That we are to hate
and despise him <$$font> ; because it is not credible that God should
require any thing of Reasonable Creatures so unsuitable to their Natures
, and to their Obligations to him ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.67

Besides that such a Law as this does tacitly involve a contradiction ;
because upon such a supposition , to despise God would be to obey him ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.68

and yet to obey him is certainly to honour him . So that in this case
to honour God , and to despise him , would be the same thing , and equal
contempts of him . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.69

In like manner it would be vain to pretend any Revelation from God ,
<font> That there is no life after this , nor rewards and punishments in
another World : <$$font> because this is contrary to those natural
apprehensions which have generally possest mankind , and would take away
the main force and sanction of the divine Laws .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.70

The like may be said concerning any pretended Revelation from God ,
which evidently contradicts those natural Notions which men have of good
and evil ; as , <font> That God should command , or allow Sedition and
Rebellion , Perfideousness and Perjury <$$font> ; because the practice
of these would be apparently destructive of the peace and happiness of
Mankind , and would naturally bring confusion into the World :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.71

But <font> God is not the God of Confusion , but of Order <$$font> ,
which St. <font> Paul <$$font> appeals to as a Principle naturally
known . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.72

Upon the same account nothing ought to be entertained as a Divine
Revelation <font> which overthrows the certainty of the Principles of
natural Religion <$$font> ; because that would take away the certainty
of Divine Revelation it self , which supposeth the truth of those
Principles . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.73

For instance , whoever pretends any Revelation <font> that brings the
Providence of God into question , <$$font> does by that very thing make
such a Revelation questionable . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.74

For if God take no care of the World , have no concernment for humane
affairs , why should we believe that he makes any Revelation of his Will
to men ? TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.75

And by this Principle <font> Moses <$$font> will have false Prophets to
be tried : <font> Deut. <$$font> 13. 1. TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.76

<font> If there arise among you a Prophet , and giveth thee a sign or
wonder , and the sign or the wonder come to pass whereof he spake unto
thee , saying , Let us go after other Gods , and let us serve them ;
thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that Prophet <$$font> :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,436.77

And he gives the reason of this , <P_437> <font> ver. <$$font> 5.
<font> Because he hath spoken unto you to turn you away from the Lord
your God , which brought you out of the Land of Egypt <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.78

Here is a case wherein a false Prophet is supposed to work a true
Miracle to give credit to his Doctrine <paren> which in other cases the
Scripture makes the sign of a true Prophet <$$paren>
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.79

but yet in this case he is to be rejected as an Impostor : Because the
Doctrine he teacheth would draw men off from the worship of the true God
who is naturally known , and had manifested himself to the people of
<font> Israel <$$font> in so miraculous a manner , by bringing them out
of the Land of <font> Egypt <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.80

So that a Miracle is not enough to give credit to a Prophet who teacheth
any thing contrary to that natural Notion which men have , <font> That
there is but one God , who only ought to be worshipped . <$$font>
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.81

5 . <font> Nothing ought to be received as a Divine Doctrine and
Revelation , without good evidence that it is so :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.82

that is , <$$font> without some Argument sufficient to satisfie a
prudent and considerate man . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.83

Now <paren> supposing there be nothing in the matter of the Revelation
that is evidently contrary to the Principles of Natural Religion , nor
to any former Revelation which hath already received a greater and more
solemn attestation from God <$$paren> Miracles are owned by all Mankind
to be a sufficient Testimony to any Person , or Doctrine , that are from
God . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.84

This was the Testimony which God gave to <font> Moses <$$font> to
satisfie the people of <font> Israel <$$font> that he had sent him ;
<font> Exod. <$$font> 4. 1 , 5 . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.85

<font> Moses said , They will not believe me , nor hearken unto my voice
: TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.86

for they will say , The Lord hath not appeared unto thee . <$$font>
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.87

Upon this God endues him with a power of Miracles , to be an evidence to
them , <font> That they may believe that the God of their Fathers ,
Abraham , Isaac and Jacob , hath appeared unto thee <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.88

And all along in the <font> Old Testament <$$font> , when God sent his
Prophets to make a new Revelation , or upon any strange and
extraordinary message , he always gave credit to them by some Sign or
Wonder which they foretold or wrought . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.89

And when he sent his <font> Son <$$font> into the World , he gave
Testimony to him by innumerable great and unquestionable Miracles , more
and greater than <font> Moses <$$font> and all the Prophets had wrought
. TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.90

And there was great reason for this : because our Saviour came not only
to publish a new Religion to the World , but to put an end to that
Religion which God had instituted before . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,437.91

And now that the Gospel hath <P_438> had the confirmation of such
Miracles as never were wrought upon any other occasion , no Evidence
inferiour to this can in reason controul this Revelation , or give
credit to any thing contrary to it . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.92

And therefore though the false Prophets and Antichrists , foretold by
our Saviour , did really work Miracles , yet they were so inconsiderable
in comparison of our Saviour's , that they deserve no credit in
opposition to that Revelation which had so clear a Testimony given to it
from Heaven by Miracles , besides all other concurring Arguments to
confirm it . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.93

6 . And <font> Lastly , No Argument is sufficient to prove a Doctrine
or Revelation to be from God , which is not clearer and stronger than
the Difficulties and Objections against it <$$font> : Because all assent
is grounded upon Evidence , and the strongest and clearest evidence
always carries it : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.94

But where the evidence is equal on both sides , that can produce nothing
but a suspense and doubt in the mind whether the thing be true or not .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.95

If <font> Moses <$$font> had not confuted <font> Pharaoh <$$font> 's
Magicians by working Miracles which they could not work , they might
reasonably have disputed it with him who had been the true Prophet :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.96

But when he did works plainly above the power of their Magick and the
Devil to do , then they submitted TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.97

and acknowledged that <font> there was the Finger of God <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.98

So likewise , though a person work a Miracle <paren> which ordinarily is
a good evidence that he is sent by God <$$paren> yet if the Doctrine he
brings be plainly contrary to those natural Notions which we have of God
, this is a better objection against the truth of this Doctrine than the
other is a proof of it ; as is plain in the case which <font> Moses
<$$font> puts , <font> Deut. <$$font> 13. which I mentioned before .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.99

Upon the same account no man can reasonably believe the Doctrine of
<font> Transubstantiation <$$font> to be revealed by God ; because every
man hath as great evidence that Transubstantiation is false , as any man
can pretend to have that God hath revealed any such thing .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.100

Suppose Transubstantiation to be part of the Christian Doctrine ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.101

it must have the same confirmation with the whole ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.102

and that is <font> Miracles <$$font> : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.103

But of all Doctrines in the world it is peculiarly incapable of being
proved by a Miracle . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.104

For if a Miracle were wrought for the proof of it , the very same
assurance which a man hath of the truth of the Miracle , he hath of the
falshood of the Doctrine , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.105

<font> that is <$$font> , the clear evidence of his senses for both .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,438.106

For <P_439> that there is a Miracle wrought to prove , <font> that what
he sees in the Sacrament is not bread but the body of Christ <$$font> ,
he hath onely the evidence of his senses ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,439.107

and he hath the very same evidence to prove , <font> that what he sees
in the Sacrament is not the body of Christ , but bread <$$font> . So
that here ariseth a new controversie , whether a man should believe his
senses giving testimony against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation , or
bearing testimony to the Miracle which is wrought to confirm that
Doctrine : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,439.108

For there is just the same evidence against the truth of the Doctrine ,
which there is for the truth of the Miracle . So that the Argument for
Transubstantiation , and the Objection against it , do just balance one
another ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,439.109

and where the weights in Both Scales are equal , it is impossible that
the one should weigh down the other : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,439.110

and consequently Transubstantiation is not to be proved by a Miracle ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,439.111

for that would be , <font> to prove to a man by something that he sees ,
that he does not see what he sees <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,439.112

And thus I have endeavoured , as briefly and clearly as I could , to
give satisfaction to the <font> first <$$font> Enquiry I propounded ,
<font> viz. <$$font> How we may discern between true and counterfeit
Revelations and Doctrines : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,439.113

I proceed now to the II. <font> To whom this judgement of Discerning
does appertain . <$$font> Whether to Christians in general , or to some
particular Person or Persons , authorised by God to judge for the rest
of mankind , by whose judgment all men are concluded and bound up .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,439.114

And this is an enquiry of no small Importance ; because it is one of the
most fundamental Points in difference between Us and the Church of
<font> Rome <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,439.115

And however in many particular Controversies , as concerning <font>
Transubstantiation , the Communion in one kind , the service of God in
an unknown Tongue <$$font> ; the business of <font> Indulgences <$$font>
, the <font> Invocation of Saints , the <font> Worship of Images
<$$font> , they are not able to offer any thing that is fit to move a
reasonable and considerate man ; yet in this Controversie , concerning
the Judge of Controversies , they are not destitute of some specious
appearance of Reason which deserves to be weighed and considered .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,439.116

Therefore that we may examine this matter to the bottom , I shall do
these <font> three <$$font> things . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,439.117

1 . Lay down some Cautions and Limitations whereby we may understand
how far the generality of Christians are allowed to <P_440> judge in
matters of Religion . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.118

2 . I shall represent the grounds of this Principle .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.119

3 . Endeavour to satisfie the main Objection of our Adversaries against
it : And likewise to shew , that there is no such reason and necessity
for an universal infallible Judge as they pretend .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.120

1 . I shall lay down some Cautions and Limitations , by which we may
understand how far the generality of Christians are allowed to judge in
matters of Religion . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.121

<font> First <$$font> , Private Persons are onely to judge for
themselves , and not to impose their Judgment upon others , as if they
had any Authority over them . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.122

And this is reasonable , because if it were otherwise , a Man would
deprive others of that Liberty which he assumes to himself , and which
he can claim upon no other account , but because it belongs to others
equally with himself . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.123

<font> Secondly , <$$font> This liberty of judging is not so to be
understood as to take away the necessity and use of Guides and Teachers
in Religion . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.124

Nor can this be denied to be a reasonable limitation ; because the
knowledge of Revealed Religion is not a thing born with us , nor
ordinarily supernaturally infused into men ; but is to be learned as
other things are . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.125

And if it be to be learned , there must be some to teach and instruct
others : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.126

And they that will learn must be modest and humble ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.127

and in those things , of which they are no competent Judges , they must
give credit to their Teachers , and trust their skill :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.128

For instance , every unlearned man is to take it upon the credit of
those who are skilful , that the Scriptures are truly and faithfully
translated ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.129

and for the understanding of obscure Texts of Scripture , and more
difficult points in Religion , he is to rely upon those , whose proper
business and employment it is to apply themselves to the understanding
of these things . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.130

For in these cases every man is not capable of judging himself ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.131

and therefore he must necessarily trust others :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.132

And in all other things he ought to be modest ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.133

and unless it be in plain matters , which every man can judg of , he
ought rather to distrust himself than his Teacher .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.134

And this respect may be given to a Teacher without either supposing him
to be infallible , or making an absolute resignation of my judgment to
him . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,440.135

A man may be a very able Teacher <paren> suppose of the Mathematicks
<$$paren> and fit to have the respect which <P_441> is due to a Teacher
, tho he be not infallible in those Sciences :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.136

and because Infallibility is not necessary to such a Teacher , it is
neither necessary nor convenient that I should absolutely resign up my
Judgment to him . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.137

For though I have reason to credit him , within the compass of his Art ,
in things which I do not know , I am not therefore bound to believe him
in things plainly contrary to what I and all mankind do certainly know .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.138

For example , if upon pretence of his skill in Arithmetick , which I am
learning of him , he should tell me , <font> That twice two do not make
four , but five <$$font> ; though I believed him to be the best
Mathematician in the World , yet I can@ @not believe him in this thing :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.139

Nor is there reason I should ; because I did not come to learn this of
him , but knew as much of that before as he or any man else could tell
me . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.140

The case is the same in matters of Religion ; in which there are some
things so plain , and lie so level to all capacities , that every man is
almost equally judge of them : As I shall have occasion farther to shew
by and by . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.141

<font> Thirdly <$$font> , Neither does this liberty of judging exempt
men from a due submission and obedience to their Teachers and Governors
. TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.142

Every man is bound to obey the lawful Commands of his Governors ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.143

and what by publick consent and Authority is determined and established
, ought not to be gainsaid by private Persons , but upon very clear
evidence of the falshood or unlawfulness of it .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.144

And this is every mans duty , for the maintaining of Order , and out of
regard to the Peace and Unity of the Church ; which is not to be
violated upon every scruple and frivolous pretence :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.145

And when men are perverse and disobedient , Authority is Judg ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.146

and may restrain and punish them . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.147

<font> Fourthly <$$font> , Nor do I so far extend this Liberty of
judging in Religion , as to think every man fit to dispute the
Controversies of Religion . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.148

A great part of people are ignorant , and of so mean capacity as not to
be able to judge of the force of a very good Argument , much less of the
issue of a long Dispute ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.149

and such Persons ought not to engage in disputes of Religion ; but to
beg God's direction , and to rely upon their Teachers ; and above all to
live up to the plain dictates of natural Light , and the clear Commands
of God's Word , TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.150

and this will be their best security . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,441.151

<P_442>

And if the Providence of God have placed them under such Guides as do
seduce them into Error , their Ignorance is invincible ,
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,442.153

and God will not condemn them for it , so long as they sincerely
endeavour to do the will of God so far as they know it .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,442.154

And this being the case of many , especially in the Church of <font>
Rome <$$font> , where Ignorance is so industriously cherished , I have
so much charity as to hope well concerning many of them :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,442.155

And seeing <font> that <$$font> Church teacheth and enjoins the people
to worship Images , it is in some sense charitably done of them not to
let them know the Second Commandment , that they may not be guilty of
sinning against so plain a Law . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,442.156

Having premised these Cautions , I proceed in the II. Place , To
represent to you <font> the grounds of this Principle of our Religion
<$$font> , viz. <font> That we allow private persons to judge for
themselves in matters of Religion . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,442.157

First <$$font> , Because many things in Religion , especially those
which are most necessary to be believed and practised , are so plain ,
that every man of ordinary capacity , after competent instruction in
matters of Religion <paren> which is always to be supposed <$$paren> can
as well judge of them for himself , as any man , or company of men in
the world can judge for him . Because in these he hath a plain Rule to
go by , <font> Natural Light <$$font> and clear <font> Revelation of
Scripture <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,442.158

And this is no new Principle of the <font> Protestants <$$font> , but
most expresly owned by the Ancient <font> Fathers :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,442.159

Whatever things are necessary , are plain , <$$font> saith St. <font>
Chrysostom . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,442.160

All things are plainly contained in Scripture which concern faith and a
good life <$$font> , saith Saint <font> Austin <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,442.161

And nothing can be more reasonable , than that those things which are
plain to every man should be left to every man's judgment .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,442.162

For every man can judg of what is plain ; of evident Truth and Falshood
, Virtue and Vice , of Doctrines and Laws plainly delivered in Scripture
, if we believe any thing to be so , which is next to madness to deny .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,442.163

I will refer it to no mans judgment upon earth to determine for me ,
<font> Whether there be a God or not ? Whether <P_443> Murder and
Perjury be Sins ? <$$font> Whether it be not plain in Scripture , That
<font> Jesus Christ is the Son of God , <$$font> That <font> he became
man <$$font> , and <font> died for us <$$font> , and <font> rose again ?
<$$font> So that there is no need of a Judg in these cases .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.164

Nor can I possibly believe any man to be so absolutely infallible , as
not to call his infallibility into question , if he determines any thing
contrary to what is plain and evident to all mankind .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.165

For if he should determine <font> that there is no God , <$$font> or
<font> that he is not to be worshipped , <$$font> or <font> that he will
not punish and reward men , <$$font> or , which is the case that <font>
Bellarmine <$$font> puts , <font> that Virtue is Vice , and Vice Vertue
<$$font> ; he would hereby take away the very foundation of Religion ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.166

and how can I look upon him any longer as a Judg in Matters of Religion
, when there can be no such thing as Religion if he have judged and
determined right ? TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.167

<font> Secondly <$$font> , The Scripture plainly allows this liberty to
<font> particular <$$font> and <font> private <$$font> Persons to judg
for themselves . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.168

And for this I need go no farther than my <font> Text <$$font> , which
bids men <font> try the Spirits whether they be of God . <$$font>
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.169

I do not think this is spoken only to the Pope or a general Council ,
but to Christians in general : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.170

for to these the <font> Apostle <$$font> writes . Now if St. <font>
John <$$font> had believed that God had constituted an infallible judge
in his Church , to whose Sentence and Determination all Christians are
bound to submit , he ought in all reason to have referred Christians to
him for the trial of Spirits , and not have left it to every man's
private judgment to examine and determine these things .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.171

But it seems St. <font> Paul <$$font> was likewise of the same mind ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.172

and though he was guided by an infallible Spirit , yet he did not expect
that men should blindly submit to his Doctrine :
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.173

Nay , so far is he from that , that he commends the <font> Bereans
<$$font> for that very thing for which I dare say the Church of <font>
Rome <$$font> would have check'd them most severely , namely , for
<font> searching the Scriptures <$$font> to see <font> whether those
things <$$font> which the Apostles delivered <font> were <$$font> so or
not : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.174

This liberty St. <font> Paul <$$font> allowed ;
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.175

and though he was inspired by God , yet he treated those whom he taught
like men . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,443.176

And indeed , it were a hard case that a necessity of believing Divine
Revelations , and rejecting Impostures , should be <P_444> imposed upon
Christians ; and yet the liberty of judging , whether a Doctrine be from
God or not , should be taken away from them .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,444.177

<font> Thirdly <$$font> , Our Adversaries themselves are forced to grant
that which in effect is as much as we contend for .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,444.178

For though they deny a liberty of judging in <font> particular points
<$$font> of <font> Religion <$$font> , yet they are forced to grant men
a liberty of judging upon the <font> whole <$$font> .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,444.179

When they of the Church of <font> Rome <$$font> would perswade a <font>
Jew <$$font> , or a <font> Heathen <$$font> , to become a Christian ; or
a <font> Heretick <$$font> <paren> as they are pleased to call us
<$$paren> to come over to the Communion of their Church , and offer
Arguments to induce them thereto ; they do by this very thing , whether
they will or no , make that man Judge <font> which is the true Church
<$$font> , and <font> the true Religion <$$font> . Because it would be
ridiculous to perswade a man to turn to their Religion , and to urge him
with Reasons to do so , and yet to deny him the use of his own judgment
whether their Reasons be sufficient to move him to make such a change .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,444.180

Now , as the <font> Apostle <$$font> reasons in another case , If men be
fit to judge for themselves in so great and important a matter as the
choice of their Religion , why should they be thought <font> unworthy to
judge in lesser matters ? <$$font> TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,444.181

They tell us indeed that a man may use his judgment in the choice of his
Religion ; TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,444.182

but when he hath once chosen , he is then for ever to resign up his
judgment to their Church : TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,444.183

But what tolerable reason can any man give , why a man should be fit to
judge upon the <font> whole <$$font> , and yet unfit to judge upon
<font> particular <$$font> Points ? especially if it be considered ,
that no man can make a discreet judgment of any Religion , before he
hath examined the particular Doctrines of it , and made a judgment
concerning <font> them <$$font> . TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,444.184

Is it credible , that God should give a man judgment in the most
fundamental and important matter of all , viz. <font> To discern the
true Religion , <$$font> and <font> the true Church , from the false
<$$font> ; for no other end , but to enable him to chuse once for all to
whom he should resign and inslave his judgment for ever ? which is just
as reasonable as if one should say , That God hath given a man eyes for
no other end , but to look out once for all , and to pitch upon a
discreet person to lead him about blindfold all the days of his life .
TILLOTS-B-1679-E3-P1,444.185

