<BEGIN_torkingt-1517-e1-p1>

<P_1>

<heading:edcomment:TORKINGTON'S_PILGRIMAGE>

Ffyrst the ffryday a_for mydlent , that was Seynt Cuthberdy's Day , And
the xx Day of Marche in the vii yer of Kyng Herri the viii=th= And the
yer of ower Lorde God m=l=cccccxvij , a_bowte viij of the cloke the same
mornyng , I shipped at Rye , in Sussex , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1.4

And the same Day a_bowte x of the cloke at nyghte I loaded at Depe , in
Normandy , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1.5

And ther I lay in the Shippe all nyght . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1.6

Satirday that was Seynt Benett's Day I cam on londe in to Depe ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1.7

And ther I taryed all Day . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1.8

Midlente sonnday , the xxij Day of Marche , a_browte xj of the cloke , I
toke my hors at Depe TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1.9

and rode to Totys wher I baytyd TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1.10

And so to Rone the same nyght , where I bode munday all Day
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1.11

Twesday , the xxiiij Day of March , I departyd from Rone to Cuys to
Diner , And to Myny the nyght . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1.12

<P_2>

Wedynsday , the Anunciacion of ower lady , to Povntese to Dine
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.14

and to Parys the same nyght , wher I bode Thursday , ffryday , and
Satyrday . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.15

The thursday I went to Seynt Denys on ffote , wher I offerd and sawe the
relyqwys , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.16

and so retornyd a_gayne the same nyght to Parys .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.17

Passion Sonday , the xxix Day of Marche , abowte none , I departyd from
Parys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.18

And the vj Day of Aprill I cam to Tarrare , wher I passyd an ill
mountayne all alone . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.19

And to Labrylle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.20

The munday aftyr Palme sonday I cam to Lyon , which was a long Jorney ,
xij_scor {COM:sic} myle and x . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.21

At Lyons I visityd the Reliques at the yle wher Sent Anne lyes and
longious . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.22

Ther ys also a Cupe of an Emerawde stone , wherof ower Savyor Crist
Drank at hys Mawdy . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.23

At the Grey ffreres there {SIC:the} lyes the Holy body of Seynt
Bonaventur in Lyon . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.24

Tewysday , the vij Day of April , at ij of the cloke at aftyr_none , I
Departyd ffrom Lion . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.25

Thursday that was the ix Day of Aprill , I com to Agnebelleto .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.26

The aftyr_none I passed ovyer an ill and a grevows Mounte callyd mounte
Gobylyn , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.27

the same nyght I com to Cambery with_inne the mountis . Wher I bode
ffryday and hard Divine service . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,2.28

<P_3>

Ther in a Castyll ys a ffayer Churche where ys the sudary of ower Savyor
Crist Jhu . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.30

And ther I hard a ffamus Sermon of a Doctor which began a v of the cloke
in the mornyng TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.31

and contynuyd tyll it was ix of the clok . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.32

In hys sermon at on tyme he had a balys in hys hond , a nother tyme a
schorge , the iij=de= tyme a Crowne of thorne , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.33

the iiij=th= tyme he shewyd the pepyll a pictur poyntyd on a clothe , of
the passion of our lorde . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.34

And after that he shewyd them the ymage of god crucyfyed vpon a crosse ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.35

and thanne all the peple bothe yong and old they fell downe vpon ther
knes TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.36

and cryed with lamentable voce , oman , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.37

the precher , the peple they weppe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.38

marvell it was to see . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.39

Estern evyn , I com to Seynt John Muryan , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.40

ther I a_bode Ester Day all Day TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.41

and hard Devine service ; TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.42

in that Cite ys a Cathedrall Church of seculer Prests .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.43

Ther I sey many Reliquis . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.44

Ther ys as they say yt the ffynger of Seynt John Baptiste whych he notyd
or shewyd crist Jhu whanne he seyd Ecce Agnus Dei ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.45

ther I offerd . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.46

Ester munday , the xiij Day of Aprill , to Seynt Michell
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.47

and so to Seynt Andrew to Dyner . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.48

The aftyr_none to lynnygbur to bede . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.49

Estern tewysday to Suza to Diner , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.50

And there {SIC:the} I rest me , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,3.51

for I was were and my hors also ffor the grett labor that I had the
<P_4> same mornyng in passing over the evyll and grevows mounte Senes
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.52

yet I come the same nyght to sent Ambros to my logeyng .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.53

Ester Wedynesday , the xv Day of Aprill , to Turyn , a fayer Cite and
Universite , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.54

and to Shewans the same nyght . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.55

Thursday , the xvj Day of Aprill , to Salys to Diner ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.56

And to Wersell the same night . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.57

ffriday , the xvij Day of Aprill , to Novera , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.58

and the same nyght to the grett Cite of Myllane .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.59

Ther I a_bode Satyrday , Sunday and munday , All Day .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.60

There {SIC:The} in a Chirche of Seynt Silvester ys many grett reliquis ,
a pece of the vesture of our blyssyd lady . And also of Seynt Jamis , a
nother relik of ij of the Innocentis , Also on of the thornys that ower
lord was crownyed with . The erth of the Sepultur of ower lady , the
staff of Seynt Ambros , the Gyrdell of Seynt Ambros , also the hede of
Seynt Barbere , And many moo Reliquis it ys to long too wrytte .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.61

Also ther ys a grett Churche of our Blyssyd lady ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.62

And ovyr the hye Auter in the Roff or toppe of the Churche ys a syne of
a sterr of golde , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.63

and in the mydys of the Sterr ys on of naylis that ower Savyr Crist was
crucifyed with . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.64

Ther brenne lampes a_bowth it that ye may se it {SIC:in} perfyghtly .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,4.65

Item , in an old Chyrch nott fer ffrom the Castell of Myllane , <P_5> ys
a Solatory and a Dilectable Place , wher lyes the Holy Body of Seynt
Ambros , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.66

And ther I offerd , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.67

And it ys callyd Sanctus Ambrosius . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.68

Munday , the xx day of Aprill , the aftyr_none , I rode to Papia or
Pavia , a cite and universite , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.69

ther lyes Seynt Austyn , the grett Doctor , in a howse of Religion , of
Chanons reguler , and ffryers Austyns , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.70

all being withine the circuite and precincte of Place , they have
nevthelesse severall Cloysters and severall logyngs .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.71

But they kepe All ther Divine service in on qwere all to_gedyr .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.72

In the same church lyeth Lyonell , the second sonne of king Edward the
iij=de= , honorable , vpon whose tumbe ys wretyn , Sanguine insignis
fuerat vel floribus armis . Ossa Leoneti continet iste lapis .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.73

In thys cite I abode tewysday , all Day and all nyght .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.74

In the same Cite I sold my horse , and my sadyll , and brydell .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.75

Wedynsday , the xxj Day of Aprill , I toke a barke att the forseyd Pavia
vpon the Ryver which ys callyd Poo ; TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.76

the same nyght I cam to Placiencia or Plesaunce ;
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.77

ther I stuffed me w=t= wyne and bred and other caseles as me thowght
necessary for me at that tyme . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.78

Seynt Gorgys Day to Cremena , a ffayer Cite , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.79

and ther I a_bode all nyght . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.80

Seynt Markes day to Dosor . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,5.81

<P_6>

Sunday , the xxvj Day of Aprill , I passyd by Mantua ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.83

And so to the towne which ys called Ryver . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.84

And ther I lay all nyght . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.85

Munday , the xxvij Day of Aprill , to fferare , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.86

and ther I lay all nyght , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.87

it ys a good Cite , And well and substancially Edifyed .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.88

Tewysday , Erly in the mornyng , we went on fote v myle to a lytyll
velage that stande on the watir called ffranccolyno ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.89

ther I toke a barke with Marchauns of Venyse , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.90

the same nyght we lay att Corbala . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.91

Lityll above fferare the Poo departeth in to two parts ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.92

The oon goth to fferare , And so in too the see , And the other parte to
Padow . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.93

Wedynsday , the xxix Day of Aprill , ij howrys afore Day , we toke the
same barke ageyne , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.94

And a none we left all the Poo , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.95

and toke ower course by a lytyll Ryver that cometh to the same , called
the ffosse , made and cutte owte by hande , whych browght vs overwhart
in to a nother Ryver called Latyze , that cometh from Verone And Trent ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.96

And yett w=t=_inne a whyle we traversed owt of that Ryver into a nother
lytyll Ryver , whiche browght vs overwhart a_gen in to Latyze , which
Latize browght vs in to chose vpon the see called in latyn Claudin , xxv
myle ffrom Venys , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.97

and ther Dyned . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.98

The same Day we sayled toward Venys , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.99

and a_bowt iij of the cloke at aftyr_none we com to the goodly and
ffamose cite of Venys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,6.100

<P_7>

Ther I was well at ese , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.102

ffor ther@ @was no thyng that I Desyred to have but I had it shortly .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.103

At Venyse , at the fyrst howse that I cam to except oon , the good man
of the howse seyd he knew me by my face that I was an englysshman .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.104

And he spake to me good englyssh , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.105

thane I was Jous and glade , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.106

ffor I saw never englyssh man ffrom the tyme I Departed owt of Parys to
the tyme I cam to Venys , which is vij or viij_C myles .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.107

The Reliquies at Venys canne not be nowmbred .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.108

Ther lyeth Seynt Elyn , Seynt Barbara , Seynt Luke , Seynt Roke , Seynt
Zachary , Seynt Jervas and Prothase . And many other Seyntis and grett
reliques . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.109

May Day we went to Seynt Elyn TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.110

and offerd ther , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.111

She lith in a ffayer place of religion of whith monks
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.112

ye may se hyr face perfythly TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.113

hyr body ys Covered with a cloth of whith Sylke .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.114

The iii=de= Day of May , the Invencion of the holy Crosse .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.115

The patrone of a new goodly sheppe with other Marchauntes Desyred vs
Pylgrymys that we wold com a bord and see hys shippe with_inne , which
Shippe ley afor Seynt Markys chirche , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.116

And a_bowyte viij of the Cloke we went all in to Seynt Markys Churche ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.117

And aftyr that we went all in to the fforeseyd Shippe .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.118

Ther they mad vs goodly Chere w=t= Diverse Sotylties as Comfytes and
Marche_Panys , And Swete Wynes . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.119

Also the v=th= Day of May , the Patrone of another Shippe whiche lay in
the see v myle from Venys , he Desyered vs all Pylgrymys that we wold
come and se hys Shippe TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,7.120

And the same <P_8> Day we went all with hym , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,8.121

And ther he provydyd for vs a mervelous good Dyner , wher we had all
maner of good viteales , And wynes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,8.122

And thanne we retornyed to Venys a_geyne . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,8.123

At the Archinale ther we saw in makyng iii=xx= new galyes and galye
Bastards , And galye Sotyltes , besyd they that be in viage in the haven
. TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,8.124

Ther ys Werkying Dayly upon thez Galyes a_m=l= men and moo .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,8.125

Ther be werkying Daly at the same Archinale , in a place that ys in
lengthe m=l=_lxxx ffote , mo thanne an_C men and women that Doo no thyng
Dayly but make Ropes and Cables . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,8.126

Ther in that Castyll the Marchauntes schewyd vn to vs all maner of
artyllary And Ingynes that myght ben Devysed ffor warre , other be see
or ellys be londe . As grett gunnes that sum of them be Divided in ij
partes and sum in iij partes Joynyd to_gedyr be vyres ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,8.127

marvell it ys to see . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,8.128

Also ther ys many howses and Chaumbers full of gunnes , bothe grett and
small , bryganynes , Crosbowys , Swardys , byllys , halbardes , Sperys ,
Moryspekys , with all other thynges that ys required necessary for warre
. TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,8.129

Wedynsday , the vj Day of May , we went by watir to Padua , by the Ryver
of Brente , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,8.130

And there we visite and Sawe many Reliquies , As Seynt Antoni , whiche
was a grey ffryer , And lith <P_9> Rygth ffayer in the body of the
Churche , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,9.131

In the Vestrye ther ys an herse that stonde full of Chalys to the
nowmbyr of iiii=xx= or v=xx= wher in ys closyd many grett Reliquies , A
rybbe of the syd of Seynt Bonaventur , which translate the holy body of
Seynt Antony ; And also the tong of Seynt Antony , yet ffayer and
ffressh whiche tong he convertyd mych peple to the ffeythe of Crist .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,9.132

Also in the Abbey of Seynt Justine virgyne , a place of blake monkys ,
ryght Delectable And also Solytary , Ther lithe the holy body of Seynt
Justine , And Seynt Luke , and Seynt Mathew , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,9.133

And ther we see the ffynger of Seynt Luke that he wrotte the holy
gospell with . And also the table of ower blyssyd lady , which Seynt
Luke poyntyd with hys owen hande , berying her sone in hyr Armys ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,9.134

it ys seyd who so ever be_hold thys pictur of our blyssyd lady ,
Devowtly onys in hys lyff he shall never be Deprivyd ffrom the syght of
hyr evlastyng . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,9.135

Also ther ys ij locures of iij quarterys of a yard long ffull of bonys
of Innocentis whyche kyng Herrodys slew ffor malyce that he bar to
Criste . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,9.136

Thursday , the vij Day of May , we retornyed by the same watir of Brent
to Venese ageyne . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,9.137

Item at Venese ys a place of Nonnys which ys callyd Seynt Johnis Zachari
, TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,9.138

in a Coffer by_hynd the hith Auter lies the holy body of Zachari ,
ffather of Seynt John Baptiste , And other ij holy bodys whose namys be
wretyng in libro vite . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,9.139

<P_1O>

In the Abbey of Seynt George ther we sey many Reliquies of holy Seyntes
, bothe Martyres and Virgines , the holy Bodyes and Armys of them , the
ffaces , ther ffyngers , the tethe of them , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.141

it ys grett mervell to see , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.142

Ther is a parte of the hede of Seynt George , hys left Arme with the
holl hande . The Arme of Seynt Lucie , The Bodys of Seynt Cosme and
Damiane . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.143

May Day we went to Seynt Elyne , to a place of Whith Monkes that stande
in the See . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.144

Ther she lyeth in a fayer Chapell Closyd in a Coffer , hyr face bare and
nakyed that ye may se it perfyghtly , which Seynt Elyne ffond the Crosse
at Jherusalen , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.145

Also ther lyes upon hyr brest a lytyll crosse made of the holy crosse ,
Also the Tunbe of Constantini magni , Sone of Seynt Elyn , And a bone of
Seynt Mary Mawdleyn . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.146

In the Monastery of blake monkys callyd Seynt Nicholas De Elio , Ther
lyes the body of Seynt Nicholas as they sey , Also oon of the Pottis
that ower lord turnyd watir in to wyne , The staff of Seynt Nicholas
that he vsed whanne he was Bushoppe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.147

In the Monastery callyd Accusechirii lyes the body of Seynt Barbare ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.148

Also in a nother Auter ys a bone of Seynt Cristofer .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.149

Also in the Church callyd Sancta Marina lies the holy body of hyr De qua
miracula vitaspatrum leguntur . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.150

Also in a nother Church lies the holy body of Seynt Luce Virgyn ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.151

ye may see perfyghtly hyr body and hyr Papys .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,1O.152

<P_11>

In the Curche of Seynt Marke ther ys many grett Reliquies and Jowellys ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.154

ther ys a gret Chalis of fine gold of Curius werke , set with many
precius stonys which ys in heyght iij quarters of a yard
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.155

it ys to large to vse at messe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.156

But they vse it in ornyng the Auter at principall tymes .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.157

Ther be also iij grett Sensurys Of gold as hye as the Chalys ys , and
peyer of grett Candylstykes , a_mong other a wonderfull gretnesse that
be rygtht Curiusely wrogth and arn {GLOSS:urn} fyne gold garnyshed
over_all with stones of gret Pryse . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.158

Ther be also xij Crownes of fine gold , And a Riche Cappe which eviry
Duk ys Crowned with at hys ffrist Intrononyzacions .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.159

The price of all with Crownes Pectorales . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.160

And a Coppe ys inestymable , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.161

ffor they be full sett with precious stunys of grett valor that may be .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.162

Also ther be viij grett Copys of fyne gold garnyshed over with precius
stonys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.163

All these thyngs I sawe whanne they war shewyd to the Marchose of Mantua
, which browght with hym many Knyghtes and Gentylmen in Riche aperell .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.164

Thys Don we passed owt of the Vestre , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.165

and so to the hye Auter , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.166

And a_non it was sett opyn , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.167

And ther war ij torchis brynyng . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.168

The Marchose had a Candyll govyn to him in hys hande bornyng .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.169

The gold , the precius stonys in the Auter when they Glysteryd And shone
, it was grett mervell to See . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,11.170

<P_12>

The Richesse , the sumptuous buyldyng , The religius howses and the
stabelyssyng of ther Justyces and Counceylles , with all other thynges
that makyth a Cite glorius Surmownteth in Venys a_bove all places that
ever I Sawe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.172

And specially at ij festis wher at we war present ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.173

the on was vpon the Assencion Day . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.174

The Duke with grett Triumphe and solemnyte with all the Senyorye went in
ther Archa triumphali , which ys in maner of a sayle of a straange
facion and wonder stately , etc. TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.175

And the Marchose of Mantua was w=t= them in the forseyd Galye .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.176

And so they rowed in to the see , with the assistens of ther Patriarche
, TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.177

And ther Spoused the see with a ryng . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.178

The spousall words be In signum veri perpetuique Domini .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.179

And therwith the duke lete fall the ryng in to the see , the processe
and the cerymonyes wherof war to long to wryte .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.180

Thanne thaye Rode to the Abbey of Seynt Nicholas of blake Monkys that
stond by juste be them , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.181

And all thaye brake ther fastes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.182

And so retornyd a_geyne to Venys , To the Dukys palace , Wher they had
provyd for them a mervelows Dyner , wher at we Pilgrymes war present and
see them servyd . At which Dyner ther {SIC:her} was viij Corse of
soundery metys , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.183

And att every Corse the Trunpettes and the mynystrellys com inne a_for
them . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,12.184

Ther was excedyng myche plate , As basons , Ewers , wonders <P_13> grett
And of a straunge facion , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.185

every iiij persons had a bason and Ewer to washen ther handes ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.186

Also ther was a grett Vesell of Sylver , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.187

And it had at every ende rounde rymys gylte TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.188

and it was iiij_cornarde , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.189

And it had at every ende iiij ryngs that ii men myght bere it betwyne
them ffor to Cast owt the watyr of ther basons whanne they had wasshed
ther handes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.190

Ther Dysshys ther platers ther Sawcers , all was of Syliver and gylte .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.191

And while they satt at Dyner ther was parte of the Dukys Chapell singing
Dyverse balyttys , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.192

And sumtyme they song with Orgones , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.193

And aftyr that ther cam on of the Trompetores TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.194

and he pleyd with the Organs all maner of messur the excellent conyng
man that ever I hard with Diverse Instrumets I hard nor never see a_ffor
. TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.195

And whanne Dyner was Don , the Duke sent to the Pilgryms gret basons
full of Marchepanys , And also commfytes and maluysey , And other Swete
Wynys as myche as ony man wold ete and Drynke .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.196

This Don ther cam on that was Disgysyd TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.197

and he gestyd a_for the Duke and the Marchose and the company
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.198

and made them Very mery . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.199

And aftyr that ther cam Dauncers and some of them Disgysyd in women
clothes that Daunsyd a gret while . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.200

And after them come Tombelers , both men And children , the most
{TEXT:missing_"most"} marvelows ffelaws that ever I saw
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.201

So myche that I conne nott writt it . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,13.202

<P_14>

The other ffest was oon Corpus xpi Day , wher was the most Solemne
pcession that ever I saw . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,14.204

Ther went Pagents of the old law and the new law Joynyng to_gedyr .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,14.205

The ffygmyes of the blyssyd sacrament in such nowmber and so apte and
convenient for that ffest that it wold have {TEXT:missing_"have"} made
any man Joyus to se it . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,14.206

And over that it was a grett merveyle to se the grett nowmbre of
Religius ffolkes and of Scolys that we call Bachelors or ffelachippys
Clothid all in white gramens with Diverse bags on ther brestis which bar
all lights of wondyr goodly facion , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,14.207

And be_twyne every of the Pagents went lityll childern of both kynds ,
gloriously and rechely Dressed beryng in ther handys ryche Cuppes or
other vessales of gold and silver Rychely inamelyd and gylt ffull of
plesaunt fflowers and well_Smellying which chyldern kest the flowers
vpon the lords and pylgrymes . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,14.208

They war Dressed as Aungellis with clothe of gold and crymsyn velvet to
order the seyd procession . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,14.209

The forme and manner therof excedyd all other that ever I Saw , so much
that I canne nott wryte it . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,14.210

The Duke Satt in Seynt Markes Churche in ryght hys astate in the Qwer on
the ryght syd with senyoryte which they call lords in Riche aparell as
purpyll velvet , cremsyn velvet , ffyne Scarlett .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,14.211

Also all the pylgrymes war commandyd to com in to the ffor_seyd Qwer
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,14.212

and ther we Satt all on the lest syd on the quere .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,14.213

The Duke thus Syttyng with hys lords , the seyd procession be_ganne to
com be hym a_bowte viij of the clok TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,14.214

and it was xij or <P_15> the seyd pression myght Com oonys a_bowt
pessyng by as faste as they myght goo but on tyme .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.215

Thanne the Duke rose vp with hys lords and company to folow , the
fforsayd procession . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.216

He commaundyd hys lordys that they shuld in the procession every oon of
them take a Pylgryme on his Right-hande hys servaunts gevyng to vs grett
Candyls of wax , whych Candelys every Pylgrim bar a-way the procession
Doon at hys owen plesur . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.217

We procedyd owt of Seynt Markes Churche , in to the Dukys pales ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.218

and so went procession with_inne the seyd place because it was Reyne
wedyr , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.219

And so retornyed in the Churche a_geyne of Seynt Marke
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.220

and ther made ende of the seyde Procession . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.221

Sonday aftyr Corpus xpi Day , the xiiij of June , we Departyd from Venys
in a lytyll bott whyche bott browght vs to the Shippe that lay iiij myle
withowt the Castellys , a good new shippe whiche mad never Jorney a_fore
of viij_C tunne , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.222

The name of the Patrone was callyd Thomas Dodo .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.223

Twesday , the xvj Day of June , whiche was the translacion of Seynt
Richard , a_browt v of the Clok in the mornyng we mad sayle with scace
{COM:sic} Wynde . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.224

Thursday , the xviij of June , we cam to Ruyne in Histria , x myle from
Parens , C myle and x from Venys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.225

Ther we went a lond TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.226

and lay ther all nyght , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.227

ffryday in the mornyng we hard messe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,15.228

<P_16>

Friday , the xix Day of June , a lityll a_for nyght , we com all to the
Shippe a_geyn . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.230

Ther we lay Satyrday all Daye at a_naker in the havyn ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.231

ventus erat contarius . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.232

Sonnday a_for Midsom day , abowyt vij of the cloke in the mornyng we
made Sayle , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.233

And passyd by the Costes of Slavone and Histria , And also Pole which ys
xxx myle from Parence , a good havyn TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.234

ffor many Shippys and galyes towche ther rather thanne at Parence .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.235

We Passyd also by Gulfe of Sana , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.236

that y=s= the entre in to Hungeri . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.237

Munday , that was Seynt Albon's Day , we passyd by the havyn of Jarre .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.238

Midsomerday we passyd by the most strong and myzghty towne callyd
Aragouse , in the Countre of Salvanye or Dalmacie ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.239

they hold of no man but of them self . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.240

They pay tribute to the Turke whiche marche with_inne half a myle of the
same towne , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.241

it ys the Strongest towne of walls , towers , Bulwerks , waches , and
wardes that ever I saw in all my lyff . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.242

This Cite ys v_C myle ffrom Venys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.243

Abowte xxx myle by_yond Arragouese endith Slovonania , And begyneth
Albane , at the town of Budua . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.244

Thursday aftyr MidsomDay , a_bowte iiij of the Cloke at aftyr_noon we
passid by Corfona . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,16.245

The wynd made so well for vs <P_17> That we approched nott
{SIC:nott_noon} nye non of ther havyns a_forseyd .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.246

At Corfona as the Patrone Shewyd me there {SIC:the} be ij strong
Castellys , stonding vp on ij Rokkys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.247

They hold of the Venysyans . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.248

I trowe they had no wher so strong a place TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.249

yt ys in Grece . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.250

And the Turkes mayne_londe lithe with_in ij or iij myle of them .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.251

And on_Dowtyd the seyd Corfona ys the key entre and hold for the suerte
of the seyd Venysyans Sayles and Shippis and countrie a_bowte , And
be_fore any other that they have in those parts .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.252

And at the seyd Corfona they speke all Greke TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.253

and be Grekes in Dede . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.254

Ther growes smale Raysons that we call reysons of Corans ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.255

they grow Chefly in Corinth callyd now Corona in Morrea , to whom Seynt
Poule wrote many epistelis . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.256

Corfo ys the fiyrst yle of Grece , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.257

and it ys from Arrogous iij_C myle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.258

At my commying homward I shall writte mor of the forseyd townes .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.259

ffryday was Johns et Pauli TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.260

we sayled with Ese , wynde styll , in alto Pelago , levyng Grece on the
left hand and Barbary on the ryght honde . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.261

These be the parte of the Countres that we passyd by .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,17.262

S. {COM:scilicet} Histria , Croacia , Slovonia , Dalmacia , Hilliricum
, Corfieu Insula , Dardania Insula , per Achaya , et Albanian per mare ,
Molon , whiche Countres be all to Grece be_yongh Corffew , As@ @well the
<P_18> mayne_londs as the yles , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.263

And so Doth bothe Candy and Cypres with many moo ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.264

And thanne comyth inn Pathmos Insula , Troya , Constantynapolis , Tracia
. TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.265

Satyrday , the xxvij Day of Junij , a_bowght iiij of the cloke at
aftyr_noone , we cam to Ganta , in Grece , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.266

and ther we went on londe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.267

And ther we taryed Sonnday , whych ys vnder the Dominacon of the
Venycians . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.268

Also we mette with ij Galyes of Venys , whiche went owte of Venys a
moneth a_for vs , whiche Galyes went to the Turke Ambasset ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.269

And they Caryed with them Riches and pleasurs , As clothe of gold and
Crymsyn velvett , And other thyngs mor than I knewe .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.270

Ther is the grettest wynys and strongest that ever I drank in my lyff .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.271

Sunday , whanne I had dyned I went to the Castyll , which stondeth in
the toppe of a Mownte , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.272

then the Captyne of the Castyll made me good Cher ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.273

And shewyd to me all the Castyll with_in The towers ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.274

the wallys are sore brosyd and brokyn with the erthe qwake which was in
Aprill last past , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.275

And all the yle ys sor trobled with the seyd erthe qwake Dyvse tymes .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.276

And it ys Also plenteouse of all maner of thyngs that any man nede to
have . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.277

Tewysday , the last Day of June that was the Commeracion of Seynt Poule
, we passed by Modona , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.278

it was but late the Venycians , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.279

but now the Turke have it . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,18.280

Ther groweth moche Rumney , <P_19> And mawnsey .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.281

Thys Modona ys CCC myle ffrom Corfona , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.282

And from Modona to Candia ys other CCC myle .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.283

Also we passyd by the yle Callyd Cyrygo , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.284

it ys directly a_yenst the Poynt of Campo Maleo in Morrea ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.285

And in the same yle was Venus borne , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.286

And in the same {TEXT:some} yle ys Delphos , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.287

And it ys all in Europa , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.288

And so ys all the remnant of Grece , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.289

And be_yonthe Grece ov {COM:sic} a brache of the see ys Asia , where in
all_most at th@ @entre stonds {SIC:stonding} Troya , whiche ys the
Cheffe Porte of the yle of Tenedos that stondeth in the see .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.290

And all the Countre of Troya ys the Turkes owen contre by herytaunce .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.291

And that countre ys propyrly callyd now Turkey , And non other
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.292

Neverthelasse he hath lately vsurped Grece with many other Countres ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.293

And call them all Turkey . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.294

Over a_gens the forseyd yle of Cirigo to the se wardes ys the Stopull of
Craggs called in Greke Obaga , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.295

for it ys leke an egge . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.296

Thursday , the ij=de= Day of Julii , a_bowt xj or xij of the Cloke a_for
non , we com to Candi , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.297

itt is callyd otherwyse Crete , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.298

ther be ryht Ill Peple , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.299

it is vnder the Venyschyans . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.300

Ther we ffonde vj or vij englissh Marchaunts whiche made vs good cher .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.301

And they gaff to vs at our Deptyng to the Shippe , Muskedele as myche as
fyllyd our botellys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.302

In Candia sive Creta was Musyke fyrst founde . And also Tourneys and
exercyse of Armys fyrst founde on horsebake ; TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.303

Ther was lawe fyrst put in wrytyng . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,19.304

Armour was fyrst ther <P_20> Divisyd and founde ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.305

And so was remys and rownyg in bootes . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.306

In Candia ther grows grett Vynes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.307

And specially of malwesy and muskadell . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.308

In the same yle was Saturnus borne . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.309

Primus Creteys Saturnus venit ab oris , etc. TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.310

In Candi Also ys the old Churche wherof Titus was Bysshoppe , to whom
Pole wrott Epystyllis , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.311

I saw the hede of the seyd Titus Coverd w=t= sylver and golde ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.312

it ys ther excedyngly hoote . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.313

Thes be the Principall Cetees Off Candi , S. {COM:scilicet} Canea ,
Candida , Aretymo , Sotiglia . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.314

And the seyd Ill ys v_C myle a_bowte , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.315

And thys Citee of Candi was sum tyme the habitacule and lordshippe of
the Kyng Mynos . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.316

At Candi ys a strong Castell and a large and a fayer towne w=t=_owt
{COM:preceding_word_"w=t=_owt"_emended} the Castell , well wallys
strongly , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.317

thys Ile ys a grett Ile and a Plenteows of all maner of thyngs .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.318

They be Grekes in that Ile , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.319

And the Vencions ben Lord ther , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.320

And every yer or every other yer ys Chosyn a Duke by the same Venycions
. TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.321

Ther groweth the Voyne that ys callyd Malweysy and muskedell .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.322

Sumtyme ther Dwellyd Cretes TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.323

yt ys wretyng of them in Actibus aptor {COM:Apostolurum} , Cretenses
semper mendaces bestie . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.324

In that londe , xxx myle from Candy , ys an old brokyn Citee whiche was
callyd Cretina , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.325

And a lityll ther be_syd stondyth an old Churche which was byldyd in the
honor of Jhu Criste And holowyd in the worshipe of Titus Epiis , to
whome Seynt Poule wrott in Actibus Aptor {COM:Apostolorum} Ad Titum .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,20.326

In thys Ile as they sey ther <P_21> war sumtyme a_C Citees and C Kynges
, TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.327

In thys Citee we taryd ij Dayes and an half .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.328

And there was grett hete , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.329

ffor from May to Halowmasse ther groweth no gresse , It is so brent with
the hete of the sone , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.330

And thanne abowzt halowmesse begynneth gresse , herbes and flowers to
springe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.331

And it ys ther thanne as somor ys in Inglonde .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.332

So in wynter it ys temperat , no cold but lityll ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.333

ther ys never Snow nor frost with yse , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.334

And yf ther cometh any frost with a lityll yse they wyll shew it eche to
other ffor a mervell . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.335

And fro May tyll the latter ende of October Ther ys no Rayne nor clowdes
but ryghte selde {GLOSS:seldom} . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.336

But ever the sone shyneth ryght cler and hote .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.337

And a_bowte Seynt Martyns tyme the sonne ys as hote ther as it ys in
August in Englond . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.338

And so it ys in Rodes and Cipres . And all that Countre Estwarde .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.339

Sonday , the v Day of Julii , a_bowghte vi of the Cloke in the mornyng ,
we made seyle ffrom Candy towardes the Rodes .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.340

Munday , at nyght , we passed by the Ile of Pathmos wher Seynt John
wrote the Apocalips , whych Ile we left on ower left hande towardes
Grece . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.341

The next Day , tewysday , we passed by the Ile of Seynt Nicholas of
Cartha wher as be tooles made of Iron that never lese ther egge by
myracle of Seynt Nicholas , As they say , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.342

I saw it not : TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.343

The same tewysday , we Saylyd ryght Estwardes toward Cipres ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.344

And left the Rodes on the left hande , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.345

nott aproched ny the rodes by C myle ffor fer of the Turke .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,21.346

<P_22>

Ower patrone of the shippe had sent to hym letters at Candy that he
shuld toche at the rodes in no wysse . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.348

Yf he Dede the Turke wold sone have knowlage . And so to take greet
Displesur with vs all , and peraventur putt vs in Joypte off over lyffe
, TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.349

ffor of trewthe he ys not content with no man that ys famyliar with the
company that ys at the Rodes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.350

ffor that hell broude takys them as hys mortall enimes .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.351

It is from Candy to the rodes iij_D {COM:sic} myle . And from the
Cipres iiij_C myle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.352

Sunday , in the mornyng , the v Day of Julii , a_bowght v of the Cloke
in the Mornyng , we made sayle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.353

Wedynsday , the viij Day of Julii , we came to {TEXT:missing_"to"}
Cipres , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.354

And ther we lay thursday all Day . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.355

ffriday , the x Day of July , a_bowght x or xj of the Cloke , we made
Sayle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.356

Satirday , the xj Day of Julii , a_bowght iiij of the Cloke at
aftyr_noon , we had sight of the holy londe .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.357

Thanne the Maryners song the letany , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.358

And aftyr that all the Pylgryms with a Joyffull voyce song Te Deum
Lawid-amus , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.359

And thankyd all_myghty god that he had goven {COM:sic} vs such grace to
have onys the sight of the most holy lande . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,22.360

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_1_here}

<P_36>

<heading>

The Pylgimagis w=t=_in the Place of Mownte Syon .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,36.364

<$$heading>

ffyrst in the sayd Chirche of Mownte Syon , in the self place wher the
hyeh auter ys , Ower blyssyd Savior Crist Jhu made hys <P_37> last Soper
and mawdy w=t= his Discipulis , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.366

And made ther the Preciose Sacrament of hys blyssyd body that we vse
Dayly in memory of hys glorius passion . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.367

Ther ys clene remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.368

And vpon the ryght honde of the seyd hyeh Auter ys a nother Auter in the
next yle , wher our Savyor wasshed hys Discipullys ffete at the seyd
Maundy . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.369

Also a_loft wythowt forth at the queres end , ys the place wher the holy
goost com and Discendid vpon hys Discipulis in the likenesse of brennyg
tongis , and in_spyred them vpon whithsonday , as the Servyce of same
ffest shewyth . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.370

And ther ys clene Remyssion . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.371

And vnder_nethe in the Cloyster in the same place , ys a lytyll Chapell
wher our Savyor Crist aftyr hys Resurreccon apperyd to hys Discipulis ,
the Dorys shete , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.372

And aftyr viij Days , whanne they war a_geyn gaderyd to_gedyr , And
Seynt Thomas with them , he cam vpon them agen ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.373

and seyd to Thomas , Infer Digitum tuum et mitte manum tuam in latus
meum , etc. TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.374

Clene remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.375

Thys Citie of Jherusalem ys a ffayer Emynent Place ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.376

for it stondith vpon suche a grounde , That from whens so ever a man
comyth ther he must nedys ascende . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.377

ffrom thens a man may se all Arabye , And the Mownte of Abaryn , and
Nebo , and Phasga , the playnes of Jordan , And Jherico , And the Dede
see vnto the ston of Deserte . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,37.378

I saw never <P_38> Citie nor other place have so fayer prospects .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.379

It stondeth fayer a_mong hyllys TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.380

and ther ys no Ryver comyng ther to , nor well in it ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.381

but the watir cometh all by condite , in grett plente , ffrom Ebrom and
Bedelem , which condites serve all the Citee in every place , And fyll
all the pyscynes , whiche are in grett nowmber ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.382

And myche watir renneth now to waste . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.383

Thys londe of Jherusalem hath ben in the handys of many Sundry Nacions .
As of Jewys , Cananers , Asseryens , Parciens , Macidens , Medoyns ,
Grekes , Cristen Men , Sarrasyns , Barbaryns , Turkes , and many other
nacions . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.384

Jherusalem ys in the londe of Jude , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.385

and it marcheth Estwardis to the kyngdom of Araby , Southwardys to the
londe of Egipte , of Westward to the grett see , Northwardis to the
kingdom of Surr , And to the se of Cipres , in sum place .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.386

And the seyd holy lond ys in length , North and Suth , ix_score myle ,
And in bred , Est and west , lx myle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.387

<heading>

Pylgrimages with_ine the Temple of the holy Sepulcre .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.389

<$$heading>

The Tewysday , at vj of the cloke at aftyr_non , that was the evyn of
Seynt Mari Mawdleyn , we war admitted by the lordes , Turkes , and
Mamolukes of the Citie , to entre into the Temple of the holy Sepulcre ,
Dilyvd in by them by name and tale , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.391

And at the seyd entre to every pylgryme ys granted plenary remission ,
De pena et a culpa . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,38.392

<P_39>

The same tyme the moste parte of the ffryers of the Mownte Syon Entred
with us in to the seyd temple , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,39.394

ffor they have certeyn placys in ther kepyng with_in the same ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,39.395

That ys for to sey the holy Sepulcre . And the Chapell of our lady wher
our savyor apperyd fyrst on to her aftyr hys resurreccon , And Sayd
Salve sancta parens , wherin be contynually at the leste ij ffryers of
the seyd mownte Sion , to kepte Devowtly the seyd holy places ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,39.396

and ther lyvyng ys mynystired vnto them twyes a Day from the seyd Mownte
Syon . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,39.397

And ye shall vnderstonde that the Doores of the seyd Temple of the
Sepulcre be never openyd by the paynyms , But by the commyng of
Pylgrymys at ther grette Sute and Coste , or to chaunge ffryers that
have the kepyng of the seyd places with_in the Temple .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,39.398

And over thys ye shall vnderstonde that ther be in Jheruslm ix Diverses
{COM:sic} Sectis of Cristen men . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,39.399

And every of the have places Distincte and severall to them self with_in
the Temple of the holy Sepulcre , to vse the ryghte of ther Sectis ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,39.400

And with_owt forth be_for the Entre into thys Temple x pacis in Distan
ys put a ston in memory and token that our Savior Crist beryng hys Crost
for very febylnesse fell ther to the grounde vnder_nethe the
{TEXT:missing_"the"} Crosse . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,39.401

The Chirche of the holy Sepulcre ys Rounde , myche leke the forme and
makyng of the Temple at London , saff it ys excedyng fer in gretnesse ,
and hath wonder many yles , Crodes and vowtes , Chapellys hygh and lowe
, in grett nowmber , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,39.402

and mervell it ys <P_40> to see the many Deferens and secrete places
with_in the sayd temple . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.403

And the grett gounde parte westwarde of the seyd tempe {TEXT:tempe} ys
all open in the Roffe , wher vnder stondith the holy sepulcre of our
lord , whiche ys made all of ston Rooke , And all in forme of a lytyll
Capell . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.404

And fyrst at the entre of the same ys a lytyll Door , wher we come into
a lytyll rounde Chapell vowtyd , other wyse callyd a spelunke , of viij
foote of brede and as myche in length . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.405

And from thys we entred into a myche lesse , and a lower Doore ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.406

And come in a like spelunke . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.407

And vpon the ryht hande of the same , evyn with_ine the seyd low Door ,
ys the very holy Sepulcre of our lord cov {COM:sic} with a mervyll stone
the lenght wher of ys viij foote . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.408

And ther ys no light in to the seyd lytyll Spelunke of the Sepulcre by
no manere of wyndow , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.409

But the lyght ys ther mynystred by many lampes hangyng within the seyd
Spelunke ov the Sepulcre . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.410

In to the ffyrst of thes ij Spelunks entred the women whanne they seyd ,
Quis revolvit nobis lipidem ab hostio monumenti
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.411

And parte of the same stone lieth ther yett now in the same vttermost
Spelunk , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.412

And the other grettest parte ys a stonne of the hye Auter , in Seynt
Savyor Churche , wher of ys mention made by_for .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.413

<heading>

Off the procession Doon ther . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.415

<$$heading>

Tewysday , that was Seynt Mary Mawlyn evyn , at vj of the cloke at
aftyr_none , we entred in to the holy sepulcre .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,40.417

Thanne war we had by and by in to the Chapell of ower blyssyd lady ,
<P_41> whiche the ffryers kepte TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.418

and ther thei made them {SIC:the} redy in ornaments
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.419

And be_gan ther a very solempne procession . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.420

And at every Station was shewyd vn to vs by on of the ffryers , the
mysterys and holynesse of the places wher they made ther Stations .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.421

And thei sang Antemes , ympnys versiculis , and collects approperyd on
to the seyd holy place ryght Solennly and Devowtly .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.422

And ffyrst at the procedyng owt of the seyd Chapell of ower blyssyd lady
, They Shewyd on to vs that ther the hye Auter ys of the same Chapell ,
ys the very self place wher our Savyor Crist aftyr hys Resurrection
ffyrst apperyd vnto hys blyssyd mother , And seyd , Salve Sancta Parens
. TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.423

And ther ys plenary remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.424

Also in the same Capell , on the ryght honde of the seyd high Auter ,
with_in a vowte , in maner of a wyndow , ys a grett pece of the peler
that our Savyor was bound to whanne in the Howse of Pilate .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.425

Also in the same Chapell , vpon the left honde of the seyd hye Auter ,
in a lyke wyndow , ys the place where longe remayned the holy Crosse of
ower Savyor Criste , aftyr that Seynt Elyne fond it ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.426

and now ther remayne non of it . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.427

Also in the myddes of that Chapell ys the Place wher the holy crosse was
provyd by resyng of a Dede man whanne they wer in Dowte whiche it was of
the thre . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.428

Thys Day the procession procedyd forthe TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.429

and we folowyd with prayers and contemplation as Devowtly as all_myghty
god yaff vs grace with Candyllys of wax brennyng in our handys .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,41.430

And goyng owt of the seyd Chapell , with_owt the Dore of the <P_42> same
, be ij whith marble stonys round a_bowte x foote a sundre
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.431

there {SIC:the} on ys the place wher ower Savyr stode whanne he apperyd
to Mary mawdeleyn aftyr hys Resurreccon , in lekeness of a gardner .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.432

And the other ston ys the place wher Mary mawdeleyn stode and Seyd ,
Raboni . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.433

Thanne our Savyor Criste seyd , Maria noli flere .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.434

And thanne she knew hym perfyghtly . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.435

ffrom thense they {SIC:the} Descendid in to a corner of an yle of the
same Chirche , wher ys a lityll vowght , Strongly made , wherin owyr
Savyr was kept in preson , whiles hys Crosse was in Dressyng and makyn
redy . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.436

Also next thys place ys an Auter wher the Crucyfyers Devydyd hys Clothes
by Chaunce of the Dyce . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.437

ffrom thens we Discendyd in to a lowe Chapell by xxx grees , wher Seynt
Elyn Stode , Sawe , and commaundyd the Diggyng of the Invencion of the
holy Crosse . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.438

And aftyr warde she made ther hyr Oratry , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.439

And vsyd to sey her Devotions and prayers most comonly in the same palce
{COM:sic_in_text} . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.440

In the same Chapell at the Auters ende , on the Right hande , ys a
wyndow , wher , aftyr messe , Seynt Elyn vsyd to knele and wepe by the
space of half an howre , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.441

ffor ther she see the place wher she fonde the most holy Crosse
perfyghtyly . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.442

And ther ys clene remisson . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.443

ffrom thense we Discendid by xj grees , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,42.444

that browght vs in to a place vnder a Rooke , xxij fote of brede , wher
the holy Crosse , <P_43> the Spere , the Nayles , and the Crowne of
Thorne of our blyssyd Savyor was founde , whiche place ys spoke by_for .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,43.445

And ther ys Also clene remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,43.446

Also from thense we ascendid a_gen in to the Churche ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,43.447

and came to an Auter , vnder the whych ys a place of stone myche lyke a
pece of a pyler , vpon the whyche our Savyor Sate in the Courte of
Pilate whanne he was Crowned with thornys , Scornyd and buffetyd .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,43.448

ffrom thense we ascendyd by xviij grees , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,43.449

and cam to the Mownte of Calvary , wher o=r= Savyor Crist was Crucyfyed
and suffered Deth for ower redempcon , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,43.450

and ther ys a fayer large Chapell , well vowted , and lytyd by many
lampes brennyng , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,43.451

this place ys mervelows holy and venerable a_bove all other .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,43.452

Also vpon the hight of the same Mownte of Calvery , ys the very hold or
morteys hevyn owt of the stone Rooke wherin the Crosse stode , with ower
blyssyd Savyor at the tyme of hys passion , whyche Morteys ys in
Depnesse ij Spannys to the botom , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,43.453

the brede ys sumwhat more thane a Spanne . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,43.454

And ther ys a plate of Coper Sett with_inne the commpas of the Stone to
the entent that no man shuld kutt nor take a_wey any parte of the Sayd
ston , and soo Disfygur the same Morteys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,43.455

Therby Also by the space of viij palmes from the place of the left Arme
of Crist hanging on the Crosse ys a scissur or clyfte in the Stone Rooke
so myche that a man may almost lye therine , which Ryft goth Downe
thorow the rokke of Calvery and appereth by_nethe at the Pavyment of the
nether Chapell and so goth thorow owt the erthe , vsque in abissu ,
which Clyft <P_44> with moo ther be but not so myche Reffe at the
precious Dethe of our Savyor Crist . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,44.456

And it ys of a trouthe as they sey ther , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,44.457

And it ys assigned by token of a fayer ston layde for remembrance that
ower blyssyd lady and Seynt John Evngeliste stod not a_bove upon the
hyest parte of the mounte of Calvery at the passion of our lord , as it
ys poynted And kerven in many places , But she stod sumwhat benethe
by_for her Der sonne face to face at the tyme of his precious Deth .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,44.458

Vnder the mounte of Clavery {COM:sic} ys another Chapell of our blyssyd
lady and Seynt John Evngeliste that was callyd Galgatha ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,44.459

and ther , ryght vnder the Morteys of the Crosse , was founde the hede
of our fore_father Adam . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,44.460

ffrom the Mownte of Calvery we Decendyd TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,44.461

and cam to the place assigned like a grave , wher ower blyssyd lady most
Dolorous mother Satt havyng in hyr lappe the Dede body of hyr Dere sone
, new takeyn Downe from the Crosse , to be put in hys Sepulcre , Seynt
John Evngeliste knelyng by her , And Seynt Mari Mawleyn knelyng at our
lordys feete . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,44.462

ffrom thens we went TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,44.463

and made our stacion at the holy Sepulcre , as in to the pryncipall of
that Temple , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,44.464

ffor all the holl Temple ys Dedicate and halowed in the honor and name
of the holy Sepulcre . Off the whiche Sepulcre ys wrytyn more largely
at the begynnyng of the Chaptre . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,44.465

<P_45>

And ffrom thys holy Sepulcre we went a_gen , folowyng always the
procession into the Chapell of our lady , wher as we fyrst be_gan to go
forth with the seyd procession , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,45.467

and ther we made an ende . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,45.468

And whanne we war retornyd a_yen on to the sayde Chapell of ower lady ,
aftyr a lytyll refeccion with mete and Drynke , evy man thanne gaff hym
self to Prayer and contemplacion , besely visyng the holy places a_for
sayd aftyr ther Devocion . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,45.469

Duryng the hole nyght And erly in the mornyng , all we that war prestis
seyd masse , Sum at Calvery , Sum at ower ladys Chapell , And Sum At the
holy Sepulcre aftyr our Devocion . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,45.470

And the laye Pylg=r=mes war howsyld at the Chapell of Calvery .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,45.471

And also by vij or viij of the cloke in the mornyng we had seyd all
masse . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,45.472

And thanne We refreshed vs with wyne and bred and such other caseles as
we cowd gett for ower mony of the Thurkes And Sarrasyns .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,45.473

The same wedynsday that was the Day of mary Mawdleyn , we taryd all Day
and all nyght in the Temple of the holy Sepulcre .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,45.474

And the next morow we sayd masse as we Ded the tewysday be_for .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P1,45.475

