<BEGIN_tunstall-1519-e1-p1>

<P_3.1,230>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXXXIX_CUTHBERT_TUNSTAL,_MASTER_OF_THE_ROLLS,TO_CARDINAL_WOLSEY_FROM_LUCCA,_REQUESTING_LEAVE_TO_DETAIN_NICHOLAS_CRATZER,_ONE_OF_THE_KING'S_SERVANTS_ABSENT_UPON_LEAVE,_WHO_WAS_ON_HIS_RETURN_HOME>

{COM:introductory_material_omitted}

<P_3.1,231>

Please it your Grace to understand that here in these parties I met with
a servant of the Kings called Nicholas Cratzer an Almayne , deviser of
the Kings Horologies , whiche shewed me howe the King had licenced hym
to be absent for a season , and that he was redy to retorne in to
Englande : Whome I desired to tary unto I might write unto the Kings
Highnes to knowe his pleas=r= whether he wolde suffer hym to be in
company with me for a season , unto the Assemble of the Electors were
past , with whom he hath <paren> as he sayeth <$$paren> acqueyntance of
many noble men being aboute theym . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,231.6

I thinke if the Kings Grace wolde com~aunde hym to tary for a season
with me , he might at the saide Assemble do the King as goode service as
if he were in Englande , in serching howe <P_3.1,232> the nobles of
Almayne be mynded concernyng the affaiers of the Empier ;
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,232.7

and yet he shulde put the King to no charge ,
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,232.8

for he shall have mete and drynke with me .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,232.9

Wherein I beseche your Grace to knowe the Kings pleas=r= ,
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,232.10

for oneles@ @he have com~aundement from the Kings Highness , or ells
your Grace , neither he will tary TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,232.11

nor I will kepe hym here longer . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,232.12

Wherfor I beseche your Grace , by the next post , in this small matier
to knowe the Kings pleas=r= and yo=rs= . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,232.13

Other newes then suche as I have written to the Kyng at this tyme there
be not , whiche I shall not nede to repete , forasmoche as the Kings
lettres shall come to the handes of your Grace . Whiche Almighty Jh~u
preserve to his pleas=r= and yo=rs= . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,232.14

ffrom Luke the xij=th= daye of Octobre . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,232.15

By your Gracys most humble bedeman Cuthbert Tunstal .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,232.16

<P_3.1,271>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CI_CUTHBERT_TUNSTAL_TO_CARDINAL_WOLSEY>

<heading:edcomment:INTRIGUES_AGAINST_THE_MINISTERS_OF_THE_KING_CATHOLICK_SUSPECTED>

<heading:edcomment:INVENTS_A_CYPHER_WHICH_HE_FORWARDS,_AS_NO_TRUST_IS_TO_BE_PUT_IN_THE_POSTS>

Plese it your Grace to undirstond that for as moch as I have at lengthe
written to the Kinge at this tyme off his affaires to have recourse to
his Lettre for the knowlege of them . Your Grace may perceyve by the
said lettre that lettres be substantially to be made and to be sent both
to the Kinge Catholyk cheffly and as me semeth also to the Lord Cheuers
and the Chaunceler from the Kinge . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,271.21

Such practise as they suspecte to be made again them wyl never be brogth
aboute : that is to say to remove them out off <P_3.1,272> governaunce ,
oonlesse it com off the Kinge Catholyke own mynd ,
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,272.22

for albeyt he be yonge , yet he knoweth al_redy how gret a man he is
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,272.23

and he is callyd , as I can perceyve , veray fast wher he lovyth or
hatyth . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,272.24

Wherfor by force he wyl not be masteryd onlesse it be first by th'@
@emperor persuadyd to hym yff th@ @emperor wer so myndyd .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,272.25

Your Grace may se mor at large what I have written to the Kinge in that
mater TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,272.26

and forasmoch as thes men have now detecte to have our master suspecte
to practyse again them , and it may apper that lettres have com~en to
ther knowlege written off that mater , for which cause they wyl suspect
the Kings lettres the mor , therfor me semyth it shuld be wel doon to
write al to th@ @emperor or to M. Wyngfeld in syfer , and lykwyse to me
in maters which the Kinge wold have kepte secret ;
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,272.27

for ther is no trust to be put in the Posts : for which cause I have
sent your Grace a sypher herin inclosyd , wherunto I have addyd certain
lettres and names necessary , and also have chaungyd the ordre off it ,
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,272.28

for as to the odyr I had , it was the same that M. Secretary had ,
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,272.29

and lakkyd many thyngs necessary : which I send to th@ @entent your
Grace may mor surly write such thynges as shal be necessary to have kept
secret , or the Kynge yff it please hym to use yt .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,272.30

I sent M. Rychmont to Cales with thys boget , and bycause that the sayd
cypher may surly come to your Graces hands .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,272.31

I undirstond by the Chaunceler touchynge <P_3.1,273> the Duke of Gelders
that he hath now late written a Lettre to the Kinge Catholyk off a more
sobre style then he was wont to use , by which it may appere he makyth
overture off treaty whiche I thynke shal be herkynyd unto .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.32

Your Grace may aduertise the Kinge theroff
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.33

for it is not in his lettre . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.34

I have at diuerse tymes sene {COM:sic} I come in to thes parties lent M.
Spinel money which monteth in al to thyrty@ @=li= sterlinge
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.35

and as yet I am unpayd . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.36

At thys tyme he writeth , as he shewyth me , to your Grace theroff ,
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.37

and hath gyffen me a byl for my stuard to receyve it off M. Heron off
his payment off his fee next to be payd .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.38

I besech your Grace to help the said sume may be payd to my stuard .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.39

I owe it my selff in odyr places with mor ,
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.40

and lykwyse I besech your Grace to be good lord to my por frends and
servaunts in all ther suts to be made unto your Grace in my causes or
therys , TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.41

and thus yff ther be {TEXT:missing_"be"} any service that I may doo for
your Grace in this parties yo=r= pleas=r= knowen I am redy as knoweth
our Lord , who ever preserve your Grace .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.42

From Bruxellys TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.43

the xxv=th= day off November . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.44

Your most humble bedman Cuthbert Tunstal .
TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.45

To the moste reverend fader in God and his moste singler good Lorde Lord
Cardinall of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} Yorke
{COM:preceding_word_"Yorke"_emended} . TUNSTALL-1519-E1-P1,3.1,273.46

