<BEGIN_turner-1568-e1-p1>

<P_A>

A new boke of the nature and properties of all Wines that are commonlye
vsed here in England , with a confutation of an errour of some men ,
that holde , that Rhennish and other small white wines ought not to be
drunken of them that either haue , or are in daunger of the stone , the
reuine , and diuers other disease , made by William Turner , doctor of
Phisicke . Whervnto is annexed the booke of the natures and vertues of
Triacles , newly corrected and set foorth againe by the sayde William
Turner . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,A.3

<P_B1R>

<heading>

<font> Of the Natures , properties , profits , hurtes and helps that
come of Wyne . <$$font> TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B1R.6

<$$heading>

Although the order of learning do require , that euerye man that shall
write of anye thing , should declare & open by definitio~ it that he
entendeth to entreate of : yet nede not I <paren> as I iudge <$$paren>
going about to write of wine , to take any great paine to make a
definition of it , bicause all men , women and childer , that are cummed
to any perfite age , know well inough that Wine is the iuice of grapes
pressed out , and put vp into vessels , to be drunken afterwards at
co~uenient times of men , for diuerse endes and purposes that the Grape
maker hath ordeyned it for . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B1R.8

For manye great causes , it shall be more necessarye to diuide Wine into
his kindes and sortes , that thereby the <P_B1V> reader may the better
know what kinds of Wines are best for what endes and purposes .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B1V.9

Wines may be numbred and diuided either by the countrie and places that
they grow in , or by their colors , or by the youth , or age , and by
their tastes , smelles , and by properties that they haue , and some of
the maner of making , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B1V.10

and euery one of these kindes , may bee diuided againe into certaine
other speciall sortes or vnder kindes . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B1V.11

Some Wine is called <font> Creticum <$$font> of <font> Creta <$$font> ,
which is named in English <font> Candie <$$font> ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B1V.12

some is called <font> Graecum <$$font> of <font> Graecia <$$font> , some
<font> Rhennish <$$font> , bicause it groweth beside the <font> Rhene
<$$font> , some <font> Gallicum <$$font> , that is French wine , bicause
it groweth in France , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B1V.13

and some is called <font> Rheticum <$$font> bicause it groweth in <font>
Rhetia <$$font> , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B1V.14

and so a greate sorte of other Wines haue their names of the countries ,
& places wher@ @as they growe . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B1V.15

But it is best as I thinke , first of all according to nature to intreat
of new and olde Wines , and of it that is a middle Wine betwene them
both . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B1V.16

<P_B8V>

<heading>

<font> Of the difference of wynes by the colors . <$$font>
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B8V.19

<$$heading>

<font> Plinie <$$font> in the .xiiij. booke of his naturall hystorie
writeth thus of the colours of Wine . <font> Colores vinis quatuor .
Albus , fuluus , sanguineus , niger <$$font> , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B8V.21

that is , wines haue fower colors : white , redish yellowe , sanguine
and black . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B8V.22

The white is well knowen to all our countriemen ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B8V.23

but the other are not fullye knowen euen vnto some of the learned here
in Englande . Wherefore I thinke it needefull for the better
vnderstanding of it that I shall entreat of hereafter , to declare these
colors , so that they maye be knowen of all men that reade this booke .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B8V.24

<font> Aulus Gellius <$$font> in his second booke <font> de noctibus
atticis cap. 26 <$$font> writeth , that <font> Fuluus color videtur de
rufo atque viridi mistus esse . <$$font> TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B8V.25

that is , the color that is called in Latine <font> Fuluus <$$font> ,
seemeth to be merged with red and greene , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B8V.26

and there seemeth in some to be more greene , and in other more red .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,B8V.27

And he writeth that the color called <P_C1R> <font> Fuluus <$$font> in
Latine seemeth to be made of the mengling togither of grene , red &
white . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C1R.28

And he writeth that the color of the lion , golde , and sande is named
<font> Fuluus <$$font> in Latine , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C1R.29

thus farre <font> Gellius <$$font> . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C1R.30

Whereas <font> Dioscorides <$$font> writeth of wines he hath these words
following . {COM:greek_omitted} which wordes <font> Ruellius <$$font>
translateth thus <font> Giluu~ , vtpote quod mediu~ est , medias inter
vtrumque vires habet . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C1R.31

But <font> Cornarius <$$font> in this place turneth {COM:greek_omitted}
into <font> fuluum <$$font> . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C1R.32

And in dede I lyke better the translation of <font> Cornarius <$$font>
in this place , than the translation of Ruellius , otherwise an eloquent
and learned man , wherevnto moueth me the translation of <font> Galen
<$$font> of our <font> Linacre <$$font> written in his xij. booke
<font> de methodo medendi . Neque inuenies ex alborum vinorum genere
calidum vllum , quando austera & mediocriter alba , cum inuetarauerint
fuluiora quodammodo reddantur . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C1R.33

Quod si aliter nominare fuluum colorem velis , licet voces igneum
pallens . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C1R.34

Quotquot autem in ipsis calidissima <P_C1V> sunt omnia certe flaua sunt
. <$$font> TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C1V.35

These wordes peraduenture some learned Gentleman or other learned men ,
had leuer reade in Grake than in the Latine or Englishe alone , for
whose sakes I will rehearse <font> Galens <$$font> owne wordes in his
owne tongue , that men maye iudge better of the nature of the woordes ,
and thereby of <font> Galens <$$font> meaning , {COM:greek_omitted}
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C1V.36

Out of all these places of the authours that I haue alleadged , I gather
that <font> Fuluus color <$$font> is it that a man may call in English ,
redish yelow , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C1V.37

for as <font> Virgill <$$font> calleth Golde <font> Fuluum <$$font> ,
bicause it is redishe yellow , our countrymen marking in golde both a
readnesse and also a yellownesse , sometimes saye , that a thing is as
red as gold , <P_C2R> and other whiles , that a thing is as yellow as
gold , as commonlye they say that his eyes & skin that hath y=e= disease
that is called in Duch , Die guel sucht , and the Northe~ English tongue
, y=e= Guelsought , and in Southerne English , the yellowe jaundise ,
are as yelow as gold . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C2R.38

This disease is named in Latin <font> Aurigo <$$font> of <font>
Cornelius Celfus <$$font> , of the color of gold .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C2R.39

<font> Galen <$$font> seeming to doubt whether al men vnderstoode what
he ment by this word {COM:greek_omitted} which <font> Hippocrates
<$$font> vseth in this signification , taketh the paine to open and
shewe by two other Greeke words what he meaneth by {COM:greek_omitted} ,
saying that he thynketh that {COM:greek_omitted} maye bee called
{COM:greek_omitted} , that is Wine of a fierye color , hauing mixed
therewith the color of yellow Ochar , which ochar is not of a bright
yellowe color as {COM:greek_omitted} is , but more darker , whereby a
man may plainly know that <font> Fuluum <$$font> which is called in
Greeke {COM:greek_omitted} or {COM:greek_omitted} is a redish yellow
color , as our Muscadine and Bastards are {COM:sic} , whe~ as they come
to vs are {COM:sic} of . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C2R.40

<font> Vinu~ sanguineum <$$font> , that is sanguine , or <P_C2V>
bloud_coloured Wine , it is that we call commonly in English Clared wine
, but not the pale , or pallet <paren> as some call it <$$paren> Clared
wine . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C2V.41

<font> Vinum nigrum <$$font> , so named of <font> Plinie <$$font> , and
called {COM:greek_omitted} , in Greeke , is foolishly , but commonlye
called in English red wine , when as it ought to be called blacke Wine ,
of the blacke color that it hath in comparison of other wines .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C2V.42

And now after that I haue shewed what the foure colors that <font>
Plinie <$$font> maketh mention of , betoken in our English tongue , I
will go forwarde to declare the natures of Wines by their naturall
colors . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C2V.43

<heading>

<font> Of the nature and properties of white Wines . <$$font>
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C2V.45

<$$heading>

<font> Dioscorides <$$font> sayth , <font> vinum albu~ tenue stomacho
vtile , ac facile in membra distribuitur <$$font> .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C2V.47

That is , white wine is thin , and good for the stomach ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C2V.48

and is easily co~ueyed into the members , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C2V.49

and white wine both in sicknesse and in health is rather <P_C3R> to be
chosen tha~ others . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C3R.50

And <font> Galen <$$font> writing of the nature of white Wine , sayth :
{COM:greek_omitted} . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C3R.51

That is , ye can finde none of the white wine that is hote , meaning of
the common white wines that were about where as he dwelt .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C3R.52

<heading>

<font> Out of Galen in his fift booke de locis affectis . <$$font>
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C3R.54

<$$heading>

Furthermore , when as a certain yong man being a Gra~marian , as often
as he did to earnestlye teach , or deuise of any matter , or waxed
hungry or angrye , was taken with the falling sicknesse , by reason of
the to much quick feling of the mouth of his stomacke : I commaunded to
giue vnto him bread well prepared in the thirde or fourth houre alone ,
if he did not thirst . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C3R.56

But if he were troubled with thirst , to be moystened in wine ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C3R.57

and that in white wine which measurably bindeth ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C3R.58

for such wine , as it strengthens the stomach , so it hurteth not the
head as hote wines are wont to do . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C3R.59

Thus farre <font> Galen <$$font> . Out <P_C3V> of whose wordes we maye
gather howe vnreasonable and vnlearned they be in <font> Galens <$$font>
workes , that saye that all white wines whether they be Rhennishe or
French , or of like nature with eyther or both , are hurtfull for the
rheume and other diseases of the head , and forbid their patientes to
drinke them for a table or common drinke to be taken with meat , when as
<font> Galen <$$font> alloweth it for them that haue the falling
sicknesse , and sayth that it doth not hurt y=e= stomach , neyther
trouble y=e= head as hote wines do , of which sortes they alow some for
their patients for common table wine , as diuerse kinds of Clared wine ,
whereof euery one of them is hotter and more headie and fumish than the
common Rhennishe and French wines are , of the which matter we will
talke hereafter more largelye , if God will . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C3V.60

That the thin , small and waterish wines do not hurt the head , so that
they haue a littell astriction , <font> Galen <$$font> declareth
plainely in his booke <font> de euchymia & cacochymia <$$font> , in
these words . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C3V.61

And eue=r= as firish red wines , seeing that they are <P_C4R> hote of
nature , by and by fill the head , euen so those wines that are thin and
waterish , and gently binding , are not onlye vnhurtfull vnto the head ,
but also sometime they take away those small head aches which come of
humors gathered togither in the stomach . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4R.62

<heading>

<font> Out of Aetius . <$$font> TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4R.64

<$$heading>

Of all wines , white wines are least hurt , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4R.66

waterish wines neyther breedeth the head_ache , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4R.67

neyther hurt the sinewes . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4R.68

Wines that are white in color , nourish least of all other Wines , if
they be thin in substaunce , and after a maner like vnto water .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4R.69

<font> Aetius <$$font> also prescribing a diet for the~ that are
deliuered of the stone , how that they maye be preserued from falling
into the disease of the stone againe , alloweth a small wine that
prouoketh water , and is not verie olde . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4R.70

And the author of the booke of healing of the stone which is ascribed
vnto <font> Galen <$$font> , and iudged of manye to be his , in expresse
wordes sayth as followeth here . <font> Vinum sit tenue admodum <P_C4V>
& album , non ita vetus , dulcia vero & nigra vina , calculosis sunt
inepta . <$$font> TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4V.71

That is , let your wines be verye small and white , and not so olde ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4V.72

but sweete wines and blackish red wines are very vnmeete for them that
haue the stone . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4V.73

And the author sayeth in the same booke a littell after . <font> Vinum
tibi conuenit tenue & album , quod misturam non ita patitur
{COM:greek_omitted} , nam eiusmodi facile descendit ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4V.74

& succos qui sunt in nobis attenuat & secernit per vrinas , virtutemque
roborat <$$font> . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4V.75

That is , white and small wine is good and meete for you , which being
small , can@ @not abide to be menged with much water ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4V.76

for such wine doth easilye go downe , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4V.77

and maketh subtill or fine the iuces or humors that are in vs ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4V.78

and sifteth them out by the water , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4V.79

and strengtheneth the power of man . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4V.80

<heading>

<font> Of the natures of white and diuers other wynes , taken out of
Actuarius the last of the noble Greeke writers of phisicke . <$$font>
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C4V.82

<$$heading>

<P_C5R>

Grosse and thicke wines nourysh much , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.85

and are cause of grosse bloud , and of the stopping of inward partes ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.86

but thin or subtill wines which driue out water , are of a contrarye
nature , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.87

for they engender fine or thin bloud . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.88

Some wines that haue a little astriction , are better for the stomach
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.89

but nourish lesse , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.90

but sweete wines are of the contrarye nature , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.91

but white wines are lesse hot tha~ all other wines .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.92

Of wines are hotest of all redish yellow , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.93

and next vnto them are hotest , Wines of red color ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.94

they are least hote that are waterish , which are called in Greke
{COM:greek_omitted} , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.95

bicause they wil not suffer to be delayed w=t= much water , such wines
as these do trouble the head least . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.96

But strong and wel_coloured wine are more fit for them that labor for to
be of a good pitte , and to looke well . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.97

But for thee that carest only for the simple health , and for thy liuely
spirite , it maye seeme that a weake wine which is white and thin should
be sufficient for thee , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5R.98

and thou ought therewith to be content , except thou be compelled to
flie for <P_C5V> needes sake to vse hoter wines when as thou art to much
cooled in thy body . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5V.99

<heading>

<font> Of the nature of red wine , which here in England is commonly
called Clared wyne , and of the nature of blacke wyne which is called
commonlye in England red wine , out of Galen in his thirde booke de
alimentis . <$$font> TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5V.101

<$$heading>

If that whatsoeuer doth norish , be meat , the~ is wine to be placed
among the number of meates <paren> that is of things that doe feede and
encrease the bodie . <$$paren> TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5V.103

Of all wines red and thicke wines are most meete to make bloud , as such
as neede little chaunging to be turned into bloud ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5V.104

after these folow in order blacke wines , grosse and sweete , and also
those which in color is red and blacke , and in substance or composition
are thick , ioyned with a binding quality . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C5V.105

The same sentence hath <font> Aetius <$$font> in these words following .
<font> Rufa itaque & crassa <P_C6R> ex omnibus ad sanguinem generadum
commodissima sunt , vt que parua egeant in sanguinem transmutatione .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6R.106

Deinceps nigra simul dulcia ac crassa . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6R.107

Deinde colore idem rufa aut nigra , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6R.108

compage vero crassa , & habentia simul adstringentem qualitatem .
<$$font> TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6R.109

<heading>

<font> Of the fourth booke of Galen de sanitate tuenda . <$$font>
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6R.111

<$$heading>

Ecsuse and flie thicke and blacke wines , bicause they make an euill
iuice , and enter thorow and go very slowly down ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6R.113

and in the fift booke he sayeth . Such wines as tarie long in the
bellie , are none of them fit for an olde man , and that blacke wines
that are grosse and thicke , and are binding , tarie and abide long in
the bellie and stir up flowinges in it . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6R.114

But they that are blacke and thick , and haue no astriction , in deede
they tarie shorter while in the bellie . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6R.115

But yet they stirre not a man to make water , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6R.116

some take them before meat TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6R.117

but they are not good for olde men , neyther <P_C6V> any other which
make a thick iuice , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6V.118

for these stop the liuer , milt and kidneys , whereby it commeth to
passe that some olde men vsing these more largelye , fall into the
dropsey , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6V.119

and other fall into the stone . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,C6V.120

<P_D3V>

<heading>

<font> Of the natures of wynes after their tastes . <$$font>
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D3V.123

<$$heading>

The wines that are commonlye brought into England , named by their
tastes in Greeke {COM:greek_omitted} <P_D4R> that are
{TEXT:missing_"are"} in Latin , <font> dulcia , astringentia , austera &
acerba <$$font> , and such like as are <font> acria <$$font> and <font>
acida <$$font> , for the most part wherof we haue neuer one proper name
in English , though we can name <font> dulce vinu~ <$$font> well in
English , sweete wine : TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4R.125

but what shall we call <font> acre , austerum <$$font> and <font>
acerbum <$$font> in commone_vsed English : TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4R.126

surely I can@ @not tell , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4R.127

for I can@ @not giue to euery one of these wordes one seuerall vsed
English word , without circumlocution , wherfore seeing that the proper
English wordes are so harde to be found : and the meaning of the wordes
are as little knowen for the most part of all men , I think it shal be
necessarye to shewe by the aucthoritie of some old learned writer , what
these words <font> adstringens , austerum <$$font> and <font> acerbum
<$$font> signifie and betoken . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4R.128

If any man say that I nede not take this paine , bicause the great and
costlye booke , called <font> Thesaurus linguae Romanae & Britannicae
<$$font> , that is , the treasure of the Latin and English tongue , hath
done that thing alreadie : I <P_D4V> aunswere that I asked counsell of
that great booke , and in dede as I found great plentie both of good
Latin wordes , and fine maners of speaking , gathered wyth great paines
, and ordered with no small learning and iudgement :
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4V.129

but in y=e= English , as I found to much plentie of light , and new
inckhorne termes : so in some places I founde such scarcenesse , lacke ,
and want of proper and true Englishe names , that the author is faine to
giue one name to diuerse Latin wordes , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4V.130

for when I looked how he englished <font> Acer <$$font> , he englisheth
it thus . Eger , sharpe , tart , soure or fell .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4V.131

Lo , here is great plentie of wordes , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4V.132

and yet we can not tell what <font> acer <$$font> in taste doth properly
signifie , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4V.133

and a little after he writeth these wordes , <font> acer , acidus succus
, Vitruuius <$$font> eger . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4V.134

By this booke we may English <font> lac acidum <$$font> , eger milke .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4V.135

And afterwarde where as of purpose he expou~deth what <font> Acidus
<$$font> betokeneth , he englisheth it , eger , soure , sharp ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4V.136

and he englisheth <font> acidula pira <$$font> soure peares ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D4V.137

he englisheth <font> Acerbum <$$font> , vnripe , soure , vnpleasant ,
and <font> Acerbitas <$$font> , sournesse <P_D5R> or tarte , sharpnesse
or grieuousnesse of time . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D5R.138

He englisheth <font> Austerus <$$font> , soure , sharpe , vnpleasant ,
and <font> gustus austerus <$$font> a rough or soure tast .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D5R.139

Now how shall a man know by this booke what difference is between ,
<font> acer , acidus , austerus <$$font> and <font> acerbus <$$font> ,
when as he called them all soure , and putteth so small difference
betweene one and another . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D5R.140

Surely we haue but small helpe of that booke in declaring of these words
, & many such other , that are much occupied in phisicke and philosophy
, and in other both liberall and mathematical sciences . Wherfore I
wishe , to the ende that the booke may be in dede as it is called : that
one learned phisition & philsopher like vnto <font> Linaker <$$font> ,
one olde and learned gra~marian like vnto <font> Clemond <$$font> , and
one perfite Englishman like vnto Sir <font> Thomas Moore <$$font> , had
the amendment and making perfite of this booke committed vnto them .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D5R.141

But now as <font> Terence <$$font> sayeth , <font> quoniam hac no~
successit , alia aggrediendum est via <$$font> .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D5R.142

<font> Galen <$$font> in the first of his bookes that he writeth of the
powers <P_D5V> of simple medicines sayth . Cap. 39. If any man doe
taste quinces or apples , or medlers , or mirtels , doubtlesse he shall
know that there is an other feeling that is moued vnto vs of these
things in y=e= tongue , and another of bodies <font> astringentibus
<$$font> , that is , that are onely binding , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D5V.143

for those things that are binding , appeare to driue inwarde that part
of vs that they touche in al places equally or in like , as pulling ,
stopping , as drawing togither . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D5V.144

But <font> austera <$$font> seeme to goe downe euen vnto the bottome ,
and to moue a rough and vnequal feeling and drying vp and wasting all
the moisture of feeling bodies . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D5V.145

Furthermore when as that bodie which is moued vnto our tongue doth
mightilye drie and draw togither , and maketh it rough euen to the
bottome , as choke_peares that are not ripe , and cornelles , euerye
such is called <font> acerbum <$$font> , differing from <font> austero
<$$font> in the excesse of these qualities . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D5V.146

That is to say , <font> austerum <$$font> in many things is like vnto
<font> acerbo <$$font> , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D5V.147

but <font> acerbum <$$font> is in all those things wherein they are
something like , much stronger and mightier <P_D6R> than <font> austerum
<$$font> is : TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6R.148

and <font> Galen <$$font> in another place writeth , that astringent is
weaker than <font> acerbum <$$font> and <font> austerum <$$font> , in
all those properties that they haue anye likenesse in .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6R.149

And <font> Galen <$$font> in y=e= .ix. booke <font> de simplicium and
medicamentorum facultatibus <$$font> , sayeth that <font> adstringentia
<$$font> draw togither , bind togither , and do make thick our substance
, TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6R.150

and therfore vpon whatsoeuer part of our bodie they be layde without ,
by and by they make it full of wrinkles , and draw togither ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6R.151

furthermore after y=e= doctrine of <font> Galen <$$font> , we may
perceiue in some kindes of peares , marked at diuerse times , <font>
gustum acerbum , austerum & adstringentem <$$font> .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6R.152

When the peares are newly growen , if ye taste of them at the first , ye
shall perceiue that they are harde and drie , and are verye rough in
taste , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6R.153

and then they are called <font> acerba <$$font> ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6R.154

but after that they are more than half ripe , when that hardnesse and
drinesse is gone , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6R.155

then become they moyster and softer , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6R.156

and are in taste <font> austera <$$font> . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6R.157

And when they are full ripe , they are <font> astringentia <$$font> ,
with a sweete taste ioyned therwith . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6R.158

<P_D6V>

By this discription , I trust wise and learned men by taking of some
paine in reading of olde English writers shall come by the knowledge of
right and proper English wordes for these .iii. Latin ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6V.160

or els at the least I iudge that men shall vnderstande what difference
is betwayne <font> astringens , austerum <$$font> and <font> acerbum
<$$font> . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6V.161

In the meane time vntill that we may spede better , we may english
<font> astringens <$$font> , binding , <font> austerum <$$font> , soure
binding , and <font> acerbum <$$font> , rough and binding like
choke_peares . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6V.162

And <font> Galen lib. 1. simpl medic. facultatibus . cap. 39
<$$font> and in diuerse other places maketh an open and plaine
difference betweene <font> acre <$$font> and <font> acidum <$$font> ,
contrarie to what is alleaged of Vitruuius , who maketh them both one .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6V.163

For <font> Galen <$$font> sayeth , that <font> acria <$$font> are <font>
calida <$$font> , and that <font> acida <$$font> are cold .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6V.164

<font> Acer <$$font> may be Englished biting sharp ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6V.165

and <font> acidum <$$font> may be named soure as sorrell , and soure
milke , and diuers other things . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D6V.166

<font> Actius <$$font> writeth , that wine that is soure with an harrish
binding , so that it be well_smelling withall , hurteth the <P_D7R> head
, but it which is waterishe , neither hurteth the headach neither
hurteth the sinewes . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7R.167

<font> Galen <$$font> also sayth that soure binding wines stoppe
flowings , and strengthen the stomach , and hurt not the head , but that
they help not them that are fallen into a swounde .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7R.168

Wines that are rough and binding in taste like vnto choke_peares , stop
vomitings and flowings of the belly , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7R.169

and they coole and drie . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7R.170

Morouer they goe hardlye downe , when as those things that are only of a
soure taste , go easily downe . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7R.171

I haue learned by experience <paren> sayeth <font> Galen <$$font>
<$$paren> that all those things that binde , and are also soure , are
manifestly cold . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7R.172

<font> Simeon Sethi <$$font> sayeth , wines that are all little and
gently binding , & are in color red , and in substance thin , are good
for them that are of a good and a meane complexion and temperature that
are neither to hote nor to colde , neither to moyst nor to drie , of the
which sort I weene we shall finde as few at this time almost , as we
shal@ @be able to <P_D7V> finde citizens of <font> Platoes <$$font>
common_welth in euery parish of England . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7V.173

And <font> Galen <$$font> a man of more authoritie than <font> Simeon
Sethi <$$font> is of , writeth in the booke of good and euill wines ,
that as fierie red wines , for_asmuch as they are hote in working , by
and by fill the heade , euen so those wines that are thin and waterishe
, and doe lightly bind , not only ar not vnnoysome vnto the head , but
also take awaye small headaches , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7V.174

and he saith afterward , all wines that are binding , are comfortable
for the stomache , and that such as are soure and colde , be of subtill
partes , but they that are binding , are of grosse partes <font> de
simplic. med. facultatib. lib. 4. cap. 2. <$$font>
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7V.175

Whatsoeuer things are sweete , can@ @not be colde ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7V.176

therfore sweete wines are of an hote complexion :
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7V.177

and <font> Dioscorides <$$font> sayth , sweete wines hath grosse partes
in it , and doth breath out of the bodie more hardlye ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7V.178

it filleth the stomache full of winde , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7V.179

it troubleth the bellye , and the guttes as Must doth ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7V.180

but it maketh not a man so sone drunken , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D7V.181

but it is most fit <P_D8R> of all other for the kidneys & the bladder .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,D8R.182

<P_E1V>

<heading>

<font> Simeon Sethi of the nature of Wines . <$$font>
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E1V.185

<$$heading>

<P_E2R>

Some vse wine for profit , some to make them merie withall , and some
for pleasure , and some for all these purposes .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.188

Wine doth not only nourishe , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.189

but also maketh the meates go wel downe , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.190

and stirreth vp the naturall heate TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.191

and encreaseth it . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.192

And the most part of them that vse it soberlye , when as their bodie is
withered before , they come into a good plight ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.193

and looke well . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.194

Wine hath this propertie , that it carieth and leadeth the meat vnto
euerye small part , and through streyte wayes by the proper thinnesse or
subtilnesse of his partes , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.195

& it heateth the members and small parts , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.196

and maketh a good digestion , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.197

& driueth forth water . Wherfore it sifteth forth the most part of
superfluities , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.198

but the greater power and working of wine may be spied more plainly in
colde and withered bodies , and wherein is lesse naturall heat , as in
olde men , and in such as are amended of their sicknesse .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.199

But wine worketh not only these things which we haue spoken of before ,
in mens bodies , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2R.200

but also sheweth certain <P_E2V> chaungings wonderfully in a mans minde
. TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2V.201

For it maketh men merie , and to haue a good hope , to be manly and
liberal , and many that we see before , cowardes , after the drinking of
wine , to be made bolde , chearefull , of a good courage , and a good
hope , and some that were niggards and filthy pinchers to be made
liberall , and free_giuers . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2V.202

But wine if it be vsed out of measure , ouerthroweth and drowneth the
liuely soundnesse and strength , and the naturall color ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2V.203

and it bringeth the hole palsie , the halfe palsie , the falling
sicknesse , and the trembling of the members , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2V.204

it noyeth also the godlye and principall part of the soule , bicause
they that gull in wine so , haue mistie and darke senses ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2V.205

and their minde is not cleare . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2V.206

Hitherto <font> Simeon Sethi . <$$font> TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2V.207

Whyte small wines that haue no great smell , are good for the sinewes
that are wounded . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2V.208

Wine is good to washe the moyst fleshe that is in olde sores .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2V.209

Waterish wine is necessarie for them that haue the ague , and haue thin
iuices therwith , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E2V.210

& it may be giue~ in diuers agues , as <font> Galen <$$font> saith in
his booke <P_E3R> <font> de methodo medendi <$$font> , when as the rage
of the ague is not great . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3R.211

And althoughe wine when it is taken inwardly hurteth both the sinewes
and ioyntes , bicause it fumeth vp into the heade , and breedeth rheumes
which fall downe vnto them , yet for all that , if it be layde
outwardlye vpon the ioyntes , it strengtheneth them ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3R.212

and maketh them fast when as they are loose by melting awaye or
resoluing the moysture that is in them , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3R.213

and for that purpose serueth best of all other blacke wine ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3R.214

for the more that it is binding , the more it strengtheneth .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3R.215

<heading>

<font> Out of the boke of Galen which teacheth that the maners of the
soule , and the complexion of the body follow one another . <$$font>
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3R.217

<$$heading>

Wine driueth away sadnesse , and pensiuenesse ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3R.219

but it is ill if it be to largely taken . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3R.220

But if a man wil vse it wisely , it will digest , and distribute or
conuey the nourishme~t , increase bloud & norishe ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3R.221

& it wil also make the minde both gentler and bolder .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3R.222

<font> Plato <$$font> <P_E3V> in the .ij. booke <font> de legibus
<$$font> , forbiddeth all children wine y=t= are vnder .xij. houres
{COM:sic} old , for that inte~t y=t= they should not be driuen therwith
into madnesse , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3V.223

he suffreth them that are full_growen in age , to vse it , bicause it is
a remedie against y=e= grieuousenesse of age , and driueth away sorowes
, & swageth the hardnesse of maners , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3V.224

the age of springoldes or of growing children , is hote and full of
muche bloude , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3V.225

contrarywise the olde age is colde , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3V.226

and wanteth bloud , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3V.227

therefore the drinking of wine is profitable for olde men ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3V.228

but to them that are in growing , it is exceeding hurtfull ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3V.229

moreouer <font> Plato <$$font> did not suffer that the souldiers shoulde
drinke any wine in the campe , neyther bondmen in the citie , neyther
princes nor gouernors in the co~mon wealth , neither iudges , neither
any other that should enter in the counsell about any matter , bicause
that wine as a certain tyrant doth rule & ouercome the powers of the
soule . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3V.230

Hitherto <font> Galen <$$font> . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E3V.231

But bicause it hath bene diuerse times sayd , that wine is good for olde
men , and it is not as yet fullye shewed what maner of wine that <P_E4R>
should be , it shal@ @be best to teache men by <font> Galen <$$font>
what wines are best for old men . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4R.232

<font> Galen lib. 5 de sanitate tuenda <$$font> , sayth : All your
counsell must goe to this ende in chosing of wine fit for old men , that
it may be very thin or subtil , in color redish yellow , or yellow , or
pale yellow , which is of a middle color betweene bright yellow and
white . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4R.233

There are two profites that come to old men by the vse of wine ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4R.234

one is , that it warmeth all the members of their bodies ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4R.235

and the other is , that it scoureth out by the water all the
whayishnesse or thin waterishnes of the bloud ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4R.236

and bicause it doth so effectuallye , it is best for olde men .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4R.237

But such wine is it that is thin in substance , & driueth forth water ,
and is yellow in color , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4R.238

for that is the proper color of hote wines , and so also which haue bene
from the beginning verye white , and haue gotten a certaine yellownesse
when they haue waxed old , wherevpon they begin first to be a little
yellowishe pale , and afterwarde to be plainly yellow pale .
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4R.239

But such wines as are eyther pale yellow , or bright yellow <P_E4V> and
a fat substaunce increase the bloud , TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4V.240

& nourish the bodie by reason whereof they are now & then good for old
men , to wete , at such times whe~ as they haue not much wheyish
moisture , & would be more plenteously norished ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4V.241

but for all that , aged me~ had more nede for y=e= most part , of
{TEXT:missing_"of"} such wines as make a man pisse much , bicause they
haue such plenty of waterish excrements . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4V.242

And good reader seeing that almighty God our heauenly father hath giuen
thee this noble creature of wine , so manye wayes profitable for our
bodies and mindes , thanke him with all thy heart , not onely for it ,
but also for that he hath sent learned Phisitions to tell thee how , in
what measure , and in what time thou should vse them , and not vse them
, and for what complexions and ages they are good , and for what
complexions and ages they are euill . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4V.243

If thou take any harm by misusing this noble creature of god , blame not
him , but thine owne selfe , that hast abused it , contrary to his will
, and to the learning of his officers & seruants that taught thee the
right vse of it . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4V.244

Honor be giuen to God for euer . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4V.245

Amen . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4V.246

<heading>

Finis . TURNER-1568-E1-P1,E4V.248

<$$heading>

