<BEGIN_vicary-1548-e1-p1>

<P_12>

<heading>

<font> A BREEFE TREATISE OF <$$font> THE ANATOMIE OF MANS BODY :
COMPYLED BY ME <font> THOMAS VYCURIE <$$font> ESQUIRE , AND SARGEANT
CHIRURGION TO KING HENRY THE EYGHT , FOR THE USE AND COMMODITIE OF AL
VNLEARNED PRACTICIONERS IN CHIRURGERIE . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,12.4

<$$heading>

<heading:edcomment:1548>

<heading:edcomment:CHAPTER_I>

In the name of God , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,12.8

Amen ! VICARY-1548-E1-P1,12.9

Heere I shal declare vnto you shortly and breefly the sayinges and the
determinations of diuers auncient Authors , in three poyntes , very
expedient for al men to knowe , that entende to vse or exercise the
mysterie or arte of Chirurgerie . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,12.10

The first is , to knowe what thing Chirurgerie is :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,12.11

The Second is , how that a Chirurgion should be chosen :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,12.12

And the thirde is , with what properties a Surgion should be indued .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,12.13

The fyrst is , to know what thing Chirurgerie is .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,12.14

Heerein I doe note the saying of <font> Lamfranke <$$font> , whereas he
sayth , Al thinges that man would knowe , may be knowen by one of these
three thinges : That is to say , by his name , or by his working , or
els by his very being and shewing of his owne properties .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,12.15

So then it followeth , that in the same manner we may know what
Chirurgerie is by three thinges . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,12.16

First , by his name , as thus , The Interpreters write , that Surgerie
is deriued oute of these wordes , <font> Apo tes chiros , cai tou ergou
<$$font> , that is too bee vnderstanded , A hand working ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,12.17

<P_13>

and so it may be taken for al handy artes . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.19

But noble Ipocras sayth , that Surgerie is hande working in mans body ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.20

for the very ende and profite of Chirurgerie is hande working .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.21

Nowe the seconde manner of knowing what thing Chirurgerie is , it is the
saying of <font> Anicen {COM:sic} <$$font> to be knowen by his beeing ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.22

for it is verely a medecinal science : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.23

and as Galen sayth , he that wyl knowe the certentie of a thing , let
him not busy him selfe to knowe only the name of that thing , but also
the working and the effect of the same thing . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.24

Nowe the thirde way to knowe what thing Chirurgerie is , It is also to
be knowen by his beeing or declaring of his owne properties , the which
teacheth vs to worke in mannes body with handes : as thus , In cutting
or opening those partes that be whole , and in healing those partes that
be broken or cut , and in taking away that that is superfluous , as
warts , wennes , skurfulas , and other lyke . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.25

But further to declare what Galen sayth Surgery is , It is the laste
instrument of medecine : That is to say , Dyet , Pocion , and
Chirurgerie : of the whiche three , sayth he , Dyet is the noblest and
the most vertuous . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.26

And thus he sayth , whereas a man may be cured with Dyet onely , let
there be geuen no maner of medicine . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.27

The seconde instrument is Pocion : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.28

for and if a man may be cured with Dyet and Pocion , let there not be
ministred any Chirurgerie . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.29

The thirde and laste Instrument is Chirugerie , through whose vertue and
goodness is remoued and put away many greeuous infirmities and diseases
, which might not have bene remoued , nor yet put away , neither with
Diet nor with Pocion . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.30

And by these three meanes it is knowen what thing Chirurgerie is .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.31

And this suffiseth for vs for that poynt . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.32

Nowe it is knowen what thing Chirurgerie is , there must also be chosen
a man apt and mete to minister Surgerie , or to be a Chirurgion .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,13.33

And in this <P_14> poynt al Authors doo agree , that a Chirurgion should
be chosen by his complexion , and that his complexion be very temperate
, and al his members wel proportioned . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.34

For <font> Rasis <$$font> sayth , Whose face is not seemely , it is
vnpossible for him for to haue good manners . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.35

And Aristotle , the great Philosopher , writeth in his Epistles to the
noble king Alexander <paren> as in those Epistles more playnely doth
appeare <$$paren> howe hee should choose al suche persons as should
serue him , by the forme and shape of the face , and al other members of
the body . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.36

And furthermore they say , he that is of an euill complexion , there
must needes folowe like conditions . Wherefore it agreeth that a
Chirurgion must be both of a good and temperate complexion , as is afore
rehearsed . And principally , that he be a good lyuer , and a keeper of
the holy commaundaments of God , of whom commeth al cunning and grace ,
and that his body be not quaking , and his hands stedfast , his fingers
long and smal , and not trembling ; and that his left hand be as ready
as his right hande , with al his lymmes able to fulfil the good workes
of the soule . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.37

Nowe here is a man meete to be made a Chirurgion .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.38

And thoughe he haue al these good qualities before rehersed , yet is he
no good Chirurgion , but a man very fitte and meete therfore .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.39

Now then , to knowe what properties and conditions this man must haue
before he be a perfect Chirurgion . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.40

And I doo note foure thinges moste specially that euery Chirurgion ought
for to haue : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.41

The first , that he be learned ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.42

the seconde , that he be expert ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.43

the thirde , that he be ingenious ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.44

the fourth , that he be wel_manered . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.45

The first <paren> I sayde <$$paren> , he ought to be learned , and that
he knows his principles , not onely in Chirurgerie , but also in
Phisicke , that he may the better defende his Surgery .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,14.46

Also he ought to be seene in <P_15> natural Philosophie , and in Grammar
, that he speake congruitie in Logike , that teacheth him to proue his
proportions with good reason . In Rethorike , that teacheth him to
speake seemely and eloquently : also in Theorike , that teacheth him to
knowe thinges natural and not natural , & thinges agaynst nature .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.47

Also he must knowe the Anatomie ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.48

for al authors write against those Surgions that worke in mans body ,
not knowing the Anatomie ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.49

for they be likened to a blind man that cutteth in a vine tree ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.50

for he taketh more or lesse than he ought to doo .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.51

And here note wel the saying of Galen , the prince of Philosophers , in
his Estories , that it is as possible for a Surgion not knowing the
Anatomie , to worke in mans body without error , as it is for a blind
man to carue an Image & make it perfyt . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.52

The .ij. I said , he must be expert ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.53

for Rasus sayth , he ought to knowe and to see other men work , and
after to have vse and exercise . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.54

The thirde , that he be ingenious or wittie , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.55

for al thinges belonging to Chirurgerie may not be written , nor with
letters set foorth . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.56

The fourth , I sayde , that he muste be wel_manered , and that he haue
al these good conditions here folowing : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.57

First , that he be no spous-breaker , nor no drunkarde .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.58

For the Philosophers say , amongst all other thinges beware of those
persons that followe dronkennes , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.59

for they be accompted for no men , because they liue a life bestiall :
wherfore amongst al other sortes of people , they ought to be sequestred
from the ministring of medicine . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.60

Likewise a Chirurgion must take heede that he deceiue no man with his
vague promises , for to make of a smal matter a great , because he
woulde be counted the more famous . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.61

And amongest other thinges , they maye neither be flatterers , nor
mockers , nor priue backbyters of other men . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.62

Likewise they muste not be proude , nor presumptuous , nor detracters of
other men . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,15.63

Likewise they ought not to <P_16> be too couetous , nor no nigarde , &
namely amongst their freendes , or men of worship ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.64

but let them be honest , curteous , and free , both in worde and deede .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.65

Likewise they shal geue no counsayle except they be asked , and then say
their aduise by good deliberation ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.66

and that they be wel advised afore they speake , chefly in the presence
of wise men . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.67

Likewise they muste be as priuie and as secrete as anye Confessour , of
al thinges that they shal eyther heare or see in the house of their
Pacient . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.68

They shal not take into their cure any maner of person , except he wyl
be obedient unto their preceptes ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.69

for he can not be called a pacient , vnlesse he be a sufferer .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.70

Also that they doo their diligence as@ @wel to the poore as to the riche
. VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.71

They shal neuer discomfort their patient , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.72

and shall commaunde all that be about him that they doo the same ; but
to his freendes , speake truthe , as the case standeth .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.73

They must also be bolde in those thinges whereof they be certayne , and
as dreadfull in al perilles . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.74

They may not chide with the sicke , but be alwayes pleasaunt and mery .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.75

They must not couet any woman by wage of vylanie , & specially in the
house of their Patient . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.76

They shal not , for couetousnes of money , take in hande those cures
that be vncurable , nor neuer set any certaine day of the sickemans
health , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.77

for it lyeth not in their power : folowing the distinct counsayle of
Galen , in the amphorisme of Ipocras , saying , <font> Oportet seipsum
non solum . <$$font> VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.78

By this , Galen meaneth , that to the cure of every sore there belongeth
foure thinges ; of which , the first and principal belongeth to God ,
the second to the Surgion , the thirde to the Medicine , and the fourth
to the Patient . Of the whiche foure , and if any one doo fayle , the
Pacient can not be healed : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.79

then they , to whom belongeth but the fourth parte , shal not promise
the whole , but bee first wel advised . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,16.80

They must also be <P_17> gracious and good to the poore ; and of the
rich take liberally for bothe . And see they neuer prayse themselues ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,17.81

for that redoundeth more to their shame and discredite , then to their
fame and worship : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,17.82

For a cunning and skilful Chirurgion neede neuer vaunt of his dooings ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,17.83

for his works wyll ewer get credite ynough . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,17.84

Likewise , that they despise no other Chirurgion without a great cause ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,17.85

for it is meete that one Chirurgion should loue another , as Christe
loueth vs all . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,17.86

And in thus dooing , they shall increase both in vertue & cunning , to
the honour of God and worldly fame . To whome he bring vs al .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,17.87

Amen ! VICARY-1548-E1-P1,17.88

<heading:edcomment:CHAPTER_II>

Heereafter foloweth the Anathomie of the simple members .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,17.90

And if it be asked you how many simple members there be , it is to be
answered , eleuen , and two that be but superfluities of members ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,17.91

and these be they , Bones , Cartylages , Nerves , Pannykles , Lygaments
, Cordes , <P_18> Arteirs , Weines , Fatnes , Fleshe and Skinne :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.92

and the superfluities be the heares & the nayles .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.93

I shal beginne at the Bone , because it is the fundation , and the
hardest member of al the body . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.94

The Bone is a consimile member , simple and spermatike , and colde and
dry of complexion , insencible , and inflexible ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.95

and hath diuers formes in mans body , for the diuersitie of helpings .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.96

The cause why there be many bones in mans body , is this :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.97

Sometime it is needeful that one member or one lymme should moue without
another . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.98

Another cause is , that some defende the principal members , as dothe
the bone of the brest , and of the head : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.99

and some to be the fundation of diuers partes of the body , as the bones
of the Ridge , and of the legges : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.100

and some to fulfyll the hollowe places , as in the handes and feete ,
&c. VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.101

The Grystle is a member simple and spermatike , next in hardnes to the
bone , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.102

and is of complexion colde and drye , and insencible .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.103

The grystle was ordeyned for sixe causes or profites that I fynd in it :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.104

The first is , that the continual mouing of the hard bone might not be
done in a iuncture , but that the grystle should be a meane betweene the
Lygament and him : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,18.105

The seconde is , that in the time of concussion or oppression , the
softe members or limmes <P_19> should not be hurt of the harde :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.106

The thirde is , that the extremitie of bones and Ioyntes that be gristly
, might the easelyer be folded and moued together without hurt :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.107

The fourth is , for that it is necessarie in some meane places to put a
grystle , as in the throte bowel for the sounde :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.108

The fyfth is , for that it is needeful that some members be holden vp
with a grystle , as the liddes of the eyes : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.109

The sixth is , that some limmes haue a sustayning and a drawing abrod ,
as in the nose and the eares , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.110

The Lygament is a member consimple , simple , and spermatike , next in
hardnes to the gristle , and of complexion cold and dry ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.111

and is flexible and insensible , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.112

and byndeth the bones together . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.113

The cause why he is flexible and insencible is this :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.114

If it had bene sensible , he mighte not haue suffred the labour and
mouing of the ioynts : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.115

and if it had not ben flexible of his bowing , one lymme should not haue
moued without another . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.116

The seconde profite is , that he be ioyned with sinews , for to make
Cordes & Brawnes : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.117

The thirde helpe is , that he be a resting place to some sinewes :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.118

The fourth profite is , that by him the members that be within the body
be sustayned , as the matrix and kidneys , and diuers other , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.119

The Sinew is a consimiler member , simple and spermatike , meane
betweene harde and softe , and in complexion colde and drye ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.120

and he is both flexible and sensible , strong and tough , hauing his
beginning from the braine , or from <font> Mynuca <$$font> , whiche is
the marow of the backe . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.121

And from the brayne commeth .vij. payre of Nerues sensatiues ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.122

and from <font> Mynuca <$$font> commeth .xxx. payre of Nerues motius ,
and one that is by him selfe , that springeth of the last spondel .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.123

Al these senews ; haue both feeling and mouing ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.124

in some more , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.125

and in some lesse , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-P1,19.126

<P_20>

A Corde or Tendon is a consimple or official member , compounde and
spermatike , synowy , strong , and tough , meanly betweene hardenes and
softnes , and meanely sensible and flexible , and in complexion colde
and dry . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.128

And the Corde or Tendon is thus made : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.129

The synewes that come from the brayne & from Mynuca , and go to moue the
members , is intermingled with the Lygamentes ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.130

and when the Synewes and Lygamentes are intermingled together , then is
made a corde . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.131

And three causes I perceyue why the Cordes were made :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.132

The fyrst is , that the Synewe alone is so sensible that he may not
suffer the great labour and trauel of mouing , without the felowship and
strength of the Lygament that is insencible , and that letteth his great
feeling , and bringeth him to a perfect temperaunce ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.133

and so the Cordes moue the limmes to the wil of the soule .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.134

And this Corde is associated with a simple flesh ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.135

and so therof is made a brawne or a muskel , on whom he might rest after
his travel . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.136

And this Brawne is called a Muskle . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.137

Then when this Corde is entred into this brawne , he is departed into
many smal threeds , the whiche be called ' wylle . '
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.138

And this wyl hath three properties : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.139

The fyrst is in length , by whose vertue that draweth , it hath might :
The seconde in breadth , by whome the vertue that casteth out hath might
: The third in thwartnes , in whom the vertue that holdeth hath might :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.140

and at the ende of the Brawne those threedes be gathered to make another
muskel , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.141

Nowe I wyl begynne at the Artere . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,20.142

This Artere <P_21> is a member consimyle , simple and spermatike ,
hollowe and synowy , hauing his springing from the hart , bringing from
the harte to euery member , blood and spirite of lyfe .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,21.143

It is of complexion cold and drye . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,21.144

And al these Arteres have two cotes , except one that goth to the Lunges
, VICARY-1548-E1-P1,21.145

and he hath but one cote that spreadeth abrode in the Lungs , and
bringeth with him to the Lunges blood , with the spirits of lyfe to
nourishe the Lungs withal : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,21.146

and also that Artere bringeth with him from the lunges ayre to temper
the fumous heate that is in the harte . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,21.147

And this Artere is he that is called <font> Arteria venalis <$$font> ,
because he hath but one cote as a vayne , and is more obedient to be
delated abrode through al the lunges , because that the blood might the
sooner sweate through him : wheras al other Arters have two cotes ,
because one cote may not withstande the might and power of the spirit of
life . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,21.148

Diuers other causes there be , which shal be declared in the Anathomie
of the brest , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-P1,21.149

The Veyne is a symple member , in complexion colde and drye , and
spermatike , like to the Artere , hauing his beginning from the Lyuer ,
and bringing from the Lyuer nutritiue blood , to nourishe every member
of the body with . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,21.150

And it is so to be vnderstanded , that there is no more difference
betweene these two vessels of blood , but that the Artere is a vessel of
blood spiritual or vytal . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,21.151

And the Veyne is a vessel of blood nutrimental , of the which Veynes
there is <P_22> noted two most principal , of the which one is called
<font> vena porta ; <$$font> VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.152

the other is called <font> uenacelis <$$font> , of whom it is too much
to treate of now , vntyll we come to the anathomie of the wombe , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.153

The flesh is a consimiler member , simple , not spermatike ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.154

and is ingendred of blood congeled by heate , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.155

and is in complexion hote and moyst . Of the which is noted three
kindes of fleshes ; that is to say , one is soft & pure fleshe :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.156

the seconde is muskulus , or hard & brawny flesh :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.157

the thirde is glandulus , knotty , or kurnelly fleshe .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.158

Also the commodities of the fleshe be indifferent ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.159

for some be common to euery kinde of fleshe , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.160

and some be proper to one maner of fleshe alone .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.161

The profytes of the fleshe be many ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.162

for some defende the bodye from colde , as dothe clothes :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.163

also it defendeth the body from harde thinges comming agaynst it :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.164

also through his moysture he rectifieth the body in sommer , in time of
great heate . Wherefore it is to be considered what profitablenes is in
euery kinde of fleshe by him selfe . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.165

And fyrst of simple and pure fleshe , whiche fulfylleth the concauities
of voyde places , and causeth good forme and shape :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.166

and this fleshe is founde betweene the teeth , and on the ende of the
yarde . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.167

The profite of the Brawny fleshe , or muskulus fleshe , shal be spoken
of in the Anathomie of the armes . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.168

The profites of the Glandulus fleshe are these :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.169

First , that it turneth the blood into a cullour like to him selfe , as
doth the fleshe of a womans paps turne the menstrual blood into mylke :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.170

secondly , the Glandulus fleshe of the Testikles turneth the blood into
sparme : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.171

thirdly , the Glandulus flesh of the cheekes , that ingendreth the
spittle , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-P1,22.172

<P_23>

The next is of Fatnes , of the whiche I finde three kindes :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.174

The firste is <font> Pinguedo , <$$font> VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.175

and it is a consimilar member , not spermatike ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.176

and it is made of a subtyl portion of blood congeled by colde :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.177

and it is of complexion colde and moyst , insencible ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.178

and is intermedled amongest the partes of the fleshe .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.179

The seconde is <font> Adeppes , <$$font> VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.180

and is of the same kinde as is <font> Pinguedo , <$$font>
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.181

but it is departed from the fleshe besydes the skinne ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.182

and it is as an oyle , heating and moysting the skinne .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.183

The thirde is <font> Auxingia , <$$font> VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.184

and it is of kinde as the others be , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.185

but he is departed from the fleshe withinforth about the kidneys , and
in the intrayles , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.186

and it helpeth both the kidneys and the intrayles from drying by his
vnctiositie , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.187

Then come we to the Skinne . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.188

The Skinne is a consimile member or officiall , partely spermatike ,
strong and tough , flexible and sencible , thinne and temperate , Wherof
there be two kindes : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.189

One is the Skinne that couereth the outwarde members : and the other the
inner members , whiche is called a Pannicle , the profitablenesse of
whome was spoken of in the laste Lesson : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.190

But the Skinne is properlye wouen of Threedes , Nerues , Veynes , and
Arteirs . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.191

And he is made temperate , because he should be a good deemer of heate
from colde , and of moystnes from drynes , that there shoulde nothing
noye nor hurt the body , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.192

but it geueth warning to the common wittes thereof , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,23.193

The Heyres of euery part of mans body are but <P_24> a superfluitie of
members , made of the grosse fume or smoke passing out of the viscoues
matter , thickened to the forme of heyre . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.194

The profitablenesse of him is declared in the Anathomie of the head ,
&c. VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.195

The Nayles likewise are a superfluitie of members , engendred of great
earthly smoke or fume resolued through the natural heate of humours ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.196

and is softer then the Bone , & harder then the Fleshe .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.197

In comeplexion they be colde and drye , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.198

and are alwayes waxing in the extremitie of the fyngers and toes .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.199

The vtilitie of them are , that by them a man shal take the better holde
: VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.200

also they helpe to clawe the body when it needeth :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.201

Lastly , they helpe to deuide thinges , for lacke of other tooles , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.202

<heading:edcomment:CHAPTER_III>

<font> Heereafter foloweth the <$$font> Anathomie of the compound
members , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.204

and first of the head . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.205

Because the head of man is the habitation or dwelling place of the
reasonable some of man , therefore , with the grace of God , I shal
fyrst speake of the Anatomie of the head . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.206

Galen saith in the seconde Chapter <font> De iuuamentis , <$$font> and
Auicen rehearseth the same in hys fyrst preposition and third Chapter ,
prouing that the Head of man was made neither for Wittes , nor yet for
the Braynes , but onely for the eyes . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.207

For beastes that haue no heades , haue the orgayne or instrumentes of
Wittes in their brests . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.208

Therefore God and nature have reared vp the head of man onely for the
eyes , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.209

for it is the hyest member of man : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,24.210

and as a beholder or watchman standeth in a highe Towre to geue warning
of the Enemies , so doth the Eye of man <P_25> geue warning vnto the
common Wittes , for the defence of all other members of the body .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.211

Nowe to our purpose . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.212

If the question be asked , how many things be there conteyning on the
head , and howe many thinges conteyned within the head ? As it is
rehearsed by Guydo , there bee but fyue conteining , and as many
conteined : as thus , The Heyre , the Skinne , the Flesh , the Pannicles
, and the Bone , neither rehearsing Veyne nor Artere . The which
Anathomie , can not be truly without them both , as thou shalt wel
perceive both in this Chapter , but specially in the next .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.213

And nowe in this lesson I shall speake but of Heire , Skinne , Fleshe ,
Veines , Pannicles , and Bones , what profite they doo to man , every of
them in his kinde . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.214

Of the Heire of the head <paren> whose creation is knowen in the
Anatomie of the simple members <$$paren> I doo note foure vtilities why
it was ordeyned : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.215

the fyrst is , that it defendeth the Brayne from too muche heate , and
too muche colde , and many other outwarde noyances :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.216

The seconde is , it maketh the forme or shape of the head to seeme more
seemelyer or beautyfuller . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.217

For if the head were not heyred , the face and the heade should seeme
but one thing ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.218

and therefore the heyre formeth and shapeth the head from the face :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.219

The thirde is , that by the cullour of the heyre is witnessed & knowen
the complexion of the Brayne : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.220

The fourth is , that the fumosities of the brayne might assend and passe
lyghtlyer out by them . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.221

For if there were a sad thing , as the skinne or other , of the same
nature as the heyre is , the fumosities of the brayne might not haue
passed throwe it so lightly , as it doth by the heyre .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.222

The Skinne of the head is more lazartus , thicker , and more porrus than
any other Skinne of any other member of the body .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.223

And two causes I note why : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.224

One is , that it keepeth or defendeth the brayne from too muche heat and
colde , as doth the heyre : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,25.225

The <P_26> other , it discusseth to the common wittes of al thinges that
noyeth outwardly , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,26.226

for the heyre is insencible : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,26.227

The thirde cause why the skinne of the head is more thicker then any
other skinne of the body , is this , that it keepeth the brayne the more
warme , and is the better fence for the brayne ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,26.228

and it bindeth and keepeth the bones of the head the faster together .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,26.229

Next followeth the Fleshe , the which is al Musculus or Lazartus fleshe
, lying vpon <font> pericranium <$$font> without meane .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,26.230

And it is made of subtile Wylle , and of simple fleshe , Synewes ,
Veines , & Arteirs . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,26.231

And why the fleshe that is al musculus or lazartus in euery member of a
mans body was made , is for three causes : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,26.232

the fyrst is , that by his thicknes he shoulde comforte the digestion of
other members that lye by him : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,26.233

The seconde is , that through him euery member is made the more
formelyer , and taketh the better shape : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,26.234

The thirde is , that by his meanes euery member of the body draweth to
him norishing , the which others withholde to put foorth from them : as
it shal be more playnlyer spoken of in the Anathomie of the wombe .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,26.235

Next followeth <font> Pericranium <$$font> , or the couering of the
bones of the head . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,26.236

But heere it is to be noted of a Veyne and an Artere that commeth
betweene the flesh and this Pericranium , that nourisheth the vtter part
of the head , and so entreth priuily through the commissaries of the
skul , bearing to the Brayne and to his Pannikles nourishing : of whose
substaunce is made bothe Duramater , and also Pericranium , as shall be
<P_27> declared in the Partes conteyned in the head .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.237

Here it is to be noted of this Pannikle , Pericranium , that it bindeth
or compasseth al the bones of the head , unto whom is adioyned the
Duramater , and is also a part of his substaunce , howbeit they be
separated , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.238

for Duramater is nerer y=e= brayne , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.239

and is vnder the skull . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.240

This Pericranium was made principally for two causes :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.241

one is , that for his strong bynding together he should make firme and
stable the feeble commissaries or seames of the bones of the head :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.242

The other cause is , that it shoulde be a meane betweene the harde bone
and the softe fleshe . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.243

Nexte is the Bone of the Pot of the head keeping in the Braynes , of
which it were too long to declare their names after al Authors , as they
number them and their names ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.244

for some name them after the Greeke tongue , and some after the Arabian
; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.245

but in conclusion , al is to one purpose . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.246

And they be numbred seuen bones in the pan or skul of the head :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.247

the fyrst is called the Coronal bone , in which is y=e= Orbyts or holes
of the Eyes , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.248

and it reacheth from the Browes unto the middest of the head ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.249

and there it meteth with the seconde bone called Occipissial , a bone of
the hinder part of the head called the Noddel of the head , which two
bones , Coronal and Occipissiale , be deuided by the Commissaries in the
middes of the head . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.250

The thirde and fourth bones be called Parietales ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.251

and they be the bones of the sideling parts of the head ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.252

and they be deuided by the Commissories both from the foresayde Coronal
and Occipissial . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,27.253

The fyfth and the syxth <P_28> bones be called Petrosa or Mendosa :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,28.254

and these two bones lye ouer the bones called Parietales , on euery side
of the head one , lyke skales , in whom be y=e= holes of the eares .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,28.255

The seuenth and last of the head is called Paxillarie , or Bazillarie ;
the whiche bone is , as it were , a wedge vnto all the other seuen bones
of the head , and doth fasten them togeather . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,28.256

And thus be all numbred : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,28.257

the first is the Coronal bone , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,28.258

the seconde is the Occipissial , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,28.259

the thirde and the fourth is Parietales , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,28.260

the fyfth and the sixth is Petrosa or Mendosa , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,28.261

and the seuenth is Paxillari , or Bazillari . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,28.262

And this suffiseth for the fyue thinges conteyning .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,28.263

<P_35>

The Eare is a member semely and grystlye , able to be folden without ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,35.265

and is the orgayne or instrument of hearing : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,35.266

It is of complexion cold and drye . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,35.267

But why the eare was set vp out of the head , is this , that the soundes
that be very fugitiue should lurke and abyde vnder his shadowe , tyl it
were taken of the instrumentes of hearing : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,35.268

Another cause is , that it should keepe the hole that it standeth ouer ,
from thinges falling in , that might hinder the hearing .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,35.269

The senewes that are the Orgayns or Instrumentes of hearing , spring
from the Brayne , from whence the seuen payre of senewes do spring ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,35.270

& when they come to the hole of the Eare , there they writhe lyke a wyne
press ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,35.271

and at the endes of them there be like the head of a worme , or like a
little teat , in whiche is receyued the sounde , and so caried to the
common wittes . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,35.272

The Eyes be nexte of nature vnto the Soule : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,35.273

for in the Eye is seene and knowen the disturbances & greefes , gladnes
and ioyes of the Soule , as loue , wrath , and other passions .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,35.274

The Eyes be the instrumentes of sight . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,35.275

And they bee compounde and made of ten things : that is to say , of
seuen Tunicles or Cotes , and of three humours . Of the whiche <paren>
sayth Galen <$$paren> <P_36> the Brayne and the head were made for the
Eye , that they might be in the hyest place , as a beholder in a towre ,
as it was rehearsed in the Anatomie of the head .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,36.276

But diuers men holde diuers opinions of the Anatomie of the Eyes :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,36.277

for some men accompt but three tunikles , and some sixe .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,36.278

But in conclusion , they meane all one thing : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,36.279

For the very truth is , that there be counted and reckoned seuen
Tunikles , that is to say , <font> Sclirotica , Secondyna , Retyna ,
Vnia , Cornua , Arania , <$$font> and <font> Coniunctiva : <$$font> and
these three humours , that is to say , <font> humour Vitrus , humor
Albigynus , <$$font> and <font> humor Crystallinus . <$$font>
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,36.280

It is be knowen howe and after what maner they spring .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,36.281

You shal vnderstande , that there springeth of the brayny substaunce of
his formost Ventrikles , two senewes , The one from the right side , and
the other from the left , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,36.282

and they be called the <P_37> fyrst payre , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.283

for in the Anatomie they be the first paire of senewes that appeare of
al seuen . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.284

And it is shewed by Galen , that these senews be hollowe as a reede ,
for two causes . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.285

The fyrst is , that the visible spirit might passe freely to the Eyes :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.286

the second is , that the forme of visible thinges mighte freely be
presented to the common wits . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.287

Nowe marke the gooing foorth of these senewes : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.288

When these senewes goo out from the substaunce of the Brayne , he
commeth through the Piamater , of whose substaunce he taketh a Pannicle
or a Cote : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.289

and the cause why he taketh that Pannicle , is to keepe him from noying
; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.290

and before they enter into the skul , they meete ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.291

and are vnited into one senewe the length of halfe an inche :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.292

and then they depart agayne into two , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.293

and eche goeth into one eye , entring through the brayne panne ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.294

and these senewes be called <font> Nerui optici . <$$font>
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.295

And three causes I finde why these Nerues are ioyned in one before they
passe into the Eye : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.296

First , if it happen any diseases in one eye , the other should receyue
all the visible spirite that before came to bothe :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.297

The seconde is , that all thinges that wee see shoulde not seeme two :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.298

for if they had not beene ioyned together , euery thing shoulde haue
seemed two , as it doth to a worme , and to other beastes :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.299

The thirde is , that the Senewe might stay and helpe the other .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.300

But herevpon Lamfranke accordeth muche , saying , that these two Senewes
come together to the Eyes , and take a Panikle both of Piamater and of
Duramater ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.301

and when they enter into the Orbyt of the Eye , there the extremities
are spread abroade , the which are made of three substances : that is to
say , of Duramater , of Piamater and of Nerui optici .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,37.302

There <P_38> be ingendred three Tunikles or Cotes , as thus :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.303

Of the substance that is taken from Duramater , is ingendred the fyrst
cote that is called Secondina : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.304

and of Nerui optici is ingendred the third cote that is called Retina :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.305

and eche of them is more subtiller then other , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.306

& goeth about the humours without meane . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.307

And it is to be vnderstoode , that eche of these three Tunicles be
diuided , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.308

and so they make sixe : That is to say , iij. of the partes of the
brayne , and three of the parts outwardes , and one of Pericranium that
couereth the bones of the head , whiche is called Coniunctiua .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.309

And thus you maye perceyue the springing of them , as thus :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.310

of Duramater springeth Sclirotica and Cornua : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.311

of Piamater springeth Secondina and Vnia : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.312

and of Nerui optici springeth Coniunctiua . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.313

Nowe to speake of the humours , which be three ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.314

and their places are the middle of the Eyes : Of the whiche the fyrste
is Humor Vitrus , because he is lyke glasse , in colour very cleare ,
redde , liquit , or thinne ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.315

and he is in the inward side next to the brayne :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.316

and it is thin , because the nutritiue blood of the Crystalline might
passe , as water through a sponge should be clensed and made pure , and
also that the visible spirite mighte the lightlyer passe through him
from the Brayne . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.317

And he goeth about the Crystaline humour , vntil he meete with Albuginus
humour , which is set in the vttermost parte of the Eye .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.318

And in the myddest of these humours Vitrus and Albuginus , is set the
Crystalline humour , in whiche is set principally the syght of the Eye .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.319

And these humours be separated and involued with the Pannicles
aforesayde ; betweene euery Humour a Panicle . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.320

And thus is the eye compound and made . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.321

But to speake of euery Humour and euery Pannicle in his due order and
course , it would aske a long processe , and a long Chapter :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.322

and this is sufficient for a Chiurgion . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.323

Nowe to begin at the Nose : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,38.324

You shall vnderstande <P_39> that from the Brayne there commeth .ij.
Senews to the holes of the brayne pan , where beginneth the concauitie
of the Nose ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.325

and these two be not properly senewes , but organes or instrumentes of
smelling , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.326

and haue heades lyke teates or pappes , in whiche is receyued the vertue
of smelling , and representing it to the common wittes .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.327

Ouer these two is set Colatorium , that we cal the Nose-thrils :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.328

and it is set betweene the Eyes , vnder the vpper part of the Nose .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.329

And it is to be noted , that this concauitie or ditche was made for two
causes : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.330

The fyrst is , that the ayre that bringeth foorth the spirite of
smelling , might reste in it tyll it were taken of the organ or
instrument of smelling : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.331

The seconde cause is , that the superfluities of the Brayne might be
hydden vnder it vntill it were clensed . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.332

And from this concauitie there goeth two holes down into y=e= mouth , of
which there is to be noted three profites : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.333

The fyrste is , that when a mans mouth is close , or when he eateth or
sleepeth , that then the ayre might come through them to the Lunges ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.334

or els a mans mouth should always be open : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.335

The seconde cause is , that they helpe to the relation of the forme of
the Nose : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.336

for it is sayd , ' a man speaketh in his Nose , ' when any of these
holes be stopped : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.337

The thirde cause is , that the concauitie might be clensed by them when
a man snuffeth the Nose , or draweth into his mouth inwardly .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.338

The Nose is a member consimple or official , appearing without the face
, somewhat plicable , because it shoulde the better be clensed .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.339

And it is to be perceyued that it is compounde and made of skinne and
Lazartus fleshe , and of two bones standing in maner triangle-wise ,
whose extremities be ioyned in one part of the Nose with the Coronal
bone , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,39.340

and the nether extremities <P_40> are ioyned with two grystles , and
another that diuideth the Nose-thrilles within , and holdeth vp the nose
: VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.341

Also there be two concauities or holes , that if one were stopped the
other should serue : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.342

Also there is in the Nose two Muskles to helpe the working of hys office
. VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.343

And Galen sayth , that the Nose shapeth the Face moste ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.344

for where the Nose lacketh <paren> sayth he <$$paren> , al the rest of
the face is more vnseemly . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.345

The Nose should be of a meane bignes , and not to exceede in length or
breadth , nor in highnesse . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.346

For Aristotle sayeth , yf the Nose-thrills be too thinne or to wyde , by
great drawing in of ayre , it betokeneth great straightnes of hart and
indignation of thought . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.347

And therefore it is to be noted , that the shape of the members of the
body betokneth and iudgeth the affections and wyll of the Soule of man ,
as the Philosopher sayth . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.348

The temples be called the members of the head , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.349

and they haue that name because of continuall mouing .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.350

And as the science of the Anatomie meaneth , the spirite vital is sente
from the hart to the brayne by Arteirs ; and by veynes and nutritional
blood , where the vessels pulsatiues be lightly hurt .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.351

Also the temples haue dentes or holes inwardely , wherin he taketh the
humour that commeth from the brayne , and bringeth the eyes asleepe ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.352

and if the sayde holes or dentes be pressed and wroung , then by
trapping of the humour that continueth , he maketh the teares to fal
from the Eye . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.353

The Cheekes are the sideling partes of the face ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.354

and they conteyne in them Musculus fleshe , with Veynes and Arteirs ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.355

and aboute these partes be many Muscles . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.356

Guydo maketh mention of .vij. about the chekes & ouer lyp .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.357

And Haly Abbas sayth , there be .xij. Muscles that moue the nether Iawe
, some of them in opening , and other some in closing or shutting ,
passing vnder the bones of y=e= temples , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,40.358

And they be called <P_41> <font> Temporales . <$$font>
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.359

And they be right noble and sensatiue ; of whose hurte is muche peril .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.360

Also there be other Muskles for to grinde and to chewe .
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.361

And to al these Muscles commeth Nerues from the brayne , to geue them
feeling and mouing : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.362

and also there commeth to them many Arteirs and Veines , and cheefly
about the temples , and the angles or corners of the Eyes , and the
Lippes . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.363

And as the Philosophers say , the cheefe beautie in man is in the
cheekes ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.364

and there the complexion of man is most knowen :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.365

as thus , if they be full , ruddy , and meddled with temperate whitenes
, and not fat in substaunce , but meanely fleshly , it betokeneth hotte
and moyst of complexion {COM:preceding_word_"complexion"_emended} , that
is , sanguin and temperate in culler . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.366

And if they be white coloured , without medling of rednes , and in
substaunce fat and soft , quauering , it betokeneth excesse and
superfluitie of colde and moyst , that is flematike :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.367

And if they be browne in colour , or cytrin , yelowe , redde , and thin
, and leane in substaunce , betokeneth great drying and heate , that is
cholerike : VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.368

And if they be as it were blowen in colour , and of little fleshe in
substaunce , it betokeneth excess and superfluitie of dryness and colde
; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.369

and that is melancholie . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.370

And as Auicen sayth , the Cheekes doo not only shewe the diuersities of
complexions , but also the affection and wil of the hart :
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.371

for by the affection of the hart , by sodaine ioy or dreede , he waxeth
eyther pale or redde . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,41.372

The bones or bony partes , fyrste of the Cheekes , be two : of the Nose
outwardely , two : of the vpper Mandibile , two : within the Nose ,
three : <P_42> as thus : one diuiding the Nosethrilles within ; and in
ech Nosethril one ; VICARY-1548-E1-P1,42.373

and they seeme to be rowled like a wafer , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,42.374

and haue a holownesse in them , by which the ayre is respyred and drawen
to the lunges , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,42.375

and the superfluition of the brayne is purged into the mouthwardes , as
is before rehearsed . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,42.376

But Guydo and Galen say , that there be in the face nyne bones ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P1,42.377

yet I can not finde that the nether Mandible should be of y=e= number of
those nyne , VICARY-1548-E1-P1,42.378

for the nether Mandible accompted there , proveth them to be ten in
number ; Of which thing I wyl holde no argument , but remit it to the
sighte of your Eyes . VICARY-1548-E1-P1,42.379

