<BEGIN_walton-1676-e3-p1>

<P_218>

<heading>

CHAP. III . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.4

HOW TO FISH FOR , AND TO DRESS THE CHAVENDER OR CHUB .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.5

<$$heading>

<font> Pisc. <$$font> The <font> Chub <$$font> , though he eat well
thus drest , yet as he is usually drest , he does not :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.7

he is objected against , not only for being full of small forked bones ,
disperst through all his body , but that he eats watrish , and that the
flesh of him is not firm , but short and tasteless .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.8

The <font> French <$$font> esteem him so mean , as to call him <font> Un
Villain ; <$$font> WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.9

nevertheless he may be so drest as to make him very good meat ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.10

as namely , if he be a large Chub , then dress him thus :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.11

<font> First scale him , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.12

and then wash him clean , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.13

and then take out his guts ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.14

and to that end make the hole as little and near to his gills as you may
conveniently , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.15

and especially make clean his throat from the grass and weeds that are
usually in it WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.16

<paren> for if that be not very clean , it will make him to taste very
sour <$$paren> ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.17

having so done , put some sweet herbs into his belly ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.18

and then tye him with two or three splinters to a spit ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.19

and rost him , basted often with Vinegar , or rather verjuice and butter
, with good store of salt mixt with it . <$$font> Being thus drest ,
you will find him a much better dish of meat than you , or most folk ,
even than Anglers themselves do imagine ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.20

for this dries up the fluid watry humor with which all <font> Chubs
<$$font> do abound . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.21

But take this rule with you , That a <font> Chub <$$font> newly taken
and newly drest , is so much better than a <font> Chub <$$font> of a
days keeping after he is dead , that I can compare him to nothing so
fitly as to Cherries newly gathered from a tree , and others that have
been bruised and lain a day or two in water . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.22

But the <font> Chub <$$font> being thus used and drest presently , and
not washed after he is gutted <paren> for note that lying long in water
, and washing the blood out of any fish after they be gutted , abates
much of their sweetness <$$paren> you will find the Chub being drest in
the blood and quickly , to be such meat as will recompence your labour ,
and disabuse your opinion . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,218.23

<P_219>

Or you may dress the <font> Chavender <$$font> or <font> Chub <$$font>
thus : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.25

<font> When you have scaled him , and cut off his tail and fins , and
washed him very clean , then chine or slit him through the middle , as a
salt fish is usually cut , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.26

then give him three or four cuts or scotches on the back with your knife
, WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.27

and broil him on Char-coal , or Wood-coal that are free from smoke ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.28

and all the time he is a broyling baste him with the best sweet Butter ,
and good store of salt mixt with it ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.29

and to this add a little Time cut exceeding small , or bruised into the
butter . <$$font> WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.30

The Cheven thus drest hath the watry tast taken away , for which so many
except against him . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.31

Thus was the Cheven drest that you liked so well , and commended so much
. WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.32

But note again , that if this Chub that you eat of , had been kept till
to_morrow , he had not been worth a rush . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.33

And remember that his throat be washt very clean , I say very clean ,
and his body not washt after he is gutted , as indeed no fish should be
. WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.34

Well Scholar , you see what pains I have taken to recover the lost
credit of the poor despised <font> Chub <$$font> .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.35

And now I will give you some rules how to catch him ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.36

and I am glad to enter you into the Art of fishing by catching a <font>
Chub <$$font> , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.37

for there is no Fish better to enter a young Angler , he is so easily
caught , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.38

but then it must be this particular way . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,219.39

Go to the same hole in which I caught my <font> Chub <$$font> , where in
most hot daies you will find a_dozen or twenty <font> Chevens <$$font>
floating <P_220> near the top of the water , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.40

get two or three Grasshoppers as you go over the meadow ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.41

and get secretly behind the tree , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.42

and stand as free from motion as possible , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.43

then put a Grashopper on your hook , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.44

and let your hook hang a quarter of a yard short of the water , to which
end you must rest your rod on some bough of the tree ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.45

but it is likely the Chubs will sink down towards the bottom of the
water at the first shadow of your Rod , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.46

for a Chub is the fearfullest of fishes , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.47

and will do so if but a bird flies over him , and makes the least shadow
on the water : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.48

but they will presently rise up to the top again , and there lie soaring
till some shadow affrights them again : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.49

I say when they lie upon the top of the water , look out the best Chub ,
<paren> which you setting your self in a fit place , may very easily see
<$$paren> WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.50

and move your Rod as softly as a Snail moves , to that Chub you intend
to catch ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.51

let your bait fall gently upon the water three or four inches before him
, and he will infallibly take the bait , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.52

and you will be as sure to catch him ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.53

for he is one of the leather-mouth'd fishes , of which a hook does
scarce ever lose its hold ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.54

and therefore give him play enough before you offer to take him out of
the water . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.55

Go your way presently , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.56

take my Rod , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.57

and do as I bid you , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.58

and I will sit down and mend my tackling till you return back .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.59

<font> Ven. <$$font> Truly , my loving master , you have offered me as
fair as I could wish . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.60

I@ @'le go and observe your directions . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.61

<font> Pisc. <$$font> Marry , and I am glad of it :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.62

I am like to have a towardly Scholar of you . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.63

I now see , that with advice and practice you will make an <font> Angler
<$$font> in a short time . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.64

Have but a love to it and I@ @'le warrant you .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,220.65

<P_221>

<font> Venat. <$$font> But Master , what if I could not have found a
<font> Grashopper ? <$$font> WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.67

<font> Pisc. <$$font> Then I may tell you , that a <font> black Snail ,
<$$font> with his belly slit , to shew his white : or a piece of soft
<font> cheese , <$$font> will usually do as well :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.68

nay , sometimes a <font> worm <$$font> , or any kind of <font> flie
<$$font> , as the <font> Ant-flie <$$font> , the <font> Flesh-flie
<$$font> , or <font> Wall-flie <$$font> , or the <font> Dor <$$font> or
<font> Beetle <$$font> , <paren> which you may find under a Cow-tird
<$$paren> or a <font> Bob <$$font> , which you will find in the same
place , and in time will be a Beetle ; it is a short white worm , like
to and bigger than a Gentle ; or a <font> Cod-worm <$$font> , or a
<font> Case-worm <$$font> : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.69

any of these will do very well to fish in such a manner .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.70

And after this manner you may catch a <font> Trout <$$font> in a hot
evening : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.71

when as you walk by a Brook , and shall see or hear him leap at flies ,
then if you get a <font> Grashopper <$$font> , out it on your hook ,
with your line about two yards long , standing behind a bush or tree
where his hole is , and make your bait stir up and down on the top of
the water : you may if you stand close , be sure of a bite , but not
sure to catch him , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.72

for he is not a leather_mouthed Fish : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.73

and after this manner you may fish for him with almost any kind of live
flie , but especially with a <font> Grashopper . <$$font>
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.74

<font> Venat. <$$font> But before you go further , I pray good Master ,
what mean you by a leather-mouthed Fish ? WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.75

<font> Pisc. <$$font> By a leather-mouthed Fish , I mean such as have
their teeth in their throat , as the <font> Chub <$$font> or <font>
Cheven <$$font> , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.76

and so the <font> Barbel <$$font> , the <font> Gudgeon <$$font> , and
<font> Carp <$$font> , and divers others have ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.77

and the hook being stuck into the leather or skin of the mouth of such
fish does very seldom or never lose its hold : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.78

But on the contrary , a <font> Pike <$$font> , a <font> Pearch <$$font>
, or <font> Trout <$$font> , and so some other Fish , which have not
their teeth in their throats , but in their mouths , <paren> which you
shall observe to be very full of bones , and the skin very thin , and
little of it <$$paren> : I say , of these fish the hook never takes so
sure hold , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.79

but you often lose your fish , unless he have gorg'd it .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.80

<font> Ven. <$$font> I thank you , good Master , for this observation ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.81

but now what shall be done with my <font> Chub <$$font> or <font> Cheven
<$$font> , that I have caught ? WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.82

<font> Pisc. <$$font> Marry Sir , it shall be given away to some poor
body , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.83

for I@ @'le warrant you I@ @'le give you a <font> Trout <$$font> for
your supper : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,221.84

and it is a good beginning of your Art to offer your first fruits to the
<P_222> poor , who will both thank God and you for it , which I see by
your silence you seem to consent to . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.85

And for your {SIC:you} willingness to part with it so charitably , I
will also teach you more concerning Chub-Fishing :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.86

you are to note that in <font> March <$$font> and <font> April <$$font>
he is usually taken with wormes ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.87

in <font> May , June , <$$font> and <font> July <$$font> he will bite at
any <font> fly <$$font> , or at <font> Cherries , <$$font> or at <font>
Beetles <$$font> with their legs and wings cut off , or at any kind of
<font> Snail <$$font> , or at the black <font> Bee <$$font> that breeds
in clay walls ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.88

and he never refuses a Grashopper on the top of a swift stream , nor at
the bottom the young <font> humblebee <$$font> that breeds in long
grasse , and is ordinarily found by the Mower of it .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.89

In <font> August <$$font> , and in the cooler months a yellow <font>
paste <$$font> , made of the strongest cheese , and pounded in a Mortar
with a little butter and saffron , <paren> so much of it as being beaten
small will turn it to a lemon colour <$$paren> .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.90

And some make a paste for the Winter months , at which time the Chub is
accounted best , <paren> for then it is observed , that the forked bones
are lost , or turned into a kind of gristle , especially if he be baked
<$$paren> of Cheese and Turpentine ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.91

he will bite also at a Minnow or Penk , as a Trout will : of which I
shall tell you more hereafter , and of divers other baits .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.92

But take this for a rule , that in hot weather he is to be fisht for
towards the mid-water , or near the top ; and in colder weather nearer
the bottom . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.93

And if you fish for him on the top , with a Beetle or any <font> fly
<$$font> , then be sure to let your line be very long , and to keep out
of sight . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.94

And having told you that his Spawn is excellent meat and that the head
of a large Cheven , the Throat being well washt , is the best part of
him , I will say no more of this Fish at the present , but wish you may
catch the next you fish for . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.95

But lest you judg me too nice in urging to have the Chub drest so
presently after he is taken , I will commend to your consideration how
curious former times have been in the like kind .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,222.96

You {SIC:Your} shall read in <font> Seneca <$$font> his natural
Questions <font> <paren> Lib. 3. cap. 17 <$$paren> <$$font> that the
Ancients were so curious in the newnesse of their Fish , that that
seemed not new enough that <P_223> was not put alive into the guests
hand ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,223.97

and he says that to that end they did usually keep them living in
glass-bottles in their dining-rooms ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,223.98

and they did glory much in their entertaining of friends to have that
Fish taken from under their table alive , that was instantly to be fed
upon . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,223.99

And , he says , they took great pleasure to see their Mullets change to
several colours , when they were dying . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,223.100

But enough of this , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,223.101

for I doubt I have stayed too long from giving you some observations of
the <font> Trout <$$font> , and how to fish for him , which shall take
up the next of my spare time . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,223.102

<P_224>

<heading>

CHAP. IV . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.105

OBSERVATIONS OF THE NATURE AND BREEDING OF THE TROUT ; AND HOW TO FISH
FOR HIM . AND THE MILK MAIDS SONG . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.106

<$$heading>

<font> Pisc. <$$font> The Trout is a fish highly valued both in this
and forraign <font> Nations <$$font> : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.108

he may be justly said , <paren> as the old Poets said of wine , and we
English say of Venison <$$paren> to be a generous Fish : a Fish that is
so like the <font> Buck <$$font> that he also has his seasons ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.109

for it is observed , that he comes in and goes out of season with the
<font> Stag <$$font> and <font> Buck <$$font> .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.110

<font> Gesner <$$font> says , his name is of a Germane off-spring ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.111

and says he is a fish that feeds clean and purely , in the swiftest
streams , and on the hardest gravel ; and that he may justly contend
with all fresh-water-Fish , as the Mullet may with all Sea-Fish for
precedency and daintiness of taste , and that being in right season ,
the most dainty palats have allowed precedency to him .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.112

And before I go farther in my Discourse , let me tell you , that you are
to observe , that as there be some <font> barren Does <$$font> , that
are good in Summer , so there be some <font> barren Trouts <$$font> that
are good in Winter ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.113

but there are not many that are so , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.114

for usually they be in their perfection in the month of <font> May
<$$font> , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.115

and decline with the <font> Buck <$$font> . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.116

Now you are to take notice , that in several Countries , as in <font>
Germany <$$font> and in other parts , compar'd to ours , Fish do differ
much in their bigness , and shape , and other ways ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.117

and so do <font> Trouts <$$font> ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,224.118

it is well known that in the Lake <font> Leman <$$font> <paren> the Lake
of <font> Geneva <$$font> <$$paren> there are <font> Trouts <$$font>
taken of three Cubits long , as is <P_225> affirmed by <font> Gesner
<$$font> , a Writer of good credit ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.119

and <font> Mercator <$$font> says , the <font> Trouts <$$font> that are
taken in the Lake of <font> Geneva <$$font> , are a great part of the
Merchandize of that famous City . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.120

And you are further to know , that there be certain waters that breed
<font> Trouts <$$font> remarkable , both for their number and smallness
. WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.121

I know a little Brook in <font> Kent <$$font> , that breeds them to a
number incredible , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.122

and you may take them twenty or forty in an hour ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.123

but none greater than about the size of a <font> Gudgion <$$font> ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.124

There are also in divers Rivers , especially that relate to , or be near
to the Sea <paren> as <font> Winchester <$$font> , or the <font> Thames
<$$font> about <font> Windsor <$$font> <$$paren> a little <font> Trout
<$$font> called a <font> Samlet <$$font> or <font> Skegger Trout
<$$font> <paren> in both which places I have caught twenty or forty at a
standing <$$paren> that will bite as fast and as freely as <font>
Minnows <$$font> ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.125

these be by some taken to be young <font> Salmons <$$font> ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.126

but in those waters they never grow to be bigger than a <font> Herring
<$$font> . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.127

There is also in <font> Kent <$$font> near to <font> Canterbury <$$font>
, a <font> Trout <$$font> <paren> call'd there a <font> Fordidge Trout
<$$font> <$$paren> a <font> Trout <$$font> <paren> that bears the name
of the Town , where it is usually caught <$$paren> that is accounted the
rarest of Fish ; many of them near the bigness of a <font> Salmon
<$$font> , but known by their different colour ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.128

and in their best season they cut very white ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.129

and none of these have been known to be caught with an Angle , unless it
were one that was caught by Sir <font> George Hastings <$$font> <paren>
an excellent Angler , and now with God <$$paren>

and he hath told me , he thought that <font> Trout <$$font> bit not for
hunger but wantonness ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.131

and it is the rather to be believed , because both he then , and many
others before him , have been curious to search into their bellies ,
what the food was by which they lived ; and have found out nothing by
which they might satisfie their curiosity . Concerning which you are to
take notice , that it is reported by good Authors , that <font>
grass-hoppers <$$font> and some Fish have no mouths , but are nourisht
and take breath by the porousness of their Guills , Man knows not how ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.132

And this may be believed , if we consider that when the <font> Raven
<$$font> has hatcht her eggs , she takes no further care , but , leaves
her young ones , to the care of the God of Nature , who is said in the
<font> Psalms , To feed the young Ravens that call upon him <$$font> .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,225.133

And they be kept alive , and fed by a <font> dew <$$font> , or <P_226>
{COM:picture_omitted} <P_227> <font> worms <$$font> that breed in their
nests , or some other ways that we Mortals know not ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,226.134

and this may be believed of the <font> Fordidge Trout <$$font> , which ,
as it is said of the <font> Stork <$$font> , that he knows his season ,
so he knows his times <paren> I think almost his day <$$paren> of coming
into that River out of Sea , where he lives <paren> and it is like ,
feeds <$$paren> nine months of the Year , and fasts three in the River
of <font> Fordidge <$$font> . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,226.135

And you are to note , that those Townsmen are very punctual in observing
the time of beginning to fish for them ; and boast much that their River
affords a Trout , that exceeds all others . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,226.136

And just so does <font> Sussex <$$font> boast of several Fish ; as
namely , a <font> Shelsey Cockle <$$font> , a <font> Chichester Lobster
<$$font> , an <font> Arundel Mullet <$$font> , and an <font> Amerly
Trout <$$font> . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,226.137

And now for some confirmation of the <font> Fordidge <$$font> Trout ,
you are to know that this Trout is thought to eat nothing in the fresh
water ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,226.138

and it may be the better believed , because it is well known , that
<font> Swallows <$$font> and <font> Bats <$$font> and <font> Wagtails
<$$font> , which are call'd half year birds , and not seen to flie in
<font> England <$$font> for six months in the Year <paren> but about
<font> Michaelmas <$$font> leave us for a hotter Climate <$$paren> ; yet
some of them that have been left behind their fellows , have been found
<paren> many thousands at a time <$$paren> in hollow trees , or
clay-Caves , where they have been observed , to live and sleep out the
whole Winter without meat ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,226.139

and so <font> Albertus <$$font> observes that there is one kind of
<font> Frog <$$font> that hath her mouth naturally shut up about the end
of <font> August <$$font> , and that she lives so all the Winter :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,226.140

and though it be strange to some , yet it is known to too many among us
to be doubted . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,226.141

And so much for these <font> Fordidge trouts <$$font> , which never
afford an <font> Angler <$$font> sport , but either live their time of
being in the fresh water , by their meat formerly gotten in the Sea
<paren> not unlike the <font> Swallow or Frog <$$font> <$$paren> or by
the vertue of the fresh water only ; or as the birds of <font> Paradise
<$$font> , and the <font> Camelion <$$font> are said to live by the
<font> Sun <$$font> and the <font> Air <$$font> .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,226.142

There is also in <font> Northumberland <$$font> a <font> Trout <$$font>
called a <font> Bull-trout <$$font> , of a much greater length and
bigness , than any in these Southern <P_228> parts :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.143

and there are in many Rivers that relate to the Sea , <font>
Salmon-trouts <$$font> , as much different from others , both in shape
and in their spots , as we see sheep in some Countries differ one from
another in their shape and bigness , and in the fineness of their wool :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.144

and certainly , as some pastures breed larger sheep , so do some Rivers
, by reason of the ground over which they run , breed larger <font>
Trouts <$$font> . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.145

Now the next thing that I will commend to your consideration is , that
the <font> Trout <$$font> is of a more sudden growth than other Fish :
concerning which you are also to take notice , that he lives not so long
as the <font> Pearch <$$font> and divers other Fishes do , as Sir <font>
Francis Bacon <$$font> hath observed in his History of Life and Death .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.146

And next you are to take notice , that he is not like the <font>
Crocodile <$$font> , which if he lives never so long , yet always
thrives till his death : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.147

but 't@ @is not so with the Trout , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.148

for after he is come to his full growth , he declines in his body ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.149

and keeps his bigness or thrives only in his head till his death .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.150

And you are to know , that he will about <paren> especially before
<$$paren> the time of his Spawning , get almost miraculously through
<font> Weires <$$font> , and <font> Floud-gates <$$font> against the
stream ; even , through such high and swift places as is almost
incredible . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.151

Next , that the <font> Trout <$$font> usually Spawns about <font>
October <$$font> or <font> November <$$font> , but in some Rivers a
little sooner or later : which is the more observable , because most
other fish Spawn in the Spring or Summer , when the Sun hath warmed both
the earth and water , and made it fit for generation .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.152

And you are to note , that he continues many months out of season :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.153

for it may be observed of the Trout , that he is like the Buck or the Ox
, that will not be fat in many months , though he go in the very same
pastures that horses do , which will be fat in one month ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.154

and so you may observe , that most other Fishes recover strength , and
grow sooner fat , and in season than the Trout doth .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.155

And next , you are to note , that till the Sun gets to such a height as
to warm the earth and the water , the Trout is sick and lean , and
lowsie , and unwholsom : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,228.156

for you shall in winter <P_229> find him to have a big head , and then
to be lank , and thin , and lean ; at which time many of them have
sticking on them Sugs , or <font> Trout lice <$$font> , which is a kind
of a worm , in shape like a clove or pin with a big head , and sticks
close to him and sucks his moisture ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.157

those , I think , the <font> Trout <$$font> breeds himself ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.158

and never thrives till he free himself from them , which is when warm
weather comes ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.159

and then , as he grows stronger , he gets from the dead , still water ,
into the sharp streams , and the gravel , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.160

and there rubs off these worms or lice ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.161

and then , as he grows stronger , so he gets him into swifter and
swifter streams , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.162

and there lies at the watch for any flie or Minnow , that comes near to
him ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.163

and he especially loves the <font> May-flie <$$font> , which is bred of
the <font> Cod-worm <$$font> , or <font> Caddis <$$font> ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.164

and these make the Trout bold and lusty , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.165

and he is usually fatter and better meat at the end of that month , than
at any time of the year . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.166

Now you are to know , that it is observed , that usually the best <font>
trouts <$$font> are either red or yellow , though some <paren> as the
<font> Fordidge trout <$$font> <$$paren> be white and yet good ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.167

but that is not usual : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.168

and it is a note observable , that the female <font> Trout <$$font> hath
usually a less head , and a deeper body than the male <font> Trout
<$$font> ; and is usually the better meat : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.169

and note that a hogback , and a little head to either <font> Trout ,
Salmon <$$font> , or any other fish , is a sign that that fish is in
season . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.170

But yet you are to note , that as you see some Willows or palm-trees bud
and blossom sooner than others do , so some Trouts be in Rivers sooner
in season ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.171

and as some Hollies or Oaks are longer before they cast their leaves ,
so are some Trouts in Rivers longer before they go out of season .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.172

And you are to note , that there are several kinds of <font> Trouts
<$$font> , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.173

but these several kinds are not considered but by very few men ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,229.174

for they go under the general name of <font> Trouts <$$font> : just as
Pigeons do in most places ; though it is certain there are tame , and
wild Pigeons : and of the tame , there be <font> Helmits <$$font> and
<font> Runts <$$font> and <P_230> <font> Carriers <$$font> , and <font>
Cropers <$$font> , and indeed too many to name .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.175

Nay , the <font> Royal Society <$$font> have found and publisht lately ,
that there be thirty_and_three kinds of Spiders :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.176

and yet , all <paren> for ought I know <$$paren> go under that one
general name of <font> Spider <$$font> . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.177

And 't@ @is so with many kinds of Fish , and of <font> Trouts <$$font>
especially , which differ in their bigness and shape , and spots , and
colour . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.178

The great <font> Kentish Hens <$$font> may be an instance , compared to
other Hens ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.179

And doubtless there is a kind of small Trout , which will never thrive
to be big ; that breeds very many more than others do , that be of a
larger size ; which you may rather believe , if you consider , that the
little <font> Wren <$$font> and <font> Titmouse <$$font> will have
twenty young ones at a time , when usually the noble <font> Hawk
<$$font> or the Musical <font> Thrassal <$$font> or <font> Black-bird
<$$font> exceed not four or five . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.180

And now you shall see me try my skill to catch a Trout ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.181

and at my next walking either this evening , or to_morrow morning I will
give you direction , how you your self shall fish for him .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.182

<font> Venat. <$$font> Trust me , Master , I see now it is a harder
matter to catch a <font> Trout <$$font> than a <font> Chub <$$font> :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.183

for I have put on patience , and followed you these two hours , and not
seen {SIC:see} a Fish stir , neither at your Minnow nor your Worm .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.184

<font> Pisc. <$$font> Well Scholar , you must endure worse luck
sometime , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.185

or you will never make a good Angler . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.186

But what say you now ? WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.187

there is a <font> Trout <$$font> now , and a good one too , if I can but
hold him , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.188

and two or three turns more will tire him : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.189

Now you see he lies still , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.190

and the sleight is to land him : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.191

Reach me that Landing Net : So <paren> Sir <$$paren> now he is mine own
, WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.192

what say you now ? WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.193

is not this worth all my labour and your patience ?
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.194

<font> Venat. <$$font> On my word Master , this is a gallant <font>
Trout <$$font> ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.195

what shall we do with him ? WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.196

<font> Pisc. <$$font> Marry e'en eat him to supper :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.197

We@ @'l go to my Hostess , from whence we came ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.198

she told me , as I was going out of door , that my brother <font> Peter
<$$font> , a good Angler and a chearful companion , had sent word he
would lodge there to_night , and bring a friend with him .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.199

My Hostess has two beds , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.200

and , I know , you and I may have the best : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,230.201

we@ @'l rejoice with my brother <font> Peter <$$font> <P_231> and his
friend , tell tales , or sing Ballads , or make a Catch , or find some
harmless sport to content us , and pass away a little time without
offence to God or man . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.202

<font> Venat. <$$font> A match , good Master ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.203

let@ @s go to that house , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.204

for the linnen looks white , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.205

and smells of Lavender , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.206

and I long to lie in a pair of sheets that smell so :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.207

let@ @s be going , good Master , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.208

for I am hungry again with fishing . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.209

<font> Pisc. <$$font> Nay , stay a little good Scholar ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.210

I caught my last <font> Trout <$$font> with a Worm ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.211

now I will put on a Minnow and try a quarter of an hour about yonder
trees for another , and so walk towards our Lodging .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.212

Look you Scholar , thereabout we shall have a bite presently , or not at
all : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.213

Have with you <paren> Sir ! <$$paren> WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.214

o' my word I have hold of him . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.215

Oh it is a great loggerheaded <font> Chub <$$font> ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.216

Come , hang him upon that Willow twig , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.217

and let@ @s be going . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.218

But turn out of the way a little , good Scholar , towards yonder high
<font> honysuckle <$$font> hedg : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.219

there we@ @'ll sit and sing whilst this showr falls so gently upon the
teeming earth , and gives yet a sweeter smell to the lovely flowers that
adorn these verdant Meadows . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.220

Look ; under that broad <font> Beech-tree <$$font> , I sate down , when
I was last this way a fishing , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.221

and the birds in the adjoyning Grove seemed to have a friendly
contention with an Eccho , with an Eccho whose dead voice seemed to live
in a hollow tree , near to the brow of that Primrose-hill ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.222

there I sate viewing the silverstreams glide silently towards their
center , the tempestuous Sea ; yet , sometimes opposed by rugged roots ,
and pebble stones , which broke their waves , and turned them into foam
: WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.223

and sometimes I beguil'd time by viewing the harmless Lambs , some
leaping securely in the cool shade , whilst others sported themselves in
the chearful Sun : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.224

and saw others craving comfort from the swoln Udders of their bleating
Dams . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.225

As I thus sate , these and other sights had so fully possest my soul
with content , that I thought as the Poet has happily exprest it :
{COM:verse_omitted} WALTON-1676-E3-P1,231.226

<P_232>

As I left this place , and entred into the next field , a second
pleasure entertained me : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.228

't@ @was a handsom milk-maid that had not yet attain'd so much age and
wisdom as to load her mind with any fears of many things that will never
be <paren> as too many men too often do <$$paren>
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.229

but she cast away all care , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.230

and sung like a <font> Nightingale <$$font> : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.231

her voice was good , and the Ditty fitted for it ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.232

't@ @was that smooth song , which was made by <font> Kit. Marlow
<$$font> , now at least fifty years ago : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.233

and the Milkmaids Mother sung an answer to it , which was made by Sir
<font> Walter Rawleigh <$$font> in his younger days .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.234

They were old_fashioned Poetry , but choicely good , I think much better
than the strong lines that are now in fashion in this critical age .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.235

Look yonder ! WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.236

on my word , yonder they both be a milking again :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.237

I will give her the <font> Chub <$$font> , and perswade them to sing
those two songs to us . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.238

God speed you good woman , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.239

I have been a Fishing , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.240

and am going to <font> Bleak-Hall <$$font> to my bed ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.241

and having caught more Fish than will sup myself and my friend , I will
bestow this upon you and your Daughter , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.242

for I use to sell none . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.243

<font> Milkw. <$$font> Marry , God requite you Sir ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.244

and we@ @'ll eat it chearfully : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.245

and if you come this way a Fishing two months hence , a grace of God I@
@'le give you a Sillybub of new Verjuice in a new made Hay-cock , for it
, WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.246

and my <font> Maudlin <$$font> shall sing you one of her best <font>
Ballads <$$font> ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.247

for she and I both love all <font> Anglers <$$font> ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.248

they be such honest , civil , quiet men ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.249

in the mean time will you drink a draught of <font> Red-Cows milk
<$$font> , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.250

you shall have it freely . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.251

<font> Pisc. <$$font> No , I thank you , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.252

but I pray do us a courtesie that shall stand you and your daughter in
nothing , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.253

and yet we will think our selves still something in your debt ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.254

it is but to sing us a Song , that was sung by your daughter , when I
last past over this Meadow , about eight or nine days since .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.255

<font> Milk. <$$font> What Song was it , I pray ?
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.256

was it , <font> Come Shepherds deck your heads <$$font> : or , <font> As
at noon <$$font> Dulcina <font> rested <$$font> : or , Phillida <font>
flouts me <$$font> : or , <font> Chevy Chase <$$font> : or , <font>
Jonny Armstrong <$$font> : or , <font> Troy Town <$$font> ?
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,232.257

<P_233>

<font> Pisc. <$$font> No , it is none of those :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,233.259

it is a Song that your daughter sung the first part , and you sung the
answer to it . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,233.260

<font> Milk. <$$font> O , I know it now , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,233.261

I learn'd the first part in my golden age , when I was about the age of
my poor daughter ; and the latter part , which indeed fits me best now ,
but two or three years ago , when the cares of the World began to take
hold of me : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,233.262

but you shall , God willing , hear them both , and sung as well as we
can , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,233.263

for we both love Anglers . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,233.264

Come <font> Maudlin <$$font> , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,233.265

sing the first part to the Gentlemen with a merry heart , and I@ @'le
sing the second , when you have done . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,233.266

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_234>

<font> Venat. <$$font> Trust me , Master , it is a choice Song , and
sweetly sung by honest <font> Maudlin <$$font> .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,234.269

I now see it was not without cause , that our good Queen <font>
Elizabeth <$$font> did so often wish her self a Milkmaid all the month
of <font> May <$$font> , because they are not troubled with fears and
cares , but sing sweetly all the day , and sleep securely all the night
: WALTON-1676-E3-P1,234.270

and without doubt , honest , innocent , pretty <font> Maudlin <$$font>
does so . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,234.271

I@ @'le bestow Sir <font> Thomas Overbury's <$$font> Milkmaids wish upon
her , <font> That she may dye in the Spring , and being dead may have
good store of flowers stuck round about her winding sheet . <$$font>
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,234.272

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_235>

<font> Mother . <$$font> Well I have done my Song ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,235.275

but stay honest <font> Anglers <$$font> , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,235.276

for I will make <font> Maudlin <$$font> to sing you one short Song more
. WALTON-1676-E3-P1,235.277

<font> Maudlin <$$font> ; sing that Song that you sung last night , when
young <font> Corydon <$$font> the Shepherd plaid so purely on his <font>
oaten pipe <$$font> to you and your Cozen Betty .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,235.278

<font> Maud. <$$font> I will Mother . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,235.279

{COM:verse_omitted}

<font> Pisc. <$$font> Well sung , good Woman ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,235.281

I thank you , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,235.282

I@ @'le give you another dish of fish one of these days , and then beg
another Song of you . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,235.283

Come Scholar , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,235.284

let <font> Maudlin <$$font> alone : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,235.285

do not you offer <P_236> to spoil her voice . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,236.286

Look , yonder comes mine Hostess , to call us to supper .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,236.287

How now ? WALTON-1676-E3-P1,236.288

is my Brother <font> Peter <$$font> come ? WALTON-1676-E3-P1,236.289

<font> Hostess . <$$font> Yes , and a friend with him ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,236.290

they are both glad to hear that you are in these parts ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,236.291

and long to see you , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,236.292

and long to be at supper , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,236.293

for they be very hungry . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,236.294

<P_272>

<heading>

CHAP. VI WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.297

OBSERVATIONS OF THE UMBER OR GRAYLING AND DIRECTIONS HOW TO FISH FOR
THEM . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.298

<$$heading>

<font> Pisc. <$$font> The <font> Umber <$$font> and <font> Greyling
<$$font> are thought by some to differ as the <font> Herring <$$font>
and <font> Pilcher <$$font> do . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.300

But though they may do so in other Nations , I think those in <font>
England <$$font> differ nothing but in their names .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.301

<font> Aldrovandus <$$font> says , they be of a Trout kind :
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.302

and <font> Gesner <$$font> says , that in his Country <paren> which is
<font> Swisserland <$$font> <$$paren> he is accounted the choicest of
all Fish . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.303

And in <font> Italy <$$font> , he is in the month of <font> May <$$font>
so highly valued , that he is sold then at a much higher rate then any
other fish . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.304

The <font> French <$$font> <paren> which call the <font> Chub Un Villain
<$$font> <$$paren> call the <font> Umber <$$font> of the Lake <font>
Leman , Un Umble Chevalier <$$font> ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.305

and they value the <font> Umber <$$font> or Grayling so highly , that
they say he feeds on Gold , and say that many have been caught out of
their famous River of <font> Loyre <$$font> , out of whose bellies
grains of Gold have often been taken . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.306

And some think that he feeds on <font> Water-time <$$font> , and smells
of it at his first taking out of the water ; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.307

and they may think so with as good reason as we do , that our Smelts
smell like Violets at their being first caught ; which I think is a
truth . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.308

<font> Aldrovandus <$$font> says , the <font> Salmon , <$$font> the
<font> Grayling <$$font> , and <font> Trout <$$font> , and all Fish that
live in clear and sharp streams , are made by their mother <font> Nature
<$$font> of such exact shape and pleasant colours , purposely to invite
us to a joy and contentedness in feasting with her .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.309

Whether this is a truth or not , is not my purpose to dispute ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.310

but 't@ @is certain , all that write of the <font> Umber <$$font>
declare him to be very medicinable . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.311

And <font> Gesner <$$font> says , that the fat of an <font> Umber
<$$font> or <font> Grayling <$$font> being set with a little Hony a day
or two in the Sun in a little glass , is very excellent against redness
, or swarthiness , or any thing that breeds in the eyes .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,272.312

<font> Salvian <$$font> takes him to be called <font> Umber <$$font>
from his swift swimming or <P_273> gliding out of sight , more like a
shadow or a Ghost than a fish . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.313

Much more might be said both of his smell and tast ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.314

but I shall only tell you , that St. <font> Ambrose <$$font> the
glorious Bishop of <font> Millan <$$font> <paren> who liv'd when the
Church kept fasting-days <$$paren> calls him the <font> flower-fish
<$$font> , or flower of Fishes , and that he was so far in love with him
, that he would not let him pass without the honour of a long Discourse
; WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.315

but I must ; and pass on to tell you how to take this dainty fish .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.316

First , Note , That he grows not to the bigness of a Trouth ;
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.317

for the biggest of them do not usually exceed eighteen inches ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.318

he lives in such Rivers as the Trout does , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.319

and is usually taken with the same baits as the Trout is , and after the
same manner , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.320

for he will bite both at the <font> Minnow , <$$font> or <font> Worm ,
<$$font> or <font> Fly <$$font> , <paren> though he bites not often at
the Minnow <$$paren> and is very gameson at the <font> Fly <$$font> ,
and much simpler , and therefore bolder than a <font> Trout <$$font> ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.321

for he will rise twenty times at a fly , if you miss him , and yet rise
again . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.322

He has been taken with a fly made of the red feathers of a <font>
Parakita , <$$font> a strange outlandish bird ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.323

and he will rise at a fly not unlike a gnat or a small moth , or indeed
, at most flies that are not too big . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.324

He is a Fish that lurks close all winter , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.325

but is very pleasant and jolly after mid- <font> April <$$font> , and in
<font> May <$$font> , and in the hot months : WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.326

he is of a very fine shape , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.327

his flesh is white , WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.328

his teeth , those little ones that he has , are in his throat ,
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.329

yet he has so tender a mouth , that he is oftner lost after an Angler
has hooked him , than any other Fish . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.330

Though there be many of these Fishes in the delicate River <font> Dove
<$$font> , and in <font> Trent <$$font> , and some other smaller Rivers
, as that which runs by <font> Salisbury <$$font> , yet he is not so
general a Fish as the <font> Trout <$$font> , nor to me so good to eat
or to angle for . WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.331

And so I shall take my leave of him , and now come to some Observations
of the <font> Salmon <$$font> , and how to catch him .
WALTON-1676-E3-P1,273.332

