<BEGIN_wcecil-1565-e1-p1>

<P_2.2,291>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLXX_SECRETARY_CECIL_TO_SIR_THOMAS_SMITH_IN_FRANCE>

<heading:edcomment:THE_QUEEN_SEIZED_WITH_ILLNESS>

The Quenes Majesty fell perillosly sick on Saturday last ,
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,291.5

the accident cam to that which they call diarrhoea .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,291.6

We feared a flux . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,291.7

She is somwhat weakned , but in helth WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,291.8

and will attend hir affayres after Satyrday , which is to_morrow ,
assure you . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,291.9

She is clearly hoole , WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,291.10

but for the tyme she made us sore afrayed .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,291.11

Thanked be God for both . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,291.12

For of both we take good : warned by hir sicknes , and comforted by hir
recovery . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,291.13

xv. Decemb. 1564 . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,291.14

Yours assured , W. Cecill . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,291.15

<P_2.2,292>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLXXI_SIR_WILLIAM_CECIL_TO_SIR_THOMAS_SMITH>

{COM:rest_of_heading_omitted}

On Saturday the French ambassador was here with the Queens Ma=ty=. who
delt in twoo principall matters , the one to know hir plesur for the
offers made by the King his Master , to choose my Lord of Lecester and
any other to be named by hir Ma=ty=. to be of his Order . Wherunto hir
Ma=ty=. did resolve to have my Lord of Lecester to be chosen :
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,292.19

but for the second place she wold herafter advertise the kyng hir
plesure . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,292.20

The <P_2.2,293> second matter was to know hir plesure in his former
sutes made that the French Kings subjectes might resort with commodities
from the kyng of Spayne@ @s low Countrees hyther , wherin abowt x.
dayes past he had a long debate with the Counsell , and wold not be
therin satisfyed allthough we shewed hym what yow had wrytten , and how
yow found the Kyng and his Counsell satisfyed with your answers made .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,293.21

But now we had a very reddy answer to hym , that was because we had not
prohibited the French but for a season duryng theis differences with
Flaunders , we being now at an accord with them he shuld see that
liberty shuld be gyven shortly to all persons , and then the French
might use there plesur . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,293.22

This knowledg gyven hym of our accord , semed to answer hym fully ,
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,293.23

and he sayd that he was therof fully gladd .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,293.24

Now whylest I am wrytyng , I understand that meanes is made that Sir
Nicholas Throckmorton might goo to the French ambassador with report
that uppon instance made by my L. of Lecester hir Ma=ty= will name my
L. of Sussex for the second party , WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,293.25

and so untill I here more I doo forbeare wrytyng thereof .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,293.26

In Scotland ther hath bene a Perlement wherin nothyng is doone but the
restitution of the Erle of Lenox ; WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,293.27

as for my Ladyes clayme to Angush , by reason of the greatness of the
Erle Morton being Chancellor , nothyng is attempted .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,293.28

The Erle of Lennox frends wish that the L. Darly might marry with the
Scottish Quene : WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,293.29

and I see some devise to bryng the Quenes <P_2.2,294> Majesty not only
to allow therof , but also to move it to the Quene hir sistur :
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,294.30

but I see no disposition therto in hir Majesty ;
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,294.31

but she rather conynueth hir desyre to have my L. of Leicester
preferred that waye , for which purpose ther was this last month a
metyng at Barwyk with my Lord of Murray and the Lord of Ledyngton , but
yet covered with other matters : WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,294.32

and now of late it is from thence renewed , to know with what conditions
the Queens Majesty will preferr hym , wherein at this present no full
answer is yet gyven : WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,294.33

but to saye the truth of my knoledg in theis tyclle matters I can affirm
nothyng that I can assure to contynew . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,294.34

I see the Qu. Ma=ty= very desyrooss to have my L. of Lecester placed
in this high degree to be the Scottish Queen's husband ,
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,294.35

but whan it commeth to the conditions which ar demanded , I see her than
remiss of hir ernestnes . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,294.36

This also I see in the Qu. Ma=ty= a suficient contentation <P_2.2,295>
to be moved to marry abrood , and if it so may please Almighty God , to
leade by the hand some mete person to come and lay hand on hir to hir
contentation , WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,295.37

I cold than wish my self more helth to endure my yeres somewhat longar
to enjoye such a world here as I trust wold follow :
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,295.38

otherwise I assure yow , as now thyngs hang in desperation , I have no
comfort to lyve . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,295.39

The 30 of Decemb. 1564 . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,295.40

Yours {SIC:Your} assured for ever W. Cecill .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,295.41

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLXXII_SIR_WILLIAM_CECIL_TO_SIR_THOMAS_SMITH>

{COM:rest_of_heading_omitted}

Sir , I thynk the two Quenes have satisfyed ether themselves with their
enterviews , or rather filled the desyres of their traynes .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,295.44

Ther are sondry expectations of the fructs hereof , and as most commenly
used in Prynces cases {TEXT:casees} , no small thyngs projected .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,295.45

I dowt not but though yow shal be farr off , yow will use a long
<P_2.2,296> anglyng wand to catch some knoledg .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.46

And lykewise I thynk yow here of some expectation what shall follow of
the rumor of the mariadg betwixt the Q. of Scotts and the L. Darlye .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.47

The Lord of Lyddyngton cam hyther to obteyne the Q. Majesties consent ,
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.48

but he found great offence . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.49

Sir Nich. Throkmorton {COM:sic} was sent to declare the miscontentment
of hir Majesty , and meanes how to break it .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.50

He retorned on Frydaye well rewarded ; WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.51

but he cold not dissolve it , although he sayth it is mislyked of all
the substance of the realme , and she hir self confesseth that if it
were to be done she wold be otherwise advsised ;
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.52

but she is determyned , WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.53

and prayeth hir Ma=ty= here to comport with hir untill she will send on
of hirs hyther <paren> which shall be M=.r= Hayes <$$paren> to declare
to the Quenes Majesty some reasons on hir behalf .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.54

I thynk my Lady Lennox shall be committed to some furder custodye ;
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.55

and my Lords hir husband and sonne shall forfayt that they may here with
us . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.56

And because it is lykely ther fundation in England is upon Papists , the
Protestants here shall receave more comfort and the Papists more
disgrace . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.57

Th'@ @Emperors Ambassador is not idle in his matter
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.58

but presseth the matter for the Archduk discretly and diligently .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.59

One great obstacle is that the Q. Majesty will nedes see before she
marry . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.60

And how that devise can be performed , if she shuld assent ether to the
French Kyng , or to the Archduke , will prove hard .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,296.61

Hir Ma=ty= remembreth hir promiss to remayn free <P_2.2,297> untill she
have well answered the French Kyng , WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.62

and so hir Ma=ty= considereth mete for hir honor to doo ; which causeth
the Emperors ambassador to lack resolution ,
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.63

and yet he fyndeth , as I her , so generall a lykyng amongest the great
Lords here that he is in great hope to spede .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.64

What shall follow God knoweth . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.65

My Lord of Lecester furdereth the Quenes Majesty with all good reasons
to take on of these great Prynces , wherin suerly perceaving his own
cause not sperable he doth honorably and wisely .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.66

I see few noblemen devoted to France WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.67

but I being <font> Mancipium Reginae <$$font> , and lackyng wit for to
expend so great a matter , will follow with service wher hir Ma=ty= will
goo before . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.68

Sir H. Sydney shall be Deputy in Irland . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.69

Shan O'neyle hath overthrowen James M=c=Oncle , and takyn hym and his
brother , wherin a nombre of English soldiors being with Shan did only
gayne the Victory . WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.70

If now the Queens Majesty may have the possesion of theis prisoners , it
shall be proffitable : WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.71

otherwyse Shanes vicory will be dangerooss for Irland .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.72

And thus you see I have scribled many thyngs in haste to satisfy your
expectation , assuryng you my lesure is so lytle as I thynk this to be
the twentyth Lettre all_redy wrytten this daye on Sonday 3 Junij 1565 .
WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.73

Yours assured W. Cecill WCECIL-1565-E1-P1,2.2,297.74

