<BEGIN_wolsey-1529-e1-p1>

<P_1.2,1>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CII_CARDINAL_WOLSEY_IN_HIS_DISTRESS_TO_THOMAS_CROMWELL>

Myn owne enterly belouyd Cromwel , I beseche yow , as ye loue me and wyl
euyr do any thyng for men repare <P_1.2,2> hyther thys day as sone as
the Parlement ys brokyn vp , leyng aparte all thyngs for that tyme ;
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,2.4

for I wold nut onely commynycat thyngs vnto yow wherin for my comfort
and relief I wold haue your good , sad , dyscret aduyse and counsell ,
but also opon the same commytt sertyng thyngs requyryng expedition to
yow , on my behalf to be solycytyd : WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,2.5

this , I pray yow therfor , to hast your commyng hyther assafore
{COM:sic} , with_owt omyttyng so to do as ye tendyr my socor , reliff ,
and comfort , and quyetnes of mynde . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,2.6

And thus fare ye wel : WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,2.7

from Asher , in hast , thys Satyrday , in the mornyng , with the rude
hande and sorowfull hert of your assuryd louer T. Car=lis= Ebor. .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,2.8

I haue also serteyn thyngs consernyng yowr sylf wych I am suere ye wol@
@be glad to here and knowe : WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,2.9

fayle not therfor to be here thys nygth , WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,2.10

ye may retorne erly in the mornyng ageyn yf nede shul so requyre .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,2.11

<font> Et iterum vale . <$$font> WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,2.12

M. Agusteyn shewyd me how ye had wryttyn onto me a Lettre wherin ye
shuld adu'tyse me of the commyng hyther of the Duke of Norfolke :
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,2.13

I assure yow ther cam to my hands no suche Lettre .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,2.14

<P_1.2,3>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CIII_CARDINAL_WOLSEY_TO_D=R=_STEPHEN_GARDENER,_AFTERWARDS_BISHOP_OF_WINCHESTER>

<P_1.2,4>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<P_1.2,5>

My owne goode Mastyr Secretary , aftyr my moste herty recommendacions ,
with lycke thanks for your goodness towards me , thes shal@ @be to
advirtyse yow that I have beyn informyd by my trusty frende Thomas
Crowmuell that ye have sygnyfied unto hym to my synguler consolations
howe that the Kyngs Hyghnes , mouyd with pity and compassyon , and of
his excellent goodnes and cheryti consyderyng the lamentable condition
and stat that I stand yn , hath wyllyd yow with other lords and mastyrs
of hys honorable Cownsell to intende to the perfygttyng and absolvyng ,
without further tract or delay , of myn end and appoyntment , and that
my pardon shulde be made in the most ample forme that my Cownsell cowde
devyse ; WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,5.20

for thys the Kyngs moste gracyous remembraunce , procedyng of hymsylf ,
I accompte my sylf not onely moste bowndyn to serve and pray for the
preservation of hys moste Royal Majeste , WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,5.21

but also thancke God that ye have occasyon govyn {COM:sic} unto you to
be a sollycyter and setter forth of such thyngs as do and shall conserve
my said ende , in the makyng and compownyng whereof myn assuryd trust ys
that ye wele shewe the love and affection wych ye have and bere towards
me your old lover and frende . So declaryng your sylf therin that the
world may perceive that by your good meanys the Kyng ys the better goode
Lorde unto me ; and that , nowe , newly in maner commyng to the world ,
ther may be such respect <P_1.2,6> had to my poore degre , olde age ,
and longe contynuyd servys , as shal be to the Kyngs hygh honor and your
gret prayse and laude , wych undowttydly shal folowe yf ye extende yowr
benyvolence towards me and mine , perceiving that by your wysdom and
dexteryte I shal@ @be releuyd and in this my calamyte holpyn .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,6.22

At the reverens therfor of God , myn owne goode M. Secretary and refuge
, nowe set to your hande that I may come to a laudable ende and reposse
; seyng that I may be furnyshyd aftyr suche a sorte and maner as I may
ende my short tyme and lyff to the honor of Cryst's Churche and the
Prince . And , besydys my dayly prayer and true hert , I shal so
requyte your kyndnes as ye shal haue cause to thyncke the same to be wel
imployed , lycke as my seyde trusty frende shal more amply shewe unto
yow to whom yt may please yow to give for me credens and loving audience
: WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,6.23

and I shall pray for the increase of your honor .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,6.24

Wryttyn at Asher with the tremylling hand and hevy hart of your assuryd
lover and bedysman . T. Car=lis= Ebor. . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,6.25

To the rygth honorable and my synguler goode frende Master Secretary .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,6.26

<P_1.2,7>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CIV_CARDINAL_WOLSEY_TO_D=R=_STEPHEN_GARDENER>

My owne goode mastyr Secretary aftyr my moste herty commendacons I pray
you at the reverens of God to help , that exspedicion be usyd in my
presents , the delay wherof so replenyssheth my herte with hevynes ,
that I can take no reste ; nat for any vayne fere , but onely for the
miserabli condycion that I am presently yn , and lyclyhod to contynue in
the same onles that ye , in whom ys myn assuryd truste , do help and
releve me therein ; WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,7.29

for fyrst contynuyng here in thys moweste and corrupt eyer , beyng
enteryd in to the passyon of the dropsy , <font> cum prostatione
appetitus , et continuo insompnus <$$font> , I can@ @nat lyve ; wherfor
of necessyte I muste be removyd to summe other dryer eyer and place ,
wher I may have comodyte of Physycyans . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,7.30

Secondly havyng but Yorke , wych ys now decayd by viij_C. =li= by the
yeere I can nat tell how to lyve and kepe the poore nombyr of folks wych
I nowe have ; WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,7.31

my howsys ther be in decay , and of every thyng mete for howsold
onprovidyd and furnyshyd . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,7.32

I have non apparell for my howsys ther , nor money to bryng me <P_1.2,8>
thether , nor to lyve with tyl the propysse tyme of the year shal come
to remove thither . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,8.33

Thes thyngs consyderyd , Mr Secretary , must nedys make me in agony and
hevynes ; myn age therwith and sycknes consyderyd .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,8.34

Alas Mr Secretary , ye with other my lordys shewyd me that I shuld
otherwyse be furnyshyd , and seyn unto . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,8.35

Ye knowe in your lernyng and consyens whether I shuld forfit my
spiritualties of Wynchester or no . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,8.36

Alas the qualytes of myn offencys consyderyd , with the gret
punisshement and losse of goodes that I have sustignyd , owt to move
petyfull hertys . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,8.37

And the moste nobyl Kyng , to whom yf yt wold please yow of your
cherytabli goodnes to shew the premyses aftyr your accustomable wysdom
and dexteryte , yt ys nat to be dowettyd but hys Hyhnes wold have
consyderacon and compassion , aggmentyng my lyvyng , and appoyntyng such
thyngs as shuld be convenyent for my furniture ; wych to do shal@ @be to
the Kyngs high honer , meryte , and dyscharge of consyens ; and to yow
gret praysse for the bryngyng of the same to passe for your olde brynger
up and lovyng frende . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,8.38

Thys kyndnes exibite from the Kyngs Hyghnes shal prolong my lyff for sum
lytyl whyl , thow yt shall nat be long ; by the meane wherof hys Grace
shal take profygtt , and by my deth non . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,8.39

What ys yt to hys Hyhnes to geve summe convenyent porcion owt of
Wynchester and Seynt Albons , hys Grace takyng with my herty good wyl
the <P_1.2,9> resydue . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,9.40

Remembyr , good M=r= Secretary , my poore degre and what servys I have
done : and how nowe approchyng to deth I must begyn the world ageyn .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,9.41

I beseche yow therfor , movyd with pity and compassyon , soker me in
thys my calamyti , WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,9.42

and to your power , wych I do knowe ys gret , releve me :
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,9.43

and I with all myn shall not onely ascrybe thys my relef unto yow , but
also pray to God for the increase of your honor .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,9.44

And as my poore shal increase , so I shal not fayle to acquyte yor
kyndnes . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,9.45

Wryttyn hastely at Asher with the rude and shackyng hand of your dayly
bedysman and assuryd frende . T. Car=lis= Ebor. .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,9.46

To the rygth honorable And my assuryd frende Mastyr Secretary .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P1,1.2,9.47

